> qe" S8dIAJas 10109 |jesunW Aq S1009 = i ; i 0 90 
toog troe p'et- 08°89 '! e 4 5 Ý i 4 820 












































tame tes 














EX LIBRIS 
JOHN FARQUHAR FULTON 


MEDICAL LIBRARY 


HISTORICAL 
| LIBRARY 








WITHDRAWN | 


































“NEW 
EXPERIMENTS 
Phyfico--ALechanicall 
Touching the Air. 





au 
ea areas ee S n aise 








| 


EXPE RIMENTS 





“NEW 


Phyfico- Mechanical, 
Touching | 
The Serina of the Air, | 
and its EFFECTS, 
(Made, for the moft part, ina New 
PNEXMATICAL ENGINE) 


Written by way of LETTER 


TTo the Right Honorable Charles 
Lord Vicount of Ha Rant, 


Eldeft Son tothe E a RL of E PA 











_ Bythe! Honorable Robert Boyle] Ets ; 





Printed by H: Hal, Printer to the Univerhty, 
for Tho: Robinfon. 1660. 




















ITITI TATIT TETTI 
SSUTSCO TTL T UST ET 


To the Reader: 


ppt Lthouch the following Trea 
DKS tife being far more proliz 







poy tls. Neth, then becomes a Letter, and 
CDNB then 1 at firff intended it, L 





oodi E am very unwilling to en- 
creafe the already excefsive bulk of the 
Book bya Preface, yet there are fome par- 
ticulars that I think my [elf oblig’d to take 
notice of tothe Reader, as things, that will 
either concern him to know, or meto have 


known, 


Inthe firft placethen: If it be demand- 
ed why I publifhto the World a Letter which 
by its Stile and diverfe Paffages, appears 
to have been written as well For, as Toa 
particular Perfon, Ihave chiefly thefe two 
things to anfwer: Theone, That the Exe 
periments therein related, having been max 
ny of them tryàin the prefence of Ingent= 
ous Men, and by that means having made 
oe {ome 

























































—s 





"To the Reader: 


Jome noife among the Victuoli (infomuch 


that fome of. them have been fent into Fo- 
reign Countries, where they have had the 
luck not to be defpifd) I could not without 

uite tyring more then one Amanuenfis,give 
out half as miny Copies of them as were fo 
carncftly defired, that 1 could not civilly 
refufe them. The other, That intelligent 
Perfons 1a matters of this kinde per [waded 
me, that the publication of what I had ob- 


Jerv’d touching the Nature of the Air, 


would not be ufeiefs tothe World; and that 
in an Age fo taken with Novelties as is O4rS, 
thefe new Experiments would be grateful to 
the Lovers of free and real Learning: So 
that I might at once comply with my grand 
Defien of promoting Experimental and 
Ufeful Philofophy, and obtainthe great fa- 
tisfaction of giving [ome to ingenious Mens 
the hope of which, is, I confe/s, a tempta~ 
tion that I cannot 'eafily y refift. 

of my being. fania prolix in many 
of my Experiments, Ihave thefe Reafons 
torender, That fome of them being altoge- 
ther new, fecemd to need the being circum- 
Pantially related, to keep the Reader from 
aiftrufting them: That divers Circum- 


frances I did here and there fet down for fear 


of forgetting them, when I may hereafter 
have 





To the Reader? 


have occafion to make ufe of themin myo? 
ther Writings: That in divers cafes 2 
thought it. neceffary to deliver things cira 
cum/tantially, that the Perfon 1 addreffed 
them to, might withont miftake, and with 
as little trouble as ts pofsible, be able torea 
peat [uch unufual Experiments: and thas 
afier Icon{ented to let my Obfervations be 
made publick, the moft ordinary Reafon of 
my prolixity was, That forèfecing that [uch 
atrouble as I met with in making thofe trys 
als carefully, and the creat expence of time 
that they neceffarily require, (not to mention 
the charges of making the Engine, and im- 
ploying 4 man to manage it) will probably 
keep moft men from trying again thefe Ex 
periments; I thought I might doe the genes 
ralityof my Readers no unacceptable peice 
of fervice, by fo puncinally relating what 
I carefully obferv'd, that they may look up « 
on thefe Narratives as flanding Records in 
our new Pneumaticks, and need not reites 
rate themfelves an Experiment to have as 
diftinét an Idea of it, as may fuffice them 
to ground therr Reflections and Speculations 
upon. 

And sige fometimes’tis the Di[cour fe 
made upon the Experiment that makes it 
appear prolix, Ihave commonly left a con- 

j AA [pisnous 





J 
$ 
4 
















To the Reader? 
foicuous interval betwixt fuch Difcourfes) 
and the Experiments whereuntothey belong, 
or are annexed, that they who defire onely 
the Hiftorical part of the account we give 
of our Engine, may read the Narra- 
tives, without being put to the trouble 
of reading the Reflections too: Which I 
here take notice of, for the fake of thofe 
that are well virfdin the New Philofophy, 
and in the Mathematicks s that fuch 
may skip what was defign’d, but for fuch 
Perfons as may be lefs acquainted even then 
I, with matters of this nature (fcarce fo 
much as mention d by any Writer in our 
Language) and not for them from whom 
I fall be much more forward to leara, then 
to pretend to teach them. Of my being 
wont to [peak rather doubtfully, or hefitant- 
ly, then refolvedly, concerning matters 
wherein I apprehend [ome difficulty, [have 
in another Treatife (which may, through 
Gods Afsiflance, come abroad ere long) 
given a particular, and Lhope a {atifacto- 
ry account: Whercfore I fball now defend 
my Prattice but by the Obfervation of Ari- 
ftotle, who fomewhire notes, That to feem 
to know all things certainly, and to {peak 
pofitively of them, is atrick of bold and 
gong Fellows: Whereas thofe that are in- 
deed 


To the Reader? 


deed intelligent and confider ate, are wont tò 
imploy more wary and diffident Exprefsi- 
ons, or (as he [peaks) DESTIGATIV cles TO asy 
Ù T THI. 

There are divers Reflections, and other 
Palfages in the following Epiftle, and ever 
[ome Experiments (occafionally mention a) 
which may feem either impertinent or fu- 
perfluous, but are not fo: Being purpofely 
written, either to evince [ome truth op pof'a, 
or difprove [ome erroneous conceit main- 
tain’d, by [ome eminent New Philofopher, 
or by fome other Ingenious Men , who, I 
pre{um’d, would cafily forgive me the ha- 
ving on [uch occafions purpofely omitted 
their Names ; though an inquifitive Perfon 
will probably difcover divers of them, by 
the: mention of the Opinions di[prov'd in 
the Experiments I am excufing. 


Ever fince 1 difcern'd the ufefulue/s 
of {peculative Geometry to Natural Phi- 
lofophy,the unhappy Diftempers of my Eyes, 
have fo far kept me from being much con- 
ver{ant in it,that I fear I fhall need the par- 
don of my Mathematical Readers, for fome 
Paffages, which if I had been deeply skill d 
in Geometry, I fhonld have treated more ac- 
carately, 

And 








To the Reader? 

And indeed, having, for Reafoas. elfe 
where deducad, purpofely kept my. felfwa 
firanzer to moft of the- new Hy potheles.rm 
Philofophy, I am fenfible enough that the 
Engine I treat of has prevail d with me to 
swrste of [ome {ubjects which arc {uf ficients 
dy remote from thofe I have been’ moft cona 
verfantin, And having been reduc’d to 
write the greateft part of the enfuing Letter 
ata diftance, not onely from my Library, 
‘but from my own ~Manuferipts, I cannot 
but fear that my Difcour{es do not onely 
want many choice things wherewith the 
Learned Writings of others might have en- 
riched or imbellifhed them: But that partly 
for this Reafon, and partly for that touch d 
upon alittle before, 1t ws pofsible I may 
have mention’d fome Notions already pub- 
lifh'd by others, without taking notice of the 
Authors, not ont of any defian todefrand 
deferving Men, but for want of knowing 
fuch particulars to have been already pub- 
lifh aby them: Efpecially the Experiments 
of our Engine being themfelves {uf ficient 
to hint fuch Notions as we build upon 
theme. fds 

The order of the Experiments every 
Reader may alter, as [uits beft with his: owa 
Defien in perufing them: For not onely all 


thofe 


To the Reideri 


thofe betwixt whom there isan Affinityin 
Nature (by belonging to one {ubj ect) are not 
always plas'd one by another, but they are 
not fiill {ct down fo much as in the order 
wherein they were made ; but moft commen- 
lyin that ca{ual one wherein my occafions iz- 
duc d me to difpatch them to the Prefs. And, 
which is worfe, I did ufually fend quite a- 
way the former Experiments, before the 
later were written, or perhaps [fo much as 
made: Whereby I loft the advantage of cor- 
recting and [upplying the Imperfections of 
what I had formerly written, by the light of 
my [ubfequent Tryais and Difcoveries. 
Befides all this, the diftemper in my eyes 
forbidding me not onely to write my felf fo 
much as one Experiment, but even to read 
over my [ilf what I dictated to others.I can- 
not but fear that befides the Authors miftakes, 
this Edition may be blemifh'd by many, that 
may be properly imputed to avery uaskil- 
ful Writer (whom I was often times by hafte 
reduc`d againft my cujtom to inspioy) and 
may have efcaped the Diligence of that 
Learned Friend, that does me the favor to 
over-fee the Prefs; efpecially there being 
the diftance of two.days Fourney betwixt it 
and me. 
J aced not perhaps reprefent to the equi- 
tahle 









panid 


To the Reader? 


table Reader, bow much the frange Confua 
fions of this unhappy Nation, in the midft 
of which 1 have made and written thefe 
Experiments, are apt to difturb that calm- 
ae of Minde , and undiftrattedne(s of 
Thoughts, that are wont to be requifite to 
Happy Speculations. But I prefume, 
that by all thefe things. put together, he 
will readily perceive, That I have becn 
fo far from following the Poets prudent 
Counfcl touching the flow Publication of 
Books defign’d to purchafe credit by, 


—— Nonumque prematur in Annum 


that I [uffer this Treatife to come abroad 
tntothe World with a multitude of Difad- 
VAL AGES « 

But tf itbe demanded, why then Idid 
not make it fitter for the Prefs before I fent 
it thither? my An{wer muft be, That not 
at fir ft imagining that this fort of Experi- 
ments would prove any thing near fo tronble- 
fome, either to make, or to Record, asl 
afterwards found them, I did, to engage 
the Printer to difpaich, promife him to fend 
bim the whole Epiftle in avery fhort time: 
So that although now and then the occafional 
vacations of the Prefs, by reafon of Fefti- 


valss 

























'To the Reader, 


wals, orthe abfence of the Correétor, gave 
me the leifure to ex{paciate upon fome fub- 
jects yet being oftentimes call dupon to difa 
patch the Papersto the Prefs, my promi(e, 
and many unexpected Avocations, obliged 
me to a hafte,which, though it have detract- 
ed nothing from the Faithfulnefs of the 
Hiftorical part of osr Book, has (I fear) 
been difadvantageous enough to all the reft. 
And I made the lefs feruple to let the fol- 
lowing Papers pafs out of my hands, with 
all their Imperfections, becaufe, as the 
: publick Affairs, and my own, were then 
circumftanc’d, Iknew not when (if at all) 
` I fhould be again in a condition to profecute 
Experiments of this kinde; efpecially, 
Jince (to omit my being almoft weary of be- 
ing, as it were, confin dto one fort of Ex- 
periments) I am pre-ingag’d (if it pleafe 
God to vouchfafe me Life and Health) to 
employ my firft leifurein the publication of 
fome other Phyfiological Papers, whtch I 
thought twould make me much the fitter to 
take in hand, if I firft difpatch’d all that 
Thad at this time to write touching our 
Engine. 

I have this further to adde, by way 
of Excufe, That as it has been my defign 
in publilhing thefe Experiments to gratsfie 

Inger 











SERENE 


To thé Reader 


Ingenious men, fo, if I have not Beer 
much flattered, 1 may bope that the varia 
ous hints to be met with in the following 
Letter, will (at leafy fomewhat awaken 
mens thoughts, er excite themto new [pesulaa 
tions (uch as perhapseveningudiitive mem 
would [carce elfe.light upon) andLnecd not 
de(pair, that even the examinationaf fyth 
new Sufpicions and Enquiries wilihenceal- 
fo, at leaft Ovcaftonally, be facilitated: F 
faid Occafionally, becanfe it being, sas tia 
proverbially faid, Facile Inventisaddere, 
Kt feems not irrational. to ex pon that our, 
Engine it. felf, and divers of aux. Experis 
ments, will be much promoted-by the Indie 
firy of Inventive and Math: national W108, 
whofe contrivances may cafily eavexercorrect 
or fupply, and confcquently furpafs many of 
thofe we have made ule of. Mad partitus 
barly,if Men by sktil and paticneocan atk» 
rive both to evacuate fuch: Renekuers as 
ours, till there be ño more. Aintzftia them, 
thes there feems tohave remain d in the 
Glaffes made njeof abou: the Magdébur- 
gick Experiment (hereafter tabe mention: 
ed) and to keep outihe At for a competent 
while, the Ufefulne{s end Difcovertes of our 
Engine, wili not be a little advance d. And 
perhaps that may belong to stymhich Lre: 
MEWS 



























To the Reader: 

member Seneca {peaks of Nature, Initia: 
tos (fays be) nos credimus, in Veftibulo 
cjus heremus: For being now in a place 
where we are not quite deftitute of moderate- 
ly skilful Artificers, we have, fince the 
Conclufion of the following Letter, made 
fome Additions to osr Engine, by whofe help 
we finde (upon fome new tryals) that we 
may be able, without much of new trouble, 
to keep the ambient Air ont of the exhau- 
fied Receiver for a whole day ; and perhaps 
we fhould be able to keep it out much longer, 
if before we [hall have difpatch'd fome ur- 
gent Affairs, and publifh'd fome Papers for 
which a kinde of Promife is thought to make 
us Debtors tothe Prefs, we could be at lei- 
furetoprofecute fuch Experiments, as may 
pofsibly afford a Supplement to the follow- 
ing Treatife, from which Ifhak now no lona 
ger detain the Reader. - 


L know 











hie Be Rie Se Bie «he fhe Ba «he Sia Mp Sea Bn he 
OS SE Bee Sis 


Friendly Reader, 


PRR Know all Perfons 

| 7 ea that have a publick 
Spirit for the Ad- 
x vancement of Lear- 
ning, will think much that this 
picce came not out in a Lan. 
guage of more general Ufe; 
then. this you fee tt now attird 
in; efpecially fince the Excel= 
lent N oble Perfon, who is the 
Author, wknown to be well a- 
ble bimfelf CCeingalmoft uni- 
verfally a Linguift) to bave gi- 
ven it either the Old Latin, or 
A the 





w7 


EN ime 











the newer French Dre/s. 

© Butif it bean Honor to a 
. Language to be preferr'd, and 
this Honor breeds fometimes an 
Emulation, asanciently it did 
between the Greeks and Ro- 


mans, i cannot be thought 


unbandfome for an Englifh 
Nobleman to have preferrd 
bis own: And it may bea fuf- 
ficient Reafon for the Gentry 
of Forein Parts to- learn our 
Speech, or keep Interpreters, 
that they are Jure to haye for 
their requital, from many of 
our Englifh Writers Cas here 
from thispiece) much curioufly 
ingenious, and profitable Lear- 
ning. 


But 


-Butas tothe particular(give 
me leaveto nfe Words from a 
Story) Sincethe Mountain 
cannot come to Mahomet, 
Mahomet wil go to the 
Mountain: J mean thus, 
Becaufemany witty Men, Per- 
Jons of Honor and Eftate efve- 
cially, may be fuppofd to be a- 
ble to make a better account, by 
employing their Studies and 
Lime on Matter then Words, 
and fo are yuflly impeded from 
learning Languages, And be- 
caufe (as I mayjudge) the no- 
ble Author ts willing to oblige all 
Men, He has already provi- 
ded, that this piece [hall ibort- 
ly be done into Latine, that Jo 
. bs it 














it may come home to divers wore 
thy Perfons in its Stream, who 
cannot travel to finde it out in 
its frf. Origine, 

Having therefore leave fo 
todo, I cannot forbear to give 
the World thé Advertifement 
of this Latine Edition, left 
fome skilful eArtift fhould take 
needle[s pains about a Work , 
which will, ere long Chy Gods 
furtherance) be done to his 
Hands ; For fuch unprofitable 
expences of Study have too fre- 
quently happened and too much 
to the difadyvantage of Learn 
ino, for want of a fufficient 
Correfpondence and tntercourfe 
between Juch as are exercifed 

in 


in the Mines of Waifdome. 
This is all the trouble I fhail 
at prefent give you: Nor fhall I 


need minde thee , if you have a 
true guft for the B ook yon read, 
to have an honor and thank u 
regard to the Perfon that has 
favord us with the Communi- 
cation of thefe bu T ryals, ér is 
manifeftly fo great a \Patron 
and Friend A Experimental 
Learning and all true Wifdom; 
For fhouldd - you failin this , yom 
might defers vedly be deprivd of 
fone other Obferyations on the 
fame fubjeét, which the An- 
thor, I heare,bas made fince the 
faifhing of Fthis Trea life, 
Ldefire to be excufed ae at f 


doe 











To the Reader. 
act make Excufes for the flow- 
nefs of the Publication, hoping 
that the long expetlation you 
have had of it will enbance,and 
not diminifh yur delight in the 
enjoyment of a piece like tobe, 
among /t the ftudents in accurate 
Philofophy,of fo general accep- 


taice. Farewel. 


R: Sh. 


PEPE ESE SEES 


A Sum- 


Segseseogseeeones 


A Summary ofthe chief Matters treated 
of in this Epiftolical Difcourfe. -~ 


He Prowmium, wherein ts fet down the 
occafion of this Difcourfe, 1. The mô- 
tives that induc d the Author thereunto,2 &es 
The hints he received, 5. The things wheres 
in this Engine excels any that have yet been 
mad: ufe of, 6 ec. The defcription of the 
Engine and its parts, 8 &c. The way of pre- 
paring and ufingit, 15 8c, The divifion of 
the Experiments tryable thereby iato. two 
forts, and the difficulty of excluding the 
Air. y 18 &c, 
The firft Experiment, touching the mane 
ner of pumping out the Air, and by what dea 
grees the Receiver  emptyed,20, &c. A di- 
grefsion touching the Spring or Elaftical 
power of the Air, with an attempt for a Me> 
chanical Explication thereof, neceffary to be 
premifd for the explanation of the Pheno- 
mena, exhibited in this and the [ubfequent 
Experiments, 22 XG. 
The fecond Experiment touching the pref- 
fure of the Air againft the fides of the Bodies 
it invirons, 37 &c. with a digrefsive Ex- 
plication of the preffnre of the Air included 
within an ambient Body. 39 KC 
b 4. The 
































x The Summarys > 5% 
_ The third Experiment, touching the 
Force requifite to draw down the Sticker, #2. 
&c, The Opinion of an eminent Modern 
Naturalift examin'd, 44C 
The fourth Experiment , ‘touching the 
fwelling of: aBladdcr ; withthe degrees by 
which tt intreafes, 45 &c. Another Opini- 
on of a Learned Author examin’d. 48 &c. 
òà The fifth Experiment,touching the break- 
dng of a Bladder in the Receiver, 49 &C. 
Aid of another by heat, 52 
© The fixth Experiment, of divers ways by 
which the elaftical expanfion of the Air 
was meafurrd. 52 &C 
The feventh Experiment, touching what 
Figure does beft refift the preffure of the Air. 
62 &c. 

“The eighth Experiment, tending to a fur- 
ther Demonftration of the former, fromthe 
breaking of glafs a Helmet inward. 64 &c, 
The ninth Experiment, contains a fur- 
ther confirmation from the breaking of a 
Glafs outward, 66 &c.with anExperimentto 
prove,that thefe Phenomena proceed not 
from an invincible Fuga vacui 69. A de- 
fcription of other [mall Rece ivers and their 
Convenienctes, JO &c. CA Receipt for the 
making of a Compofition to Cement crackt 
Glalfes. 73 
The 








«The Summary: 
ı he senth Experiment, touching the flat 
ming of Candles inclofed in the Receiver. 
ME aE 74 &O 
-“ The eleventh Expertment, touching the 
burning of Goals, 78.. And the lafting of 
theexcandefcence of an included piece of I+ 


TOR. Me 80. 
The twelfih Experiment concerning the 
burning .of “Match. 82 


The thirteenth Experiment, concerning 
the further profecution of the preceding » 
tending to prove the extinction of the Fire 
in the former Experiments, not to have 
proceeded from the preffure of the Fire by the 
Fumes, 84. Some remarkable Circumftan- 
ces of it, 86. The Experiment of Match 
try'd in a [mall Receiver. 87 

The fourteenth Experiment, touching the 
firiking Fire, and kindling of Powder with 
the Lock of a Piftolin the evacuared Recet- 
Ure 88 &c. 

The fifteenth Experiment, touching the 
unfuccefsfulnefs of kindling included Bo- 
dies with a burning Glafs, and the Ans 
thors intention to profecute it further. 

102 
The fivteenth Experiment concerning the 
operation of the Loadftone, 305, && 


- The ` 











The Summary, 

The fewenteenth Experiment, touching the 
graduat defcent of the Quick-filver in tht 
JTorvicellian Experiment, 106 &c. Some 
obfervable Circumftances concerning it 
112 &c. The fame Experiment tryd ix 
one of the [mall Receivers... 115.- How 
this Experiment may be made ufe of to know 
th ftrength of the preffure of the Air for 
every degree of Rarefaction, 116 &c. The 
_ bryal of the (ame Experiment in á Tube not 
two foot long, 118. The ratfing of the Mer. 
cursal Cylinder, by the forcing of more Air 
into the Receiver, 119. Some Allegations 
for and againft a Vacuum confider’d, 120 
&c. Some Advertifements concerning the 
inconveniencies that may arife from the di- 
wer fity of meafures made ufe of for the defi- 
ning the Altitute of the Mercursal Cylinders 
and from the neglect of little parcels of Air 
apt toremain between the Mercury and the 
concave {urface of the Tube, 123 XC. Some 
Expedients for the more exact filling the 
Tube,127.The height the Author once found 
of the Mercurial Cylinder according to En- 
glih meafure. 128. 

` The esghteenth Experiment, containing 
anew Obfervation touching the variation 
of the height of the Mercurial Cylinder in 
the fame Tube, with an offer at the reafon 


thereof. 




































| The Summary: 
(thereof. 129 &C 
The 19% Experiment, touching the fub- 
| fiding of a Cylinder of Water, 140 &c. The 
fame try d in a {mall Receiver, 143 
The 20% Experiment, touching the Ela- 
ter of Water, with a digrefsive Experiment 
| to the fame purpofe 144 &c, 
The 21 Experiment, beinga profecution 
of the former Enquiry, by Experimenting 
| the Generation of Bubbles under Water, 4 
| recital of fome notable Circumftances, with 
[ome obfervable Corollary's deduc’d there- 
from. 147 &c, 
The 22° Experiment, tending to a detere 
mination of the Enquiry propofd in the for- 
mer Experiment, by proving the matter of 
thefe Bubbles from their permanency to be 
Air: The Experiments trydin the great 
and {mall Receivers, evincing the fame 
thing, 155 &c. An Experiment wherein 
there appear'd Bubbles in Quick-filver , 
160. The Authors Inference, 162, A di- 
grefsive Enquiry, whether or no Air may be 
generated anew , with (everal Hiftories and 
Experiments, tending tothe refolving and 
clearing thereof, 162 &c, The authors exe 
cufe for fo longa Digre{sion. 18i 





The 23° Experiment, containing a fur- 


ther Enquiry touching Bubbles made with 
common 





_ ‘The Summary: 

common and difil d water. 183 

The 24 Experiment, wherein the ingui- 
ry ts profecuted with other Liquors, as with 
Sallet oyl, Oyl of Turpentine, a Solution of 
Tartar ,Spirtt of Vinegar ,Red-wine, Milk, 
Hens Eges, Spirit of Urine, Spirit of 
Wine and Water, Spirit of Wine.. 187 &c, 
The wonderful expanfion of the Spirit of 
Wine. . 194 

The 25 Experiment, touching the ex- 
panfion and gravity of the Air ander wa- 


ter. 195 &Ce 
The 26% Experiment, touching the Vi- 
brations of a Pendulum. : 202 &C. 


The27hExperiment, touching the pro- 
pagation of found: And the Authors inten- 
tion of trying fome other Experiments, for 
the further elucidation thereof. 210 &C. 

The 28 Experiment, touching the [udder 
eruption of Bubbles from the water, when 
the airs preffure was [peedily remov'd. 214 

The 29 Experiment, touching the caufe 
of the afcent of Fumes and Vapors wherein 
tes prow a (from the feveral motions, which 
the Fumes of a flrange {moaking Liquor, of 
the Authors were obferv dto havein the Re- 
ceiver, upon the ex{uction of the Air) that 
the reafon of their afcent proceeds from the 
gravity of the ambient air and not from any 
pofitive levity of their own. 217 &C 

The 


The Summary: 


‘The 30 Experiment, concerning the na- 
ture of a fluid Body ,illuftrated by the exame 
ple of [moak which in feveral circumflances 
feems very much to refemble the property of a 
fuid Body, 224 &c. A conjecture of the 
saufe of the Suns undulation. 228 
The 31 Experiment, concerning the Phe- 
nomena of two flat Marbles exaétly plain’ 
and wrought together, and the true reafon 
thereof, 229. Tbe Authors intention for the 
farther profecution thereof, & what hindred 
him z the reafon why the under Marble did 
not fal from the upper being onely conjoynd 
with Spirit of Wine) when the Receiver was 
evacuated, Anda notablerelation concern- 
ing the cohefion of flat Bodies. 231 &Cs 
The 32 Experiment, touching the forcible 
preffure of the Air againft tbe outward fu- 
perficies of a Valve, faften’d upon the flop- 
cock of the Receiver. Thé Diameter of it, 
and the weight it fuftain d, 233 &C 
The 33 experiment touching the great pref- 
fare of the Air againft the under {uperfictes 
of the Sucker, 235 &c. what weight was re- 
quifite to deprefs it, cr what weight it would 
lift and carry.up with it, 23.9 &C. what ims 
provement € ufe there maybe made of this 
experiment, 242, A Difcourfe touching the 
nature of Suction, proving that fuga vacui 
isnot the adcquatecasfethercof. 243 &C 


a 
The 


dist 














The Summary: 


The 34° Experiment containing fever al 
attempts for the weighing of light Bodies in 
she exhaufted Receiver. 258 &c. 

The 35% Experiment, touching the caufe 
of Filtration, and the rifing of Water in 
Siphons, 262.&c. A relation of a new 
kinde of Siphon, of the Authors , upon 
the occafion of trying the Experiment 
Lately obferv'd by fome French-men,and fura 
ther improv'd by himfelf; and fome conje- 
ctures touching the caufe of the exhibited 
Phenomena, 267 Se 

The 36% Experiment touching the weigh- 
ing of a parcel of Air inthe exhaufted Vef- 
fel; and [ome other obfervations for the ex- 
plication thereof, 272 &c. An accidental 
Experiment, tending to the further confir- 
mation of the Authors Reflections upon the 
firft Experiment ; with a digrefsive obfer» 
vation, noting the [ubtil penetrancy of fome 
Spirits, toexceed by far that of the Air, 275 
&c. And fome other Experiments to fhew the 
difficulty of the ingrefs of the Air into the 
pores or holes of forse bodies into which Wa- 
ter will readily infinuate it [elf,-79 &c.with 
aconjecture at the canfe thereof, 482, The 
Author returns to the profecution of the in- 
quiry after the gravity of the Air: But fir ft, 
(uponthe occafion of the tenacity of a thin 
. Bubble 





The Sumihary:’ 

Bubble of Glafs) fets down his thoughts cone 
cerning the frange exuperancy of ftrength 
in Air, agitated by heat, above what the 
fame has unagitated,283 &c. And then proa 
ceeds to the examination of the weight of the 
Air by an Æolipile and compares ive refult 
thereof, with that of Merfennus, 286. The 
Opinions and Experiments of divers Aue 
thors, and fome of his own, touching the 
proportion of weight betwixt Water and Air, 
are compar dand cxar d by the Author, 
288. The refult thereof, 290. Merfennus 
his obfervation reconctl’d, with that of the 
Author , and the proportion between the graa 
vity.of Water and Air about London, 291 
&c. After the recital of the opinions of fe- 
veral Writers, touching the proportion of 
gravity between Water and Quick-filver, 
the Author fets down his own tryals, made 
feveral ways, together with his conclufion 
therefrom, 293 &c The ufe he makes of this 
inquiry for the ghefsing at the heaght of the 
Atmo{phere,297. What other Experiments 
arerequifite to the determination thereof. 
299 &c: 

The 37°" Experiment touching the ftv ange 
and odde Phenomenon, of the judden flafh- 
es of light in the cavity of the Receivers the 
feveral circumftances and difficulties of tt, 

wit 





















The Summary? 
with fome attempts towards the rendering at reani: 
thereof, 301, &c. The Difficulty of fo doing fnr- 
thir foewn frm the confidevation of the various. 
changes of Air which doe not immediatly falin- 
dir onrfenfes, 315.° this laft propofition prowd, 
by feverall obfervations. 316. 
The 38. Experiment touching the freezing of. 
water, 319.8, Aproblem, (concerning the great, 
force wherewith a freezing Liquor extends its fa lfe), 
propof’d upon the Confideration of divers admirable, 
effects wrought thereby. l 3.20 &C. 
The 39. Experiment, containing an inguifition' 
after the temperature of the fubftance that remain d 
in the cavity of the Recebver,after the Air was well 
exhaufted. The relaticn of a Phenomenon, feeming 
to proceed from the (welling of the Glafs. : With an 
advertif:ment concerning the pliablenc{s.of G lafs in 
{mall peices. dt antec oe 
Th: 40. Experiment touching the difficn!ty that 
occur’ in making tryall whether rarified Air 
were able to fuftaine flying infects. 326. Xe 
The 41. Experiment, Exhibiting [everall trye 
alls touching the re[piration of divers torts of ant- 
malls included in the Receiver, 328, &C. With a 
digreffion contcining fome doubts touching re{pira- 
tion wherein are delivered feverall Experiments re- 
lating thereunto. 335 &C. 
Fhe 42. Experiment, touching the differing o« 
peration.of corrofive Liquors in the emptied Receiver 
andin the opens Air. 384. 
The 43.Experiment,tonching the [pontaneous E- 
bulliticn of warm Liquors in the exbanfled Receivers 
388 
The Conelafien, 394 
Th: 

























































































ry 





/ 
y 


H 




















































































































(1) 


ESET RR See 


BRE GE REESE 
SRA MGR LTTE apearen eenas 


ae 

: 
Sth 
AN 
$: 

Pard 
wae 
o 


LORD 


DUNGARVAN 
My Honoured and Dear 
NEPHEW: 


My Dear Lord, 


Eceiving in your laft from 
Paris, adefire that I would 
adde fome more ae 
ments to thofe I formerly 

{fent Youover: [could not 

be fo much your Servant as I am, without 

looking upon that Defire as 2 Com- 

mand; “and confeguently, without think- 

ing my felf obliged to confider by what 

fort of Experiments i it might the moft ac- 

ceptably be obey’d. And at the fame 
B 


tine, 































—— 





(2) 
time, perceiving by Letters from fome 
other Ingenious Perfonsat Paris, that fe- 
veral of the Virtuofi there, were very 
intent upon the examination of the Inte- 
reft of the AT in hindring the defcent 
of the Quick-filver, in the famous Expe- 
riment touching 2 Vacuum: I thought I 
could not com ply with your Defiresina 
more fit and feafonable inanner, then by 
profecuting and ‘endeavoring to promote 
that noble Experiment of 7 Torricellins: 
and by prefenting your L aes ac- 
count of) my attempts to illuftrace a fub - 
ject, about which, it’s being fo much dif- 
couri’d of where you are, together with 
your inbred Curiofity, and love of Ex- 
perimental Learning, made me fuppofe 
you fuffcienti ty ing fitive 

And though I I pretend fot to acquaint 
you, on this occafion, with any {tore of 
new Tiifcoperies, yet poftibly I{hall be fo 
happy.as to es t you to know fomethings 
which you did d tormerly but fuppofe s > and 
fhall prefent you, if not with new Theo- 
ries, at leait with new Proofs of fuch as 
are not yet become unqueftionable. And 
if what I fhall deliver, have the good for- 
tune to encourage and affift you to profe- 
cute the Hints ic will afford, I fhall ac- 
count 





(3) 

count my felf, in paying of a duty to 
you, to have done apiece of Service to 
the Commonwealth of Learning. Since 
it may highly conduce to the “advance- 
ment of that ce ah ae Philofophy, 
the effectual purfuic of which, requires 
aswella Purle asa Brain, to endeere ic 
to hopeful Perfons of your Quality : who 
may accomplith many things which o- 
thers can but m/h or, at moft, but defien, 
by being able toimploy the Prefents of 
Fortune in the fearch of the Myfteries of 
Nature. 

And Jam not faintly indue’d to make 
choice of this Subject, rather then any 
of the expected Chymical ones, to enter- 
tain your Lorathip upon, by thefe two 
Contiderations: The one, That the Ayr 
being fo neceffary to humane Life, thac 
not onely the generality of Men, but 
moft other Creatures that breath, can- 
not live many minates without its any 
amea difcovery of its Nature, 
feems likely to prove of moment to 
Man-kinde. Ana the other is, That the 
Ambient Ayr, being that whereto both 
our own Bodies, and-moit of the others 
we deal with here belo ow, are almott pera 
petually contiguous ; not onely irs elte- 

B2 rations 























(4) 


rations have a notable and manifeft {hare 
in thofe obvious effeéts, that men have 
already been invited to afcribe thereunto 
fuch as are the various ciftempers inci- 
dent to humane Bodies, efpecially if cra. 
zy, in the Spring, the Autumn, and alfo 
on moft of the great and fudden changes 
of Weather) butlikewite, chat the fur- 

ther cuicovery of the nature of the Ayr, 
will probably difcover to us, that it con- 
curs more or lefs to the exhibiting of ma- 
ny rheninens » in which it hath hither- 
to {carce been fulpefed to have any inte- 
reft. So that a True Account of any 
Experiment that is New concerning a 
thing, wherewith we. have fuch conftant 
and neceflary intercourfe, may not one- 
ly prove of fome advantage to humane 
Life, but gratifie Philofophers, by pro- 
moting their Speculations on a Subject 
which hath fo much opportunity to folli- 
cite their Curiofity. 

And I fhould immediately proceed to 
the mention of my Experiments, but that 
Tlike too well that worthy faying of the 

. Nature alint Pliny Benignum ef 
oe * & plenum ingenui i pudori, fateri 

per quos profeceris not to cons 
form to it, by acquainting your Lord- 
{hip 





(5) 

fhip, in the firft place, with the Hint I 
hadof the Fngine I am to entertain you 
of. You may be pleaftd to remember, 
that a while before our (eparation in Eng- 
land, I told you of a Book that I had 
heard of, but not peru(’d, publifh’d by 
the induftrious Jefuir Schottus, wherein 
’twas faid, He related how that ingenious 
Gentleman Otto Gericke, Conful of Mag- 
deburg, had lately practicedin Germany a 
way of emptying Glafs Veflels, by fuck- 
ing out the Ayr at the mouth of the Vef- 
fel, plung’d under water: And you may 
alfo perhaps remember, that IJ exprefied 
my felf much delighted with this Expe- 
riment, fince thereby the great force of 
the external Air (either ruthing in at the 
open’d Orifice of the empty ’d Veffel, or 
violently forcing up the Water into it) 
was rendred more obvious and con{picu- 
ous, than in any Experiment that I had 
former ly feen. And though it may appear 
by fome of thofe Writings I fometimes 
fhew’d your Lordfhip,chart I had been fol- 
licitous to try things upon the fame 
ground; yet in regard this Gentleman 
was before- hand with me in producing 
fuch confiderable effects, by meaas of the 
exfuction of Air, I think my felf oblig’d 

B 3 to 














(6) 
to acknowledge the Affiftance, and En- 
couragement “the Report of his perfor- 
mances hath afforded me, 

But as few inventions happen to be at 
firt focompleat, as not to be either ble- 
mifhd with fome deficiencies needful to be 
remedy’d, or otherwife capable of im- 
provement: fo when the Engine we 
have been {peaking of, comes to be more 
attentively confider’d, there will appear 
two very confiderable things to be de- 
fir'd init. For firft, che Wind- Pump (as 
fome body not improperly callsit) 1s fo 
contriv’d, that to evacuate the Veffel 
there is requit *d the continual labor of 

two ftrong men for divers hours, And 

next (which is an imperfection of much 

greater moment) the Receiver, or Glafs 
to be empty’d, confifting of one entire 
and uninterrupted Globe and Neck of 
Glafs; thewhole Engineis fo made, that 
things cannot be convey’d into it, where: 
on to try Experiments: So tbat there 
feems but little (if any thing) more to be 
expected from it, then thofe ve ry few 
Phancmena that have been already ob- 
ferv’d by the Author, and Recorded by 
Schottus. Wherefore to remedy thefe 
Inconveniences, I put both Mr. a 
anc 


ri 

tnd R. Hook (who hath alfo the Honor to 
be known to your Lorcfhip,and was with 
me when I hidthefe things under confi- 
deration) to contrive fome Air Pump, 
that might not, like the other, need to 
be kept under water (which on divers oc- 
cafions is inconvenient) & might be more 
eafily manag’d: And after anuniuccefsfal 
tryall or two of ways propofd by o- 
thers, the laft nam’d Perfon fitted me 
with a Pump, anon to bedeferib’d. And 
thus the firft Imperfection of the German 
Engine, was in good meature, though 
not perfect] Ys remedy’d : And to fupply 
‘the fecond defect, it was confidered that 
it would not perhaps prove impoffible to 
leave inthe Glafs to be empty’d, a hole 
large enough to pat in a ame Arm 
cloath’d ; andconfequently other Bodies, 
not bigger thenit, or longer then the in- 
fide of the Veflel. And this Defign 
feem’d the se hopetull, becaufeI re- 

membred, that having feveral years be~ 
fore often made the Experiment De Va- 
cuo with my ownhands; I had, to exa- 
mine fome conjectures thar occurr’d to 
me about it, cauled Glafles to be made 
with a hole at that end, which ufesto be 

feal’dup, and had neverthe lefs been able, 
3 4 as 























(8) 
as occafion requir’d, to make ufe of fuch 
Tubes, as if no fuch holes had been left 
in them ; by devifing ftopples for them, 
made of the common Plaifter call’d Dia- 
chylow: which rightly enough gheff’d, 
would, by reafon of the exquifite com- 
mixtion of its {mall parts, and clofenefs 
of itstexture, deny all accefs to the ex- 
ternal Air, Wherefore, fuppofing that 
by the help of fuch Plaifters, carefully 
laid upon the commiflures of the ftopple 
and hole to be made in the Receiver, the 
external Air might be hindred from infi- 
nuating it {elf between them into the Ve} 
fel, we cauld feveral fuch Glaffes , as 
you will finde detcrib’d alittle lower, to 
be blown at the Glafs-houfe; and though 
we could not get the Work-men to blow 
any of them jo large, or cf fo conveni- 
ent a {hape as we would fain have had ; yet 
finding one to be tolerably fit, and lefs 
unfit then any of the reft, we were con- 
tent to make nfe of it jn that En. 
gine: Of which, I fuppofe, you by this 
time expect the Defcription, in order to 
the Recital of the Phenomena exhibited 
by it. 

To give your Lordfhip then, in the 
firft place, fome account of the Engine ic 
felf : 


(9) 
felf : It confifts af two principal parts; a 
glafs Veffel, and a Pump to.draw the Air 
out of it. 

The former of thefe (which we, with 
the Glafs.men, fhall often call a Receiver, 
for its affinity to the large Veflels of thag 
name, ufed by Chymifts) confifts of a 
Glafs-with awide hole at the top, of a 
cover to that hole, and of a ftop-cock 
faftned to the end of the neck, at the 
bottom. 

The fhape of the Glafs, you will find 
expreff'din the firft Figure of theannex~ 
ed Scheme. And for the fize of it, it 
contain’d about 30 Wine Quarts, each of 
them containing near two pound (of 16 
Ounces to the pound) of water: We 
fhould have been better pleaf’d with 
more capacious Veflel, but the Glafs-men 
profefled themfelves unable to blow a 
larger, of fach a thicknefs and fhape as 
was requifite to our purpofe. 

At the very top of the Veffel, (A) you 
may obferve a round hole, whofe Dia- 
meter (B C)is of about four inches; and 
whereof, the Orifice is incircled with a 
lip of Ġlafs, almoft an inch high: For 
the making of which lip, i t was requifite 
(to mention that upon the by, in cafe 

your 








(10 } 

your Lordfhip fhould have fuch another 
Engine made for you) to have a hollow 
and tapering Pipe of Glafs drawn out, 
whereof the Orifice above mentioned 
was the Bafis, and then to have the cone 
cut off with ahot Iron, within about an 
Inch of the Points (B C.) 

The ufe of the lip, is to fuftain the 
cover delineated in the {fecond Figure; 
where(D E) points out a brafs Ring, fo 
caft, as that it doth within and without 
cover thelip (BC) of the firft Figure, 
andis cemented on upon it with aitrong 
and clofe Cement. To the inward taper- 
ing Orifice of this Ring (which is about 
three Inches over) are ex quifitely ground 
the fides of the Brafs ftopple (F G;) fo 
that the concave fuperficies of the one, 
andthe convex of the other, may touch 
one another info many places, as may 
leave as little accefs, as poffible,to the ex - 
ternal Air: And in the midh of this cover 
is lefta hole (H I) of about half an inch 
over, invironed alfo witha ring or focket 
of the fame mettal, and fitted likewife 
with a brafs ftopple (K) made in the form 
of the Key of a ftop-cock, and exactly 
ground into the hole (H D it is to fill; fo 
as that though it be turn’d roundin the 

cavity 


(11) 
cavity it poffeffes, it will not let in the 
Air, and yet may be put inor takenout 
at pleafure, for ules to be hereafter men- 
tioned. In order to fomeof which, it is 
perforated with a little hole, (8)traverfing 
the whole thicknefs of it at the lower 
end; through which, and a little brafs 
Ring (L) faftned to one fide, (no matter 
which ) of the bottom of the ftopple 
(E G)aftring (8,9, 10) might pals, to 
be imploy’d to move fome things in the 
capacity of the empty'd Veffel; without 
any where unftopping it. 

The laft thing belonging to our Recei- 
ver, is the f{top-cock defigned in the firft 
Figure by (N.) for the better faftening 
of which to the neck, and exacter exclufi- 
on of the Air, there was foder'd on to 
the fhank of the Cock (X) a Plate of 
Tin, (MT UW) long enough to cover 
the neck of the Receiver, But becaufe 
the cementing of this was a matter of 
fome difficulty, it will not be amifs to 
mention here the manner of it, which 
was, That the cavity of thetin Plate was 
fill’d with a melted Cement, made of 
Pitch, Rofin, and Wood-afhes, well in- 
corporated; and to hinder this liquid 
Mixture trom getting into the Orifice (Z) 

of 








(12) 

of the fhank, (X) that hole was ftope 
with a Cork,to which was faftned a ftring, 
whereby it might be pull’d out of the up- 
per Orifice of the Receiver, and then, 
the glafs neck of the Receiver being well 
warm'd, was thruft into this Cement, and 
over the fhank whereby it was effected, 
that all the {pace betwixt the tin Plate and 
the Receiver , and betwixt the internal 
fuperficies of: the Receiver, and the 
fhaack of the Cock, was filld with the 
Cement; and fo we have difpach’d the 
firft and upper part of the Engine. 

The undermoft remaining part confifts 
of aFrame, and of afucking Pump, or 
as we formerly call’d it,an Air Pump, fup- 
ported by it: The Frame is of Wood, - 
{mall, but very ftrong,confifting of three 
legs, (1 1 1) foplac’d, that one fide of 
it may ftand perpendicular, that the free 
motion of the hand may not be hindered. 
In the midft of which frame, is tran{verfly 
nail’d a board, (2 2 2) which may not im- 
properly be call’da Midriff, upon which 
refts, and to which is ftrongly faftned,the 
main part of the Pump it felf, which is 
the onely thing remaining to be defcri- 
bed. 

The Pump confifts of four parts, a 

l hollow 








(13) 
hollow Cylindre, a Sucker, a handle to 
move that Sucker, anda valve. 

The Cylindre was (by a pattern) caft 
of brafs ; itis in length about 14 inches, 
thick enough to be very ftrong, notwith- 
ftanding the Cylindrical cavity left withe 
in it; this cavity is about three inches 
Diameter, and makes as exacta Cylin- 
dre as the Artificer was able to bore, 
ThishollowCylindre is fitted with a fuck- 
er, (4455) confifting of two parts, the 
one (44) {omewhat lefsin Diameter then 
thecavity of the Cylindre, upon which 
is nail’d a good thick piece of tan’d fhoe 
Leather, which will go fo clofe to the 
Cylindre, that ic will need to be very 
forcibly knock’d andram’din, if at any, 
time it be taken out, which is therefore 
done, that it may the more exactly hin- 
der the Air from infinuating it felf be- 
twixt it and the fides of the Cylindre 
whereon itis to move, 

To the midft of this former part of the 
Sucker is ftrongly faftned the other, 
namely athick and narrow plate of Iron 
(55) fomewhat longer then the Cylindre, 
one of whofe edges is {mooth, butat the 
other edge it is indented (as I may fo 
fpeak) witha row of teeth delineated h 

the 




































































(14) 
the Scheme,” into whofe intervals are to 
be fitted, the teeth of a fmall Iron nut, 
(8) (as Tradef-mencallit) which is faft- 
ned by two ftaples (22) to the under fide 
of the formerly mention’d tranfverfe 
board (222) on which the Cylindre refs; 
andis turn’d to and fro by the third piece 
of this Pump, namely, the handle or 
manubrium, (7) of which the Figure gives 
a fufficient defcription. 

The fourthand laft part of this Cylin- 
dre, is the Valve, (R) confifting of a 
hole bored through at the top of the Cy- 
dindre, a little capering towards the cavi- 
ty; into which holeis ground a tapering 
Peg of brafs, to be thruft in, and taken 
out at pleafure. 

The Engine being thus defcrib’d, it 
will be requifite to adde, that fomething 
is wont to be done before it be fet on 
work, for the more eafie moving of the 
Sucker, and for the better exclufion of 
the outward Air: which when the Veffel 
begins to be exhaufted, is much more dif - 
ficult to be kept out then one would eafi- 
ly imagine. 

There muft then be firft powr’d in at 
the top of the Receiver a little fallad oyl, 
partly to fill up any {mall intervalls that 
may 


C15) . 
may/happen to be betwixt the contigu- 
ous furfaces of the internal parts of the 
Stop-cock: And partly that it may be 
the more eafie to turn the Key (S) back- 
wards and forwards. Pretty ftore of oyl 
muft alfo be pour’d into the Cylindre , 
both that the Sucker may flip up and 
down in it the more {moothly and freely, 
and thac the Air might be the better 
hindred from getting in between them - 
And for thelike reafons, alittle oyl is to 
be ufed alfo about the Valve. Upon 
which occafion, it would not be omitted 
(for it is {trange) that oftentimes, when 
neither the pouring inof water, nor even 
of oylalone, prov‘d capable to make the 
Sucker move eafily enough in the Cylin- 
der; a mixture of both thofe Liquors 
would readily (fometimes even to admi- 
ration) perform the defired effeét. And 
Isftly, the brafs cover of the Receiver, 
being put into the brais ring formerly de- 
fcrib’d , that no Air may get between 
them, it will be very requifice to plaifter 
over very carefully the upper edges of 
both, with the plaifter formerly mention- 
ed, or fome other as clofe, whichis to be 
{pread upon the edges with a hot Irons 
that being melted, it may run into and 














































(16) 


fill up all the crannies, or other little ca- 
vities, at which the Air might otherwife 
get entrance. 

All things being thus fitted, and the 
lower fhank (O) of the ftop-cock being 
put into the upper Orifice of the Cylin- 
der(&), into which it was exactly ground; 
the Experimenter is firft, by turning the 
handle, toforce the Sucker to the top of 
the Cylinder, that there may be no Air 
left inthe upper part of it: Then fhut- 
ting the Valve with the Plug, and turning 
the other way, he is to draw down the 
Sucker to the bottom of the Cylinder 5 
by which motion of the Sucker, the Air 
that was formerly in the Cylinder being 
thruft out, and none being permitted to 
fucceed in itsroom, ’tis manifeft that. the 
cavity of the Cylinder mutt be empty, 
in reference to the Air: So that if there- 
upon the Key of the Stop-cock be fo 
turn’d, as that through the perforation of 
it, a free paflage be opened betwixt the 
Cylinder and the Receiver, part of the 
Air formerly contain’d in the Receiver, 
will nimbly defcend into the Cylinder. 
And this Air, being by the turning back 
of the Key hinder’d from the returning 
into the Receiver, may, by the opening | 
of 


(17) 

of the Valve,and forcing up of the Suck 
er tothe top of the Cylinder again, be 
driven out into the open Air. And‘thus 
by the repetition of the motionof the 
Sucker upward and downward,and by op- 
portunely turning the Key, and ftopping 
the Valve, as occafion requires, more or 
lefs Air may be fuck’d out of the Recei- 
ver, according to the exigency of the Ex- 
periment, and the intention of him that 
makes it. 

Your Lordhip will, perhaps,think that 
I have been unneceffarily prolix in this 
firft part of my Difcourfe: But if you 
had feen how many unexpected difficul- 
ties we foundto keep out the externall 
Air, even for alittle while, when fome 
confiderable part of the internal had been 
fackt out; You would peradventure al- 
low, that I might have fet down more 
circumftances then I have, without fet- 
ting down any , whofe knowledge,he that 
{hall try the Experiment may not have 
need of. Whichis fo true, that, before we 
proceed any further, I cannot think it un- 
feafonable to advertife Your Lordfhip, 
that there are two chief forts of Experi- 
ments, which we defign'd in our Engine 


, to make tryal of: The one, fuch as may 


be 











(18) 
be quickly difpatchr, and therefore may 
be try’d in our Engine, though it leaka 
little; becaufe the Air may be fafter drawn 
out, by nimbly plying the Pump, then 
it can get in at undifcern’d leaks; I fay at 
undifcern’dleaks, becaufe {uch as are big 
enough to be difcover’d can {carce be un- 
eafie to be ftopt. The other fort of Ex- 
periments confifts of thofe that require 
not onely thatthe internal Air be drawn 
out of the Receiver, but that it be like- 
wife for along time kept out of it. Such 
are the prefervation of Animal and o- 
ther Bodies therein , the germination and 
growth of Vegetables, and other tryals 
of feveral forts, whichitis apparent can. | 
not bewell made unlefS the external Air | 
can, for acompetent while, be excluded : 
Since evenatavery {mall leak there may 
enough get in, to make the Zacuum foon 
loofe that name; by which I here declare 
once for all, that I underftand not a {pace 
wherein there is no body at all, but fuch 
asis either altogether, or almoft totally 
void of Air, 
Now this diftinétion of Experiments 
I thought fit to premife to the enfuing 
Narratives, becaufe upon tryal, we found 
it fo exceeding(and {carce sia mals 
cult 























(19) 
ficult amatter, to keep out the Air from 
getting at all inat any imperceptible hole 
or flaw whatfoever, in a Veifel immedi« 


ately furrounded with the comprefled At. . 


mofphere, that in {pight of all our care 
and diligence, we never were able totally 
to exhauft the Receiver, or keep it when 
it was almoft empty, any confiderable 
time,from leaking more or lefs : although 
(as we have lately intimated)by unwearyed 
quicknels in plying the Pump, the inter- 
nall Air can be much fafter drawn out 
then the external.can get in, till the Re- 
ceiver come to be almoft quite empty, 
And that’s enough to enable mento dif- 
cover hitherto unobferved Phenomena of 
Nature. 

The Experiments therefore of the firft 
fort, will, I fear, prove the onely ones 
wherewith my Avocations will allow me 
to entertain Your Lordfhip in this Letter. 
For till your further Commands fhall en- 
gage me to undertake, by Gods permif- 
fion, fuch an Employment, and more lea- 
{ure thal] better fit me for it, I know not 
whether I fhall be ina’ condition to try 
what may be done, to enable me to give 
you fome account of the other fort of 
Experiments alfo. 

C 2 To 











































Experi- 
ment I. 


(20) 

















T proceed now to the Phenomena, 
exhibited tous by the Engine above 
defcribed ; Ehold it not unfit to begin 
with what does conftancly and regularly 
offer it felf to our obfervation,as depend - 
ing upon the Fabrick of the Enginei it felf, 
and not upon the nature of this or that 
particular Ex periment which ’tis employ- 
ed to tr 

Pitt, "Then upon the drawing down 
of the Sucker, (the Valve being fhut) the 
Cylindrical {pace, deferted by the Sucker, 
is left devoid of Air; and therefore, up- | 
onthe turning of, the Key, the Air con- | 
tained in the Receiver rufhes into theem- | 
ptyed Cylinder, till che Air in both thofe 
Veflels be brought to about an equal | 
meafure of dilatation. And therefore, 
upon shutting the Receiver by returning | 
the Key, if you open the Valve,and force 
up the Sucker again, you will finde, that | 
after this firft exfuction you will ‘drive | 
out almoft a whole Cylinder full of Air - 
But at the following exfuctions, you will 
craw lefs and lefs of Air out of the Recei- 
ver into the Cylinder, becaufe that there | 
will ftill remain lefs and lefS Air in the | 














(21) 

Receiver it felf; and confequently, the 
Particles of the remaining Air, having 
more room to extend themfelves in, will 
lefs prefs out one another. This you will 
eafily perceive, by finding, that you ftill 
force lels and lefs Air out of the Cylin- 
der; fo that when the Receiver is almoft 
exhaufted, you may force up the Sucker 
almoft to the top of the Cylinder, be- 
fore you will need to unftop the Valve to 
let out any Air: And ifat {uch time, the 
Valve being hurt, you let go the handle of 
the Pump, you will finde the Sucker for- 
cibly carryed up to the top of the Cylin- 
der, by the protrujion of the external Air; 
which, being much lefsrarified then that 
within the Cylinder, muft havea more 
forcible preflure upon the Sucker, then 
the internal is able to refit: And by this 
means you may know how far you have 
emptyed the Receiver. And to this we 
may adde, on this occafion, that conftant- 
ly upon the turning of the Key to let out 
the Air from the Receiver, into the em- 
| ptied Cylinder, there is immediately pro- 
duced a confiderably brisk noile, efpeci- 
ally whil’ft thereis any plenty of Air in 

the Receiver. 
G 3 For 









































( 22 J 4 

For the more eafie underftanding of the 
Experiments tryable by our Engine, I 
thought it not (uperfluous, nor unfeafon- 
able in the recical of this firft of chem, to 
infinuate that notion by which itfeems 
likely chat moft, if not all, of them will 
prove explicable. Your Lorcfhip will 
eafily fuppofe, that the Notion I {peak 
of is, That there is a Spring, or Elafti- 
cal power inthe Air we livein. By which 
ésavip or Spring of the Air, that which 
I mean is this: That our Air either con- 
fifts of, or at leatt abounds with, parts of 
fuch a nature, that in cafe they be bent or 
compreff’d by the weight of the incum- 
bent part ofthe Atmofphere,or by any o- 
ther Body, they doendeavor, as much as 
in them lies, to tree themfelves from that 
preffure, by bearing againft the contigu- 
ous Bodies that keep them bent; and, 
affoon as thofe Bodies are remov'd ‘or 
reduced to givethem way, by prefently 
unbending and ftretching out themfelves, 
either quite, or fo far torth as the con- 
tiguous Bodies that refift rhem will per- 
mit, and thereby expanding the whole 
parcel of Air, thefe elaftical Bodies com- 


ole. 
j This 


iy 


(23) 


” This Notion may perhaps be fome- 


what further explain’d, by conceiving the 
Air near the Earth to be fucha heap of 
little Bodies, lying one upon another, as 
may be refembled toa Fleece of Wooll. 
For this (to omit other likenefles betwixt 
them) confifts of many {lender and flegi- 
ble Hairs; each of which, may indeed, 
like alittle Spring, be eafily bent or roul- 
edup; butwill alfo, likea Spring, be 
{till endeavouring to ftretch it felf out 
again. For though both thefe Haires, 
and the Aerial Corpufcles to which we 
liken them, do eafily yield to externall 
preffures; yet each of them (by vertue of 
its {tru@ture) is endow’d with a Power or 
Principle of felf-Dilatation; by vertue 
whereof, though the hairs may by a Mans 
hand be bent and crouded clofer together, 
and into a narrower room then fuits beft 
with che nature of the Body : Yet whil ft 
the compreflion lafts, there is in the fleece 
they compole an endeavour outwards, 
whereby it continually chrufts againft the 
hand that oppofes its Expanfion. And 
upon the removall of the external pref- 
fure,by opening the hand more or lefs,the 
compreffed Wooll does, as it were, fpone 
taneoufly expand or ditplay it {lf cowards 

C4 the 










































(24) 
the recovery of its former more loofe and 
free condition, till the Fleece have ei- 
ther regain’d its former Dimenfions, or 
at leaft, approach’d them as near as the 
compreffing hand (perchance not quite 
open’d) will permit. This Power of 
felf- Dilatation, is fomewhat more confpi- 
cuous in adry Spunge compreff’d, then 
in a Fleece of Wooll. But yet we ra- 
ther chofe to imploy the latter, on this 
occafion, becaufe it is not like a Spunge, 
an entire Body, but a number of flen- 
der and flexible Bodies, loofely com- 


‘plicated, as the Air it felf feems to 


be. 

There is yet another way to explicate 
the Spring of the Air, namely, by fuppo- 
fing with that moft ingenious Gentleman, 
Monfieur Des Cartes, That the Air is no- 
thing but a Congeries or heap of {mall 
and (for the moft part) of flexible Parti- 
cles; of feveral fizes,and of all kinde of Fi- 
gures whichare raiftd by heat (efpecially 
that of the Sun) into that fluid and 
fubtle Etheriall Body that furrounds 
the Earth; and by the reftleffe agi- 
tation of that Celeftial Matter where- 
in thofe Particles fwim, are fo whirl’d 
round, 








(25) 
round, that each Corpufcle endeavours 
to beat off all others from coming within 
the little Sphear requifite to its motion 
aboutits own Center; and (incafeany, 
by intruding into that Sphear fhall op- 
pofe its free Rotation) to expell or drive 
it away: So that according to this Do- 
&rine, it imports very little, whether the 
particles of the Air have the ftructure re- 
quifite to Springs, or be of any other 
form (how irregular foever) fince their 
Elaftical power is not made to depend 
upon their fhape or ftruéture, but upon 
the vehement agitation, and (as it were) 
brandifhing motion, which they receive 
from the fluid Erber that {wiftly flows 
between them, and whirling about each 
of them (independently from the reft) 
not onely keeps thofe flender Aérial 
Bodies feparated and ftretcht out (at leaft, 
as far as the Neighbouring ones will per- 
mit) which otherwife, by reafon of 
their flexiblenefs and weight, would 
flag or curl; but alfo makes them hic 
againft, and knock away each other, and 
confequently require more room , then 
that which if they were comprefl’d, they 
would take up. | 

k By 












































































(26) 

By thefe two differing ways, my Lord, 
may the Spring of the Air be explicated. 
But though the former of them be that, 
which by reafon of its feeming fomewhat 
moreeafie, I fhall for the moft part make 
ufe of in the following Difcourle: yet 
am I not willing to declare peremptorily 
for either of them, againft the other. And 
indeed, though I have in another Treatife 
endeavoured to make it probable, that the 
returning of Elaftical Bodies (if I may fo 
call them) forcibly bent, to their former 
pofition, may be Mechanically explica- 
ted: YetI muft confefs, that to deter- 
mine whether the motion of Reflitution 
in Bodies, proceed from this, That the 
parts of a Body of a peculiar Structure 
are put into motion by the bending of the 
{pring,or from the endeavor of fome fub- 
tle ambient Body, whofe paflage may be 
oppot’d or obftructed, or elfe it’s pretfure 
unequally refifted by reafon of the new 
thape or magnitude, which the bending of 
a Spring may give the Pores of it: To 
determine this, I fay, feems to mea mat- 
ter of more difficulty, then ac firft fight 
one would eafily imagine it. Wherefore 
I {hall decline medling with a fubjed, 
which is much more hard to be sat 
ted, 





(27) 
ted, then neceflary to be fo, by him, 
whofe bufine(s it is not, in this Letter, to 
affign the adequate caufe of the Spring of 
the Air, but onely to manifeft, That the 
Air has a Spring, and torelate fome of 
its effects. 

I know not whether I need annex that, 
though either of the above-mention’d 
Hypothefes , and perhaps {fome others, 
may afford us an account plaufible enough 
of the Air-{pring 5 yet I doubt, whether 
any of them gives us a fufficient account 
of its Nature, And of this doubt, I 
might here mention fome Reafons, but 
that, peradventure, I may (God permit- 
ting) have a fitter occafion to fay fome- 
thing of it elfewhere. And therefore I 
fhould now proceed to the next Experi- 
ment, but that I think it requifice, firft, 
to fuggeft to your Lordfhip what comes 
into my thoughts, by way of Anfwer to 
a plaufible Objection, which I forefee you 
may make againft our propof'd Doctrine, 
touching the Spring of the Air. For it 
may be alleadged, that though the Air 
were granted to confift of Springy Par- 
ticles (if I may fo f{peak) yet thereby 
we could onely give an account of the 
Dilatation of the Air in Wine- Guns ae 

other 














(28) 
other pneumatical Engines wherein the 
Air has been compreffd, andits Springs 
violently bent by an apparent externall 
force; upon the removall of which, ’tis 
no wonder that the Air fhould, by the 
motion of reftitution, expand itfelf till 
it have recovered its more natural dimen- 
fions: whereas inour above-mentioned 
firft Experiment, and in almoft all others 
tryable in our Engine, it appears not 
that any compreffion of the Air prece- 
dedits {pontaneous Dilatation or Ex pan- 
fion of it felf. To remove this difficul- 
ty, I muft defire Your Lordfhip to take 
notice, that of whatever nature the Air, 
very remote from the Earth, may be, and 
whatever the Schools may confidently 
teach to the contrary, yet we have divers 
Experiments to evince, that the Atmof- 
phere we live in is not (otherwife then 
comparatively to more ponderous Bodies) 
light, but heavy: And did not their 
gravity hinderthem, it appears not why 
the {teams of the Terraqueous Globe, of 
which our Air in great part confifts, 
fhould not rife much higher then the Ree 
fraction of the Sun, and other Stars 
give men ground to think, that the At- 
mofphere, evenin the judgement of thofe 
. Recent 








(29) 
Recent Aftronomers, who feem willing 
to enlarge its bounds as muchas they dar € 
does reach. 

But left you fhould expect my feconding 
this Reafon by Experience; and left you 
fhould objeét, That moft of the Experi- 
méts that Eyal been propofd to prove the 
gravity ofthe Air, have been either barely 
propofd, or perhaps not accuratly try’d; F 
am content,before I pafs further,to menti- 
onhere, That I found a dry lambs- bladder 
containing near about two thirds of a pint, 
and compreff’d by a packthred tyed about 
it, to loofea grain and the eighth part of 
a grain of its former weight, by the recefs 
of the Air upon my having prickt it: And 
this with a pair of Scales, which when the 
full Bladder and the correfpondent weight 
were init, would manifeftly turn either 
way with the 32 parcof a grain, Andif 
it be further obje&ted, That the Air in 

the Bladder was violently comprefl’d by 
the Pack-thred and the fides of the 
Bladder, we might probably (to wave 
prolix antwers) ‘be furnith’d with a Re- 
ply, by fetting down the differing weight 
of our Receiver, when empty’d and when 
full of uncompreff’d Air, if we could here 
procure fcales fit for fo nice an experiment, 

{ince 














(30) 

fince we are informed, that in the German 
Experiment, commended at the begin- 
ning of this Letter, the Ingenious Tryers 
of it found, That their Glais Veffel, of 
the capacity of 32 meafures, was lighter 
when the Air had been drawn out of it, 
then before, by no lels then one ounce 
and = that is, an ounce and very near a 
third: But of the gravity of the Air, we 
may el fewhere have occafton to make fur- 
ther mention. 

Taking it then for granted that the Air 
is not devoid of weight, it will not be 
tneafie to conceive, that that part of the 
Atmofphere wherein we live, being the 
lower part of it, the Corpufcles that com- 
pofeit, are very much compreff*d by the 
weight of all thofe of the likenacure thar 
are directly overthem, that is, of all the 
Particles of Air, that being pil’d up up- 
on them, reach to the top of the Atmof- 
phere. And though theheight of this 
Atmofphere , according to the famous 
Kepler, and fome others, fcarce exceeds 
eight common miles; yet other eminent 
and later Aftronomers, would promote 
the confines of the Atmofphere, to ex- 
ceed fix or feven times that number of 
miles. And the diligent and learned 
à l Riviolo 











(31) 
Riviolo makes it probable, that the At- 
mofphere may, at leaft in divers places, be 
at leaft 50 miles high. So that according to 
a moderate eftimate of the thicknefs of 
the Atmofphere, we may well fuppofe, 
that a’Column of Air, of many miles in 
heigtic, leaning upon fome f{pringy Cor- 
puícles of Air here below, may have 
weight enough to bend their little fprings, 
and keep them bent: As, to refume our 
former comparifon,if there were Aeeces of 
Wooll pil’dup to a mountainous height 
upon one another, the Hairs that com- 
pofe the lowermoft locks which fupport 
the reft, would, by che weight of all the 
Wool above them, be as well ftrongly 
comprefled, as if a man fhould {queeze 
them together in his hands, orimploy any 
íuch other. moderate force to comprels 
them. Sothat we neednot wonder, that 
upon the taking off the incumbent Ar 
from any parcel of the Atmofphere here 
below, the Corpufcles, whereof that un- 
dermoft Air contifts jhould difplay them- 
felves, and take up more room then be- 
tore, 

And if it be objected, That in Water, 
the weight of theupper and of the lower 
partis theme: I anfwer, That befides 
- that, 




































































(32) 
that it may be well doubted whether the 
obfervation, by reafon of the great difi- 
culty have been exactly made, there is 2 
manifeft difparity betwixt the Air and 
Water: For I havenot found, that upon 
an Experiment purpofely made, (and in 
another Treatife Recorded) that Water 
will fuffer any confiderable compreffion ; 
whereas we may obferve in Wind-Guns 
(to mention now no other Engines) that 
the Air will fuffer it felf to be crouded in- 
toa comparatively very little room; in 
fo much, that a very diligent Examiner 
of the Phenomena of W ind- Guns would 
have us believe, that in one of them, by 
condenfation, he reduc’d the Air into a 
{pace at leaft eight times narrower then it 
before poffeft. And to this, if we adde 
a noble Phenomenon of the Experiment 
De Vacuno ; thefe things put together,may 
forthe prefent fuffice to countenance our 
Dodétrine. For that noble Experimenter, 
Monfieur Pafcal (the Son) had the com- 
mendable Curiofity to caufe the Torri- 
cellian Experiment to be try’dat the foot,- 
about the middle, and at the top of that 
high Mountain (in Auvergne, if I miftake 
not) commonly call’d Le Pay de Domme 5 
whereby it was found, That the Mercury 
m 

























(33) 
in the Tube fell down lower, about three 
inches, at the top of the Mountain then 
atthe bottom., And a Learned Man a 
while fince inform’d me, That a great 
Virtuofo, friend to us both, has, withnot 
unlike fucceis, tryed the fame Experi- 
ment in the lower and upper parts of a 
Mountain in the Weft of Exgland: Of 
which,the reafon feems maniteftly enough 
to bethis, That upon the tops of high 
Mountains, the Air which bears againit 
the reftagnant Quick-filver, is lels preff’d 
by the lefs ponderous incumbent Air ; and 
confequently is not able totally to hinder 
the defcent of fo tall and heavy a Cylin- 
der of Quick-filver, as at the bottom of 
fuch Mountains did but maintain ane£qui- 
librium with the incumbent Atmofphere.: 
And if it be yet further Objected a- 
gaint what hath been propofd touching 
the compactnets and preflure of the Infe- 
rior Air; That we finde this very Air to 
yield readily to the motion of little Flies, 
and even to that of Feathers, and fuch o- 
ther light and weak Bodies; which feems 
to argue, that the particles of our Air are 
not fo compreff'd as we have reprefented 
them, efpecially, fince by our former 
Experiment it appears, that the Air on 
ny 


qe 





2S SS SS SEE 


















































(34) 
dily dilated it felf downward, from the 
Receiver into the Pump, when ‘tis plain, 
thatit is not the incumbent Atmofphere, 
but onely the fubjacent Air in the brafs 
Cylinder that has beenremov’d: If this, 
Ifay, be objected, we may reply, That 
when aman {queezes a Fleece of Wool in 
his hand, he may feel that the Wool in- 
ceffantly bears againft his hand, as that 
which hinders the hairs it confifts of, to 
recover their former and more natural ex - 
tent, Soeach parcel of the Air about the 
Earth,does conftantly endeavour to thruft 
away all thofe contiguous Bodies, whe- 
ther Aérial or more grofs, that keep 
them bent, and hinder the expanfion of 
its parts, which will dilate themfelves or 
flie abroad towards that part, whether up- 
wards or downwards , where they finde 
their attempted Dilatation of themfelves 
lefs refifted by the neihgboring Bodies. 
Thus the Corpufcles of that Air we have 
been all this while {peaking of, being un- 
able, by reafon of their weight, to afcend 
above the Convexity of the Atmofphere, 
and byreafon of the refiftance of the fur- 
tace of the Earth and Water,to fall down 
lower, they are forced, by their own gra- 
vity and this refiftance, to expand and 
diffule 





(35) 

diffufe themfelves about the Terreftial 
Globe; whereby it comes to pafs, that 
they muft as well prefs the contiguous 
Corpufclesof Air that on either fide op- 
pofe their Dilatation, as they muft prefs 
upon the furface of the Earth, and, as it 
were recoyling thence, endeavor to thruft 
away thofe upper particles of Air that 
lean upon them, 

And as for the eafie yielding of the Air 
to the Bodies that move init, if we con- 
fider that the Corpufcles whereof it con- 
fifts, though of a fpringy nature, are yet 
fo very fmall, as to make up (which ‘tis 
manifeft they doe) a fluid Body, it will 
not be difficult to conceive, that in the 
Air, as in other Bodies that are fluid, the 
little Bodies it confifts of are inan almoft 
reftlefs motion, whereby they become 
(as we have more fully difcourfed in ano Ina Dif. 
ther Treatife) very much difpofed to coarfe 
yield to other Bodies, or eafie to be dif- dee: 
-plac’d by them, and that the fame Cor- my A ; 
pufcles are likewife fo varioufly mov’d, as pef. 
they are intire Corpufcles, that if fome 
{trive to pufh a Body plac’d among them 
towards the right hand (for inftance) 
others, whofe motion has an ovpofite de- 
termination, as ftrongly thruft the fame 

“= bg Body 

























(36) 
Body towards theleft; whereby neither 
of them proves able to move it out of 
its place, the preffure on all hands being 
reduced as it weretoan equilibrium: fo 
that the Corpufcles of the Air muft be as 
well fometimes confidered under the no- 
tion of little Springs, which remaining 
bent, are in their entire bulk tranf{ported 
from place to place; asunder the notion 
of Springs difplaying themfelves, whofe 
parts flie abroad whilft as to their entire 
bulk they fcarce change place: As the 
two ends of a Bow, thot off, fly from one 
another, whereas the Bow it felf may be 
held faft in the Archers hand; and that it 
is the equal preflure of the Air on all fides 
upon the Bodies that are in it, which cau- 
fes the eafie Ceflion of its parts, may be 
argu'd from hence: Thacif by the help 
of our Engine the Air be but in great 
part though not totally drawn away 
from one fide of a Body without being 
drawn away from the other; he that hall 
think to move that Body too and fro, as 
eafily as before, will finde himfelf much 
miftaken. 

Inverification of which we will; to di- 
vert your Lordihtp a little, mention here 
a Phenomenon of our Engine, which even 
tO 





| G37) 
to divers ingenious perfons has at fir 
fight feem’d very wonderful, 


“pu thing that is wont to be admired, Fvperi- 
and which may pafs for our fecond ment 2. 
Experiment is this, That if, when the 
Receiver is almoftempty, a By-ftander 
be defired to lift up the brafs Key(former- 
ly defcribed as a {topple inthe brafs Co- 
ver) he will finde ita very difficult thing 
to do fo, if the Veffel be well exhaufted 5 
and even when but a moderate quantity of 
Air has been drawn out, he will, when he 
has lifted it upa little, fo thatit is fome- 
what loofe from the fides of the lip or 
focket, which (with the help of a little 
oylyitexactly filled before, he will (I fay) 
finde it fo difficult to be lifted up, that 
he will imagine there is fome great weight 
faftned to the bottomof it. Andif (as 
fometimes has been done for merriment) 
onely a Bladder be tyed toit, it is plea- 
fant to feehow men will marvail that fo 
light a Body, filled at moft but with Air, 
fhould fo forcibly draw down their hand 
asif it were fill’d with fome very ponder- 
ous thing : whereas the caufe of this pret- 
ty Phenomenon Seems plainly enough to 
D 3 be 

















C38.) 
be onely this, That the Air inthe Recej. 
ver, being very much dilated, its Spring 
muft be very much weakn’d, and confe- 
quently it can but faintly prefs up the 
lower end of the ftopple, whereas the 
Spring of the external Air being no way 
debilitated, he that a little lifts up the 
ftopple muft with his hand fupport a pref- 
fure equal to the difproportion betwixt 
the force of the internal ex panded Air,and 
that of the Atmofphere incumbent upon 
the upper part of the fame key or ftopple: 
And fo men being unufd to finde any re- 
fiftance, in lifting things up , from the 
free Air above them, they are forward to 
conclude that that which depreffes their 
hands muft needs be fome weight,though 
they know not where plac’d, drawing be- 
neath it. 

And that we have not mif-affign’d the 
caule of this Phenomenon feems evident 
enough by this; That as Air is fufter- 
ed by little and little to'get into the Re- 
ceiver, the weight that aman fancies his 
hand fupports is manifeftly felt to decreafe 
more and more, the internal Air by this 
recruit approaching more to an e#quils- 
brinw with the external, till at length the 
Receiver growing again fullof Air, the 
m ~ ftopple 


(39) 

topple may be lifted up without any dif- 
ficulty at all. i 
By feveral other of the Experiments 
afforded us by our Engine, the fame no- 
tion of the great and equal preflure of the 
free Air upon the Bodies it environs, 
might be here manifefted, but that we 
think it not fo fit to anticipate fuch Ex- 
periments; And therefore thall rather 
employ afew lines to clearupa difficulty 
touching this matter, which we have ob- 
ferv’d to have troubled fome even of the 
Philofophical and Mathematical Specta- 
tors of our Engine, who have wonder’d 
that we fhould talk of the Air exquifitely 
{hut upin our Receiver, as if it were all 
one with the preflure of the Atmofpheres 
whereas the thick and clofe body of the 
Gla{s,wholly impervious to the Air,dces 
manifeftly keep the incumbent Pillar of 
the Atmofphere from preffing in the leait 
upon the Air within the Glats, which it 
càn no where cometo touch. Toeluci- 
datea little this matter, let us confider, 
That if a man fhould take a fleece of 
W ool, and having firft by compreffing it 
in his hand reduc’d it into anarrower com- 
pais, fhould nimbly convey and fhut it 
clofe up into a Box juft fit for it, though 
D 4 the 














(40) 

the force of his hand would then no lon: 
ger bend thofe numerous {pringy Body’s 
that compofe the Fleece, yet they would 
continue as ftrongly bent as before, be- 
caufe the Box they are inclofd in would 
as much refift their re-expanding of 
themfelves, as did the hand that put them 
in. For thus we may conceive, that the 
Air being fhut up, when its parrs are bent 
by the whole weight of the incumbent 
Atmofphere, though that weight can no 
longer lean uponit, by reafonitis kept 
off bythe Glafs, yet the Corpufcles of 
the Air within that Glafs continue as 
forcibly bent as they were before their in- 
clufion, becaufe the fides of the Glafs 
hinder them from difplaying or ftretch- 
ing out themfelves. And if it be. ob- 
jected that this is unlikely, becaufe ev’n 
Glafs bubles , fuch as ave wont to be 
blown at the flame of a Lamp, exceeding 
thin and Hermetically feal’d will not 
break; whereas it cannot be imagin‘d 
that fo thina Prifon of Glafs could re- 
fift the Elaftical force of all the included 
Air, if that Air were fo comprefl’d as we 
fuppofe. It may be eafily reply’d, That 
the preffure of the inward Air againft the 
Glals, is countervail’d by the equal Be 

ure 


(4r) 

fure of the outward againft the fame Glafs. 
And we feein bubles, that by reafon of 
this an exceeding thin film of Water is 
often able, for a good while, to hinder the 
eruption of a pretty quantity of Air. And 
this may be alfo more confpicuous in 
thofe great Spherical bubles that boyes 
fometimes blow with Water, to which 
Sope has given a Tenacity. But that, if the 
preffure of the ambient Air were remov'd, 
the internal Air may be able to break 
thicker Glaffes then thofe lately men- 
tion’d,will appear by fome of the follow- 
ing Experiments; to which we fhall there- 
fore now haften, having, I fear, been but 
too prolix in this Excurfion, though we 
thoughtit not amifs to annex to our firft 
Experiments fome general Confiderati- 
ons touching the Spring of the Air, be- 
caufe (this Doctrine being yet a ftranger 
to the Schools) not onely we finde not 
the thing it felf to be much taken notice 
of; but of thofe few that have heard of it, 
the greater part have been forward to re- 
jectit, upona miftaken Perfwafion, that 
thofe Phenomena are the effects of natures 
abhorrency of a Vacuum, which feem to 
be more fitly afcribeable to the weight 
and Spring of the Air. l 

Pra We 












(42) 


Experi- VV E will now proceed to obferve that 





though, by the help of the handle, 
the Sucker be eafily drawn down to the 
bottom of the Cylinder; yet, without 
the help of thar Leaver, there would be 
required to the fame effect , a force or 
weight great enough to furmount the 
preflure of the whole Atmofphere: Since 
otherwile the Air would not be driven out 
of its place, whennone is permitted to 
fucceed into the place deferted by the 
Sucker, Thisfeems evident, from the 
known Torricellian Experiment,in which, 
if theinverted Tube of Mercury be but 
25 Digits highs or fomewhat more, the 
Quick-filver will not fall but remain fuf- 
pended in the Tube; becaufe it cannot 
prefs the fubjacent Mercury with fo great 
aforce, as does the incumbent Cylinder 
of the Air reaching thence to the top of 
the Atmofphere: Whereas, if the Cy- 
linder of Mercury were three or four digits 
longer, it would over- power that of the 
external Air,and run out into the Veffel’d 
Mercury, till the two Cylinders came to 
an e#qutlibrinm, andno further. Hence 
we need not wonder, that though the 
. ~ Sucker 





(43) 

Sucker moveeafily enough up and down 
in the Cylinder by the help of the Mazs» 
brinm, yet if the Manubrium be taken off, 
it will require 4 confiderable ftrength to 
move it either way. Nor will ic feem 
ftrange, that if, when the Valve and 
Stop-cock are well fhut, you draw down 
the Sucker, and then let go the Manubri- 
ums; the Sucker will, as it were of it felf, 
re-afcend to the top of the Cylinder, fince 
the {pring of the external Air findes no- 
thing to refift its preffing up the Sucker, 
And for the: fame reafon, when the Re- 
ceiver is almoft evacuated, though, ha- 
ving drawn down the Sucker, you open 
the way from the Receiver to the Cylin- 
der, and thenintercept that way again by 
returning the Key; the Sucker will, up- 
on the letting go the CManubrium , be 
forcibly carried up almoft to the top of 
the Cylinder : Becaufe the Air within the 
Cylinder, being equally dilated and weak- 
ned with that of the Glafs, is usable to 
withftand the preflure of the ex ternal Air, 
till it be driven into fo little {pace, that 
there ts an equilibrium betwixt its force 
and thatof the Air without. And con- 
gruoufly hereunto we finde, that in this 
cafe, the Sucker is drawn down with Hue 

TRASATE ANUA lee 















(44) 
lefs difficulty, thenif the Cylinder, be? 
ing devoid of Air, the Stop-cock were 
exa@ly fhut: We might take notice of 
fome other things, that depend upon the 
Fabrick of our Engine it felf but to fhun 
prolixity, we will, inthis place, content 
our felves to mention one of them, which 
feems to be of greater moment then the 
reft, and itis this; that when the Sucker 
has been impell’d to thetop of the Cylin- 
der, and the Valveis fo carefully ftopp’d, 
that there is no Air left in the Cylinder a- 
bove the Sucker: Ifthen the Sucker be 
drawn to the lower part of the Cylinder, 
he that manages the Pump findes not any 
fenfibly greater difficulty todeprefs the 
Sucker ,when it is nearer the bottom of the 
Cylinder,then when it is much further off. 
Which circumftance we therefore think fit 
to take notice of, becaufe an eminent Mo- 
dern Naturalift hath taught ,that,when the 
Air is fucked out of a Body, the violence 
wherewith it is wont to rufh into it again, 
as foon as it is allow’d to re-enter, pro- 
ceeds mainly from this ; That the preflure 
of the ambient Air is ftrengthned upon 
the acceffion of the Air fuck’d out; which, 
to make it felfroom, forces the neighbor- 
ing Air toa yiolent-fubingreffion of its 
parts : which, if it were true, he that draws 

ce ies nO N 


(45) 

down the Sucker, would finde the refika 
ance of the external Air increaf'd as he 
draws itlower, more of the difplaced Air 
being thruft into it to comprefs it. But, by 
what has been difcourf’d upon the firft 
Experiment, it feems more probable,that 
without any fuch ftrengthning of the pref- 
fure of the outward Air, the taking quite 
away or the debilitating of the refiftance 
from within, may fuffice to produce the 
effects under confideration. But this will 
perhaps be illuftrated by fome or other of 
our future Experiments , and therefore 
fhall be no longer infifted on here. 


H Aving thus taken notice of fome of Experi- 
the conftant Phenomena of our En- 7t 4 
gine it felf, let us now proceed to the Ex- 
periments tryable in it. 

We took then a Lambs Bladder large, 
well dry’d, and very limber, and leaving in 
it about half as much Airas it could con- 
tain, we caufd the neck of it to be ftrong- 
iy ty’d, fo that none of the includéd Air, 
though by preflure, could get out. This 
Bladder being convey’d into the Receiver, 
and the Gover luted on, the Pump / 
was fet awork, and after two or three 
exfuctions of the ambient Air (where. 
by the Spring of that which remain’¢ in 

the 








(46) 

the Glafs was weaken’d) the Imprifon’d 
Air began to fwellinthe Bladder, and as 
more and more of the Air in the Recei- 
ver was,from time to time,drawn out ; fo 
did that in the Bladder more and more ex: 
pand it felf, and difplay the folds of the 
formerly flaccid Bladder:fo that before we 
had exhaufted the Receiver near fo much 
as we could, the Bladder appear’d as full 
and ftretched, as if it had been blown up 
witha Quill. 

And that it may appear that this plump- 
nefs of the Bladder proceeded from the 
furmounting of the debilitated Spring of 
theambient Air remaining in the’ Veffel, 
by the ftronger Spring of the Air remain- 
ing in the Bladder ; we Return’d the Key 
of the Stop-cock,and by degrees allow’d 
the external Air to return into the Recei- 
ver: Whereupon it happen’d, as was ex- 
peCted, thatas the Air came in from with- 
out, the difturb’d Air in the Bladder, was 
proportionably comprefi’d into a narrow- 
er room, and the fides of the Bladder 
grew flaccid, till the Receiver having re- 
admitted its wonted quantity of Air, the 
Bladder appear’d as full of wrinkles and 
cavities as before. 

a are This 


(47) 

This Experimentis much of the fame 
nature with that which was fome years 
agoe faid to be made by that eminent Ge- 
ometrician Monfieur Roberval., with a 
Carps Bladder empty’d and convey’d into 
a Tube, wherein the Ex periment De Va- 
cuo was afterwards try’d, which ingeni. 
ous Experiment of his juftly deferves the 
thanks of thofe that have been, or fhall be 
folicitous to difcover the nature of the 
Air. 

But toreturn to our Experiment, we 
may take notice of this Circumftance in 
it, That atter the Receiver has been in 
fome meafureempty’d, the Bladder do’s, 
at each exfuction, {well much more con- 
fpicuoufly then it didat any of the firit 
Exfuctions ; infomuch that towards the 
end of the pumping, not onely a great 
fold or cavity in the furface of the Blad- 
der may be made, even by the ftretching 
of the inward felf-expanding Air: Buc 
we have fometimes feen, upon the turn- 
ing of the Key to let the ambient Air 
pats out of the Receiver into the Cyling 
der, we have feen (I fay) the Air in the 
Bladder fuddenly expand it felf fo much 
andfo briskly, thatit manifeftly lifted up 


fome light Bodies that leand upon it, 
and 















(48) 
and feem’d to lift up the Bladder it 
felt. 

Now becaufe it has by very Learned 
Men been doubted whether the {welling 
of the Bladder may not have proceeded 
from the Dilatationof the included Air, 
but from the Texture of the Fibres; 
which, being wont to keep the Bladder 
extended when the Animal to whom it 
belong’d was alive, may be fuppofd in 
our Experiment to have return’d, like fo 
many Springs to their wonted extent, up- 
on the removal of the Ambient Air that 
comprefl’d and bent them: becaufe this, 
I fay, has been doubted, we thought fit 
to make this further tryall. 

We let down into the Receiver with 
the fore-mentioned Bladder two other 
much fmaller, and of the fame kinde of 
Animal; the one of thefe was not ty'd 
up at the neck that there might be liberty 
left to the Air that was not {queez’d out 
(which might amount to about a fifth 
part of what the Bladder held betore) to 
pafs out into the Receiver: The other had 
the fides of it ftretch’d out and preff'd to- 
gether, almoft into theform of a Cup, 
that they might intercept the lefs Air be- 
twixt them, and then was ftrongly ty’d 
up 











(49) 
upatthe neck: Thisdone, and the Air 
being in fome meafure fuck’d out of the 
Pneumatical Glafs (if I may fo call it) 
the Bladder, mention’d at the beginning 
of our Experiment, appear'd extended e- 
very way to its full Dimenfions ; whereas 
neither of the two others did remarkably 
{well, and that whote neck was not ty’d 
feem’d very little, if ac all lefs wrinkl’d 
then when it was put in, 

We made likewilea ftrong Ligature a- 
bout the middle of a long Bladder part- . 
ly empty’d, and upon the drawing the 
Air out of the Receiver, could oblerve 
no fuch {welling betwixt the Ligature and 
the Neck of the Bladder, which had been 
purpofely left open, as betwixt the fame 
Ligature and the bottom of the Bladder, 
whence the included Air could no way 
get out. 

But a further and fufficient manifeftati- 
on whence the intumeffence of the Blad- 
der proceeds, may be deduc’d from the 
following Experiment. 


f "O try then at once both what it was Experi- 
that expanded che Bladder, and what «xt 5- 
a powerful Spring there is ev’nin the Air 


va 
4 ri 






















(50) 
we are wont to think uncompreff'd, we 
cauf*da Bladder dry, well ty’d and blown 
moderately full, to be hung in the Recei- 
ver by one end of a ftring, whofe other 
end was faftned to the infide of the Co- 
ver: andupondrawing out the ambient 
Air, that preff'd on the Bladder; the in- 
ternal Air not finding the wonted refift- 
ance, firft {well’d and diftended the Blad- 
der, and then broke it, with fo wide and 
crooked arent, asif it had been forcibly 
torn affunder with hands. After which a 
fecond Bladder being convey’d in,the Ex- 
periment was repeated with like fuccefs : 
And I fuppofe it will not be imagin’d that 
in this cafe the Bladder was broken by its 
own Fibres, rather then by the Impri- 
fon’d Air. 

Andof this Experiment thefetwo Phe- 
nomena may be taken notice of: The one, 
that the Bladder at its breaking gave a 
great report, almoft like a Craker : And 
the other, That che Air contain’d in the 
Bladder, had the power to break it with 
the mention’d Impetuofity, long before 
the ambient Air was, all or near all, drawn 
out of the Receiver, 

But, to verifie what we fay in another 
Difcourfe, where we thow, That even 
true 































(51) 
true Experiments may, by reafon of 
the eafie miftake of fome unheeded 
Circumftance , be unfuccefsfully try’ds; 
we will Advertife; on this occafion, 
that we did oftentimes in vain try the 
breaking of Bladders, after the manner 
above-mention’d: Of which the caufe 
appear’d to bethis, That the Bladders we 
could not break, having been brought us 
ready blown from thofethat fold them, 
were grown dry before they came to our 
hands: whence it came to pafs, that, if 
we afterwards ty’d them very hard, they 
were apt to fret and fo become unfervice- 
able; and if we ty’d them but moderate- 
ly hard, their ftiffaefs kept them from þe- 
ing clofd fo exa&ly, but that when the 
included Air had in the exhaufted Recei- 
ver diftended them as much as eafily it 
could, it would in part get out between 
the little wrinkles of the Sphincter ot the 
Neck: Whence alfo it ufually happen’ds 
that, upon che letting in the Air from 
without, the Bladders appear’d more flac- 
cid and empty then before they were put 
ins; whereas when the Bladders were 
brought us moift from the Butchers, we 
could, without injuring them, tye their 
necks fo clote, that none of the Air once 
E 2 blown 





































Experi 
miat ©. 





(52) 


blown in, could get out of them, but by 


violently breaking them. 

Ir will not be amifs on this occafion to 
point at fomething which may deferve a 
more deliberate Speculation then we can 
now afford it; namely that the Elaftical 
Power of the fame Quantity of Air may 
be as well Encreaf'd by the Agitation of 
the Aérial Particles (whether onely mo- 
ving them more- fwiftly and {cattering 
them, or alfo extending or ftretching 
them out, I determine not) within an 
every way inclofing and yet yielding Bo- 
dy; as Difplay’d by the withdrawing of 
the Aw that preffd it without. For we 
found that a Bladder, but moderately 
fill'd with Air and ftrongly ty’d, being 
a while held near the Fire,nct onely grew 
exceeding turgid and hard, but after- 
wards, being approach’d nearer to the 
Fire, fuddenly broke with fo loud and ve- 
hement a noile, as ftony’d thofe that were 
by, and made us, fora while after, almoft 
deaf. 


-J Aving thus feen that the Air has an 

' Elaftical Power, we were next defi- 
rous to know in fome meafure how far a 
l l parcel 





(53) 

parcel of Air might by this ics own Spring 
be dilated- And though we were not pro- 
vided of Inftruments fit to meafure the 
dilatationof the Air any thing accurately, 
yet becaufean imperfect meafure of it was 
more defireable then noneat all, we de- 
vifd the following Method as very eafily 
practicable, 

We took a limber Lambs Bladder 
which was thorowly wetted in fair Water, 
that the fides of it being {queez’d toge- 
ther, there might be no Air left in its 
folds: (as indeed we could not afterwards 
upon tryal difcern any) The neck of this 
Bladder was ftrongly tyed about that of 
a {mall Glafs, (capable of holding five 
full drachmes of Water) the Bladder be: 
ing firft fo comprefl’d, that all the inclu- 
ded Air was onely in the Glafs, without 
being prefl’d there; then the Pump be- 
ing fet awork after afew exfuctions, the 
Airin the little Viol began to dilate it 
felf and poe a {mall Tumor in the 
Neck of the Bladder; and as the ambi- 
ent Air was more and more drawn away, 
fo the included Air penetrated further and 
further into the Bladder, and by degrees 
liftedup the fides and difplay’d its folds, 
till ac length it feem’d to have blownic 

E up 


=== are 
sete o 


j 
l 
i 
| 
| 
1 








(54) 

üp toits fullextent: whereupon the ex- 
ternal Air, -being permitted to flow back 
into the Reciver, repulfd the Air that 
had fill’d the Bladder into its former nar- 
row receptacle, and brought the Bladder 
to be again flaccid and wrinkled as before t 
Then taking out the Bladder, but with- 
out fevering it from the Glafs, we did by 
4 hole made at the topof the Bladder fill 
the Veffel they both madeup with Wa- 
ter, whofe weight was five Ounces five 
Drachmes and an half: Five Drachmes 
whereof were above-mention’d to be the 
contents of the Bottle.So that in this Ex- 
periment, when the Air had moft extend- 
ed the Bladder, it poffefl’d in all above 
fine times as much room as it did when it 
was put into the Receiver. And it would 
probably have much inlarg’d its bounds, 
but that the Bladder by its weight and the 
fticking together of its fides did fome- 
what refift its expanfion: And which was 
. more confiderable, the Bladder appear‘d 
tumid enough, whilft yet a pretty deal of 
Air was left in the Receiver, whofe ex- 
fuction would, according to our former 
Obfervation, probably have given way ` 
toa further expanfion of the Aur, et 

i aty 


(55) 
ally fuppofing the dilatation not to be re- 
itrain’d by the Bladder. 


© Ince we wrote the other day the former 
K” Experiment, we have met with fome 
G.afles not very unfit for our purpofe 5 
by means of which we are now able, with 
alittle more trouble, to meafure the ex- 
pantion of the Air a great deal more ac- 
curately then we could by the help of the 
above-mention’d Bladder, which was 
much to narrow to allow the Air its ut- 
moft diftention. 

Wetook then firfta Cylindrical Pipe 
of Glafs, whofe bore was about a quarter 
of anInch in Diameter: this Pipe was fo 
bent and doubled, that, norwithftanding 
its being about two foot ia length, it 
might have been thut up into a fmall Re- 
ceiver, not a Foor high: But by mif- 
fortune it crack’d in the cooling, whereby 
we were reduced to make ule of one part 
which was ftraight and intire, but exceed- 
ednot fix or feven Inches, This little 
Tube was open atone end; and at the 
other, whereit was Hermetically feal’d, 
hada {mall Glafs bubble to receive the 
Air whofe dilatation was to be meafur d, 

E 4 Along 


















(56) 
Along the fide of this Tube was paft- 
eda ftraight narrow piece of Parchment, 
divided into twenty fix equal Paris,mark- 
ed with black Lines and Figures, tha: by 
them might be meafur’d both the inclu- 
ded Air and its dilatation. Atterwards 
we fill’dthe Tube with Water almoft to 
the top, and ftopping the open ena with 
a Finger, and isverting the Tube, the 
Air was permitted to afceric to the above- 
mention’d Glafs bubble. Anc by rea- 
fon this afcent was very flow, it gave us 
the opportunity to mark how me uch more 
or lels then oneot the twenty fix divifi- 
ons this Airtookup. By this means,af- 
ter a tryal or two, we were inabled to con- 
vey to the top of the Glafs a bubble of 
Air equal enough, as to fight, to one 
of thofe Divifions: Then the open end 
of the Tube being put into a {mall Viol, 
whofe bottom was cover’d with Water 
about half an Inch high; we included 
both Glaffes into a {mall and flender Re- 
ceiver, and caufed the Pump to be fet a- 
work. The evengwas, That at the firft 
exfuGiion of the Air there appear’d not 
any expanfion of the bubble, comparable 
to what appear’d at the fecond, and that 
upon a very few exfuctions the bubble 
reaching 





(57) 

reaching as low as the furface of the fub- 
jacent Water, gave us caufe to think 
that if our Pipehad not been broken it 
would have expanded it felf much fur- 
ther : Wherefore we took out the little 
Tube, and found that befides the twenty 
fix digvifions formerly mention’d, the 
Glafs bubble and fome part of the Pipe 
to which the divided Parchment did not 
reach, amounted to fix divifions more. 
Whereby it appears that the air had taken 
up one and thirty times as much room as 
before, and yet feem’dcapable of amuch 
greater expanfion, if the Glafs would 
have permitted ic. Wherefore, after the 
former manner, we let ihanother bubble, 
that by our guefs was but half as big as 
the former, and found, that upon the ex- 
faction of the Air from the Receiver, this 
little bubble did not onely fill up the 
whole Tube, but (in part) break through 
the fubjacent. Water in the Viol, and 
thereby manifeft it felf to have pofleffed 

fixty andodde times its former room. 
Thefe two Experiments are mention’d 
to make way for the more eafie belief of 
that which is now to follow. Finding 
then that our Tube was too fhort to ferve 
our turn, we took a flender Quill of Glafs 
ae which 






















(58) 
which happen’d to be at hand, though ic 
were not fo fit for our purpofe as we 
could have wifhed, inregard it was three 
or four times as big at one end as the o- 
ther, This Pipe which was thirty Inches 
long, being Hermetically feal’d at the 
flender end, was almoft filled with Wa- 
ter; andafcer the above-related manner 
a bubble was convey’d to the top of it, 
andthe open extream was put into a Viol 
that had a little fair Water at the bottom: 
Then the Cover, by means of a {mall hole 
purpofely made in it for the Glafs Pipeto 
ftand out at, was cemented on to the Re- 
ceiver, and the Pump being fet awork, 
after fome exfudtions, not onely the Air 
manifeftly appear’d extended below the 
furface of the fubjacent Water; but one 
of the By-ftanders affirms, that he faw 
{ome bubbles come out at the bottom of 
the Pipe and break through the Water. 
This done, we left off Pumping, andob- 
ferv'd how åt theunperceiv’dleaks of the 
Receiver the Air got in fo faft, thatit 
very quickly impell’d up the Water to 
thetop of the Tube, excepting a little 
{pace whereinto that bubble was repulf"d, 
which had fo lately pofleff'd the whole 
‘Tube; this Air ac the flender end ap- 
ah pear'd 





(59) 
pear’d to.be a Cylinder of + parts of an 
Inch in length; but when the Pipe was 
taken out and turn’d upfide down, it ap- 
pear’dat the other end interior in bulk toa 
Pea. 

Thefe things being thus done we took 
(to make the Experiment the more ex- 
a&ly) a {mall pair of Scales, fuch as Gold- 
Smiths ufe to weigh Gold Coynin; and 
weighing the Tube and Water init, we 
found them to amount to one Ounce thir- 
ty Grains and an half: Then we pour’d in 
as much Water as ferv’d to fill up the 
Tube, wherein before we had left as much 
{pace unfill'd up as was pofleff'd by the 
bubble, and weighing again the Pipe and 
Water, we found the weight increaf’d 
onely by one Grain. Laftly, pouring out 
the Water, and carefully freeing the Pipe 
from it (which yet we couldnot perfectly 
doe) we weighed the Glafs alone, and 
found it to want two Drachmes and thirty 
two Grains of its former weight: So 
that the bubble of Air taking up the room 
but of one Grain in weight of Water, it 
appear’d that the Air by its own tazràp 
was fo rarified, as to take up one hundred 
fifty two times as much room asit did be- 
fore: though it were then compreff'd by 

nothing 




















(60 } 

nothing but the ordinary preffure of the 
contiguous Air. know not whether it 
be requifite to take notice, that this Ex- 
periment was made indeed in a moift 
Night, butina Room, in whofe Chim- 
ney there was burning a good Fire, which 
did perhaps fomewhat rarifie the Air of 
which the bubble confifted. 

It has feem’d almoft incredible which is 
related by the Induftrious Mer fennus, That 
the Air by the violence of heat, though 
as great as our Veflels can fupport with- 
out fufion, canbe fo dilated as to take up 
{eventy times as much room as before : 
Wherefore becaufe we were willing to 
have a confirmation of fo ftrangea Pheno- 
nenon, we once more convey d into the 
Tube a bubble of the bignefs of the for- 
mer, and profecuting the Experiment as 
before with the fame Water, we obferved 
that the Air did manifeftiy ftretch it felf 
fo far, as to appear feveral times a good 
way below the {urface of the Water in the 
Viol, and that too with a furface very 
convex toward the bottom of the Pipe. 
Nay, the Pump being ply’da little lon- 
ger, the Airdid manifeftly reach to that 
place where the bottom of the Tube 
iean’d upon the bottom of the Viol, and 
eee deem’ 


(61) 
feem’d to knock upon it and rebound ` 
fromit: Which Circumftances we adde, 
partly that the Phenomenon we have been 
relating may not be imputed to the 
bare fabfiding of the Water that fill’d 
the Tube, uponthe taking off the pref- 
fure of the ambient Air. And partly al- 
fo that it may appear that if our Expe- 
riments have not been as accurately made 
as with fitter Inftruments might perhaps 
be poffible; yet the expanfion of the 
Air is likely to be rather greater then 
leler then we have made it: Since the 
Air was able to prefs away the Water at 
the bottom of the Pipe,though that were 
about two Inches below the furface of the 
Water that was then in the Viol, and 
would have been at leaft as high in the 
Pipe, if the Water had onely fubfided and 
not beendepreffed: So that it feems not 
unlikely chat if the Experiment could be 
fo made, as that the expanfion of the Air 
might not be refitted by the Neighboring 
Bodies, it would yet inlarge its bounds 
and perhaps ftrecch it felf to two hundre d 
times its former bulk, i iant mone How- 
ever what we have now try’d will The ope, 
fuffice to hinder divers of the Phenomena 
of our Engine from being diftrafted : 
Since 





Experi- 


ment 7. 












(62) 


Since in that part of the Atmofphere we | 
livein,that which we call the free Air (and | 
prefume to be fo uncompreff*d) is crouded | 
into fo very {mall a part of that fpace, 
which if- it were not hindred it would pot- 
fefs. Wewould gladly have tryed alfo | 
whether the Air at its greateft expanfion — 
could be further rarified by heat; but do 
what we could, our Receiver leak’d too 
faft to let us give our felves any {atisfactie 
on in that particular. 


TO difcover likewife by the means of 

that prefiure of the Air, both the 
firength of Glafs, and how much inte- 
reft the Figureof a Body may have in its 
greater or leffer Refiftance to the preflure 
of other Bodys, we made thefe further 
tryals. 

We caufd to be blown witha Lamp a 
round Glafs bubble, capable of contain- 
ing, by guefs, about five Ounces of Wa- 
ter, with a flender neck about the bignefs 
of aSwans Quill, and it was purpofely 
blown very thin, as Viols made with 
Lamps are wont tobe, that the thinnefs 
of the matter might keep the roundnefs 
of the Figure from making the Veflel too 
| ee {trong ; 








(63) 
ftrong. Then having moderately empty- 
edthe Receiver, and taken it out of the 
Pump, we lpeedily applyed to the Ori- 
fice of the bottom of it the Neck of the 
newly mention’d Glafs, carefully ftopping 
the Crannys with melted Plaifter, that no 
Air might get in at them: And after 
turning the Key of the Stop.cock, we 
made a free paffage for the Air to pafs out 
of the bubble into the Receiver : which it 
did with great celerity, leaving the bub- 
bleas empty as the Receiver it r elf as ap- 
pear’d to us by fome Circumftances not 
now to beinfiftedon. Notwithftanding 
all which, the Veflel, continuing as intire 
_as before, gave us caufe to wonder thar 
the bare Roundnefs of the Figure {hould 
inable a Glafs, almoft as thinas Paper, to 
refift fo great a preflure as that of the 
whole incumbent Atmof{phere. And ha- 
ving reiterated the Experiment, we found 
again. that the ees of the ambient 
Body > thrufting all the AA inwards , 
mace them, by reafon of their arched Fi- 
gure, fo fupport one another, that the 
Glas remain’d as whole as at firft. 

Now thatthe Figure of the Glafs is 
of great moment in ‘this matter > may be 
evinced by this other Experiment. 

We 









Experi- 
mcnt. 8. 




























( 64) 


V E took a Glafs Helmet or Alem- 
bick (delineated by the feventh 
Figure) fuch as Chymitts ufe in Diftilla- 
tions, and containing by conjecture be- 
tween two and three Pints: The Rofirum 
or Nofe of it mark’d with (c) was Herme- 
tically clofed, and at the top of it wasa 
hole, into which was fitted and cemented 
one of the Shanks of a middle-fiz’d Stop- 
cock; fo that the Glafs being turn’d up- 
fide-down, the wide Orifice (which in 
common Glafs-Helmets is the onely one) 
was upwards; and to that wide Orifice 
was fitted acaft-Cover of Lead, which 
was carefully cemented on to the Glafs: 
Then the other Shank of the Stop-cock 
béing with Cement Ykewife faften’d into 
the upper part of the Pump, the exfucti- 
onot the Air was endeavoured, But it 
was not long before, the remaining Air 
being made much too weak to ballance 
the preflure of the ambient Air, the Glafs 
was not without a great noife crack’d al- 
moft half round, along that part of it 
where it began to bend inwards: As if 
in the Figure the crack had been made ac- 
cording tothe Line (46); and uponan 
en- 











(65) 
endeavour to pump out more of the Air, 
the crack once began, appear’dto run on 
further; though the Glafs where it was 
broken feem’d to be by conjeCture above 
ten, fome thought above twenty times as 
thick as the bubble mention’d in the fore- 
going Experiment. 

This will perhaps makeit feem ftrange, 
that having taken another Glafs bubble 
blown at the fame time, and like for 
ought we difcern’d for fize, thicknefs 
and Figure to that thin one formerly 
mention’d; and having feal’dit up Her- 
metically, and fufpended it in the Recei- 
ver, the exfuction of the ambient Air did 
not enable the imprifoned Air to break,or 
in the leaft to crack the bubble; though 
the Experiment were laborioufly tryd, 
and that feveral times with bubbles of o- 
ther fizes: But that perhaps the heat of 
the Candle or Lamp wherewith fuch 
Glafles are Hermetically feal’d, (not to 
mention the warmth of his hands that 
feal’dit) might fo rarifie the contained 
Air, as much to weaken its Spring , may 
feem probable by the following Expe- 
riments, 


We 


































(66) 


VV E took a Glafs Viol able to hold 

three or four Ounces of Water, 
and of the thicknefs ufual in Glafles of 
that fize; into the Neck of this was put 
a moderately flender Pipe of Glafs,which 
was carefully faften’d with a mixture of e- 
qual parts of Pitch and Rofin to the Neck 
of the Viol, and which reach’d almoft to 
the bottomof it, as the fixth Figure de- 
clares. 

This Viol being upon a particular de- 
fign fill'd with Water,till that came up in 
ita pretty deal higher then the lower end 
of the Pipe, was put into one of our {mall 
Receivers, (containing between e Pint 
anda Quart) in fuch manner as that the 
Glafs Pipe, paffing through ahole made 
purpofely for it inthe Leaden-Cover of 
the Receiver, was for the moft part of it 
without the Veffel, which being exactly 
clofed, the Pump was fet awork : But at 
the very firft exfuction, and before the 
Sucker was drawn to the bottom of the 
Cylinder, there flew out of the Viol a 
piece of Glafs half as broad as the Palm 
of a Mans Hand, and it was thrown out 
with {fuch violence, that hitting ed 
the 


(67) 

the Neighboring fide of the Receiver, it 
not onely dafh’d it felf to pieces, but 
crack’d the very Receiver in many places, 
with a great noife that much furprifed all 
that were in the Room. But it feem’d 
thatin folittlea Receiver, the Air about 
the Viol being fuddenly drawn out, the 
Air Imprifon’d in the Veffel, having on 
it the whole preflure of the Atmofphere 
(to which by the Pipe open at both ends, 
tr and the Water were expof?d)'and not _ 
having on the other fide the wonted pref- 
fure of the Ambient Air to ballance that 
other preffure, the refiftance of the Glafs 
was finally furmounted,and the Viol once 
beginning to break where it was weakeft, 
the external Air might rufh in with vio- 
lence enough to throw the crack’d parcel 
fo forcibly againft the Neighboring fide 

of the Receiver, as to break that too. 
And this may be prefumed fufficient to 
verifie what we delivered in that part.of 
our Appendix to the firft Experiment, 
where we mention’d the almoft equal 
preflure of the Air on either fide of a 
thin Glafs Veflel, as the caufe of its not 
being broken by the forcible Spring of 
thecontain'd Air. But yet that it be not 
fulpeted that chance had an intereft if fo 
Fa odde 





































(68) 
odde an Experiment as we have been Re- 
lating, we will adde that for farther fatif- 
faétion we reiterated it in a round Glaffe 
containing by gueffe about fix ounces 
of water: this violl we put into fucha 
{mall Receiver as was lately mention’d, 
in fuch manner as that the bottome of 
it refted upon the lower part of the Pneu- 
maticall Glaffe, and the Neck came out 
through the Leaden- Cover of the fame 
ata hole made purpofely for it. But be- 
ing made circum{pect by the foregoing 
mifchance , we had put the viol! into a 
Bladder, before we put. it into the Re- 
ceiver to hinder this laft named Glafie 
from being endanger’d by the breaking 
of the other, Then the Pneumaticall 
veflell being clos’d fo that no way was 
left for the outward Air to get into it, 
but by breaking through the “Viol, into 
whofe cavity it "had free acceffe by the 
mouth of it, (which was purpofely left 
open,) the ‘Sucker being nimbly drawn 
down, the external Air immediatly preffd 
forcibly as well upon the Leaden-Co- 
ver as the Violl; and the Cover hap- 
pening to be in one place a little narrow- 
er then the edge of the Paeumatical Glafs 

was depreff de and thruft into it fo vio- 
lently 





| (69) | 

Jently by the incumbent Air, that get- 
ting a little within the tapering Lip of the 
Glifs,it did like a kinde of Wedge,thruft 
our that fide where it was deprefl’d, fo as, 
though the Receiver was new, to fplit it. 
This accident being thus mention’d upon 
the by to confirm what we formerly faid 
touching the fitnefs or unfitnefs of Glafles 
of fome Figures to refift the preflure of 
the Atmofphere; We will proceed to 
relate the remaining part of the Experi 
ment, namely, That having fitted ona 
wider Cover to the fame Receiver, and 
clofed both that and the crack with Ce- 
ment, we profecuted the Experiment in 
the manner above related, with this fuc- 
cefs: That upon the quick depreffing of 
the Sucker, the external Air burft the 
Body of the Viol in above a hundred pie- 
ces, many of them exceeding {mall, and 
that with fuch violence that we found a 
wide rent, befides many holes, made in 
the Bladder it felf. 

And to evince that thefe Phesomena 
were the effects of a limited and even 
moderate force, and not of fuch an ab- 
horrency of a Vacuum as that toavoidit, 
many have been pleafed to think that Na- 
ture muft, upon occafion, exercife anal- 

E3 — mo& 





































(70) 
moft boundlefs power,we afterwards pur- 
pofely try’d this Experiment with feveral 
Glafies fomewhat thicker then thofe Vi- 
ols,and found the event to verifie our con- 
jecture, that it would not fucceed: for 
the Glaffes were taken out as intire as they 
were put in. 

And here, My Lord, Thold it not un- 
fit, upon occafion of the mention that 
has been made of our having employ’d 
{mall Receivers, and one of them, not- 
withftanding its being crack’d, to annex 
thefe two Advertifements. 

Firft then, befides the great Pneuma- 
tical Glafs fo often mention’d, and the 
proportionate Stop-cock, we thought fit 
to provide our felves of fome {mall Recei- 
vers blown of Cryftalline Glafs, of feve- 
ralli Shapes, and furnifhed with {maller 
Stop-cocks purpofely made ; and this we 
did upon hopes that when we had fur- 
mounted the difficulties to be met with in 
Cementing the Glaffes to the Stop- 
cocks, and the Pneumatical Veflels to the 
Pump fo exquifitely as is requifite for our 
purpofe, we fhould from the: fmalnefs of 
our Receivers receivea four-fold Advan- 
tage, The firft, that by reafon of the 
flendernefs of the Veflels, and their be- 

| ng 


(71) 

ing made of much purer and clearer mes 
tall, as the Glafs-men fpeak, then the 
grear Receiver, we might have a more 
perfect view of every thing happening 
within them. The next, that {fuch fmall 
Veffels might be empty ‘d with lefs la- 
bourand in much leffe time. The third, 
that this nimble exfuction of the ambient 
Air would make many changes in the 
Bodies fhut up inthefe glaffes more fud- 
den and confpicuous then otherwife they 
would prove. And che laft,chat we fhould 
be able to draw and keep out the Air much 
more perfectly from fuch {mall Vetlels 
then from our large Receiver. But though < 
we were not much dif-appointed in the 
expectation of the three firft advantages, 
yet we were inour hopes of the fourth. 
For befides the great difficulty we found 
in fitting together the Glafles, the Stop- 
cocks and the Covers 5 befides this I fay, 
we found our felves feldom able to draw, 
and keep out the Air fo faras to make the 
remaining Airinthefe Receivers weaker 
then the remaining Air in our great Recel- 
ver. Fot though fometimes the Leaks 
of fome of thefe little Receivers may be 
much either fewer or {maller then thofe 
of thelarger Veflel, yeta little Air get- 

F4 ting 


















(72) 
ting into one of thefe, wherein it had bue 
‘little room to expand and difplay it felf, 
might prefs as much upon all parts of the 
internal {urface of the Veffel, and upon 
the included Bodies, as a greater quan- 
rity of Air ina Veffelin whofe capacity 
it might finde more room to expand it 
felf. 

The other thing that we were to ade 
vertife, is, That ’tis not every {mall crack 
that can make fuch a Receiver as isof a` 
roundith Figurealrogether ufelefs to our 
Experiment, in regard that upon the ex- 
{uction of the internal Air, the ambient 
Air onall fides preffing the Glafs inwards 
or towards the middle, does confequent- 
ly thruft the Lips of the crack clofer, and 
fo rather clofe then increafe it. 

This I mention partly becaufe Recei- 
vers fic for our turn are more eafily 
crack’d then procur’d,and therefore ought 
not to be unneceffarily thrown away as 
unferviceable: And partly becaufe I think 
it becomes one that profefles himfelf a 
faithful Relator of Experiments, not to 
conceal from Your Lordfhip, that after a 
few of the foregoing Experiments were 
made, there happen’d in the great Recei- 
ver a crack of about a Span long, begin- 
nmng 





(73) 
ning at the upper Orifice, and occafion d, 
asitfeem’d, by the exceffive heat of too ` 
large an Iron that was employ’d to melt 
the Cement about that Orifice. But ha- 
ving laid upon this crack a broad Plaifter, 
which inone of our Effays written fome 
years fince to your ingenious and hopeful 
Coufin Fones, we extoll tor the mending 
of crack’d Receivers, and other Chymi- 
cal Glaffes; and having afterwards thick- 
ly over-laid this Plaifter with Diachylon, 
-we neither could then, nor can yet per- 
ceive that the Veffel leaks fenfibly at that 
crack. 

The Plaifter was made of good quick 
Lime finely poudred, and nimbly ground 
with a Peflle in a Morter, with a quantity 
(I know not how much precifely, not ha- 
ving thofe Effays inthis place) of fcra- 
pings of Cheefe and a little fair Water, 
no more then is juft neceflary to bring the 
mixture to afomewhat {oft Pafte, which 
when the Ingredients are exquifitely in- 
corporated, will have a {trong and 
ftincking fmell: Then it muft be im- 
mediately {pread upon a Linnen Cloath 
three or four fingers breadth,and prefently 
apply’d, left if begin to harden. Butif 
Your Lordfhip had feen how we at 

wit 












(74) 
with ic Receivers even for the moft fub- 
tle Chymical Spirits, You would fcarce 
wonder at the fervice it has donei in our 
Pneumatical Glafs. 






























Erp- E took a Tallow-Candle of fuch 
‘igi V a fize that eight of them make 
about apound, and having i ina Very com- 
modious Candleftick letit down into the 
ti Receiver, and fo fufpended it that the 
eat Flame burnt almoft in the middle of the 
pie Veffel, we did in fome two minutes ex- 
by actly clofeit up: and, upon Pumping ve- 
ry nimbly, we found that within little 
| more then half a minute after the Flame 
went out, though the Snuff had been 
purpofely ‘left of that length we judged 
the moft convenient for the lafting of 

the Flame. 

But the fecond time having put in the 
fame Candle into the Receiver, (after it 
had by the blafts of a pair of Bellows 
been freed from Fumes) the Flame lafted 

about two minutes from the time the 
f Pumper began to draw out the Air , up- 
on the firftexfuGtion whereof, the Flame 
feem’d to contract it felf in all its Dimen- 
fions, And thefe things were further ob- 

ae ~~ fervable, 





(75) 

fervable, that after the two or three firft 
ex {uctioas of the Air, the Flame (except 
at the very top) appear’d exceeding blew, 
and that the Flame ftill receded more and 
more from the Tallow, tillat length it 
appear’d to poffefs onely the very top of 
the Week, and there it went out. $ 

The fame Candle being lighted again 
was fhut into the Receiver, to try howit 
would lat there without drawing forth 
the Air, and we found that it lafted much 
longer then formerly 5 and before it went 
out receded from the Tallow towards the 
the top of the Week, but not near fo 
much as in the former Experiment. 

And having an intention to obferve par- 
ticularly what the motion of the fmoak 
would be in thefe Experiments: We 
took notice that when the Air was not 
drawn out, there did upon the extinction 
of the Flame a confiderable part of the 
Week remain kindled, which (probably 
by reafon of the Circulation of the Air 
inthe Veffel, occafion’d by the heat) e- 
mitted a Steam, which afcended fwiftly 
and directly upwards in a flender and unin: 
terrupted Cylinder of {moke, till it came 
to the top, whence it maniteftly recoyl’d 
by the fides to the lower part of the Val 

Cho 

































Wee 


Saaie 





(76). 
fel. Whereas when the Flame went out 
upon the exfuétion of the Air one time 
(when the Flame retir’d very leafurely 
to the top) we perceived it not to be fol- 
low’d by any imoke at all. And at an 
other time the upper part of the Week 
ren@ining kindled after the extinction 
of the Flame, the flender fteam of Fumes 
that did arife afcended but a very little 
way, andthen after fome uncertain mo- 
tions this and that way, did, for the moft 
part, {oon fall downwards. 

Being defirous alfo to try whether 
there would -be any difference as wellin 
our Receiver as there is wont to be elfe- 
where betwixt Candles made of Wax and 
thofe made of Tallow, as to their dura- 
tion; we took flender Tapers of white 
Wax, (commonly called Virgins Wax) 
that being found to burn with much lefs 
{moke then common yellow Wax: Six 
of thefe of like bignefs, and each of them 
of about the thicknefs of a Swans Quill, 
we preff'd together into one Candle: And 
having lighted all the Weeks, we let in 
the above-mention’d Wax into the Re- 
ceiver, and made what hafte we could to 
clofeitup with Cement, But though in 
the mean while we left open the V ‘lie 

o 


(77) 7 

of the Cylinder, the hole of the Stop? 
cock and that in the Cover of the Re- 
ceiver, that fome Air might get in to 
cherifh the Flame and theimoke might 
have avent; Yet for fo great a Flame 
the Air fufficed not fo much as till the 
Cover could be perfectly luted on “So 
that before we were quite ready toimploy 
the Pump, the Candle was extinguithed. 
Wherefore we took but one of the a- 
bove mention’d Tapers, and having 
lighted it, clofd it upin the Receiver, to 
try how longa {mall Flame with a pro- 
portionable fmoke would continue in 
fuch aquantity of Air: But we found 
upon two feveral tryals, that from the 
beginning of pumping, the Flame went 
out in about a minute of an hour. It 
appear'd indeed to us that the fwinging 
of the Wier to and fro (in the Engine 
fhaken by pumping) haften’d the vanith- 
ing of the Flame, which feem’d by that 
motion to be caft {ometimes on one fide . 
of the Week and fometimes on the o- 
ther: But though once we purpotely 
refrdin’d pumping after a very few ex- 
fuctions of the Air, that the Flame might 
not be agitated, yet it lafted not much 
longer then the newly mention’d pe 

nd 








Experi- 


ment (1. 


(78) 

And laftly, clofing up the fame Taper, 
lighted again, to difcover how long it 
would laft without drawing out of the 
Air, we found that it burn’d for a while 
vividly enough, but afterwards began to 
be leffen’d more and more inallits Di- 
menfions. And we obferv’d that the 
Flame did not, as before, retire it felf by 
little and little towards the top, but to- 
wards the bottom of the Week (from 
which yet it dida little withdraw upwards 
juft before it went out) fo that the upper 
part of the Week appear’d for a pretty 
while manifeftly above the top of the 
Flame, which having lated about five 
minutes, was fucceeded by a directly af- 
cending ftream of Smoak. 


Here was taken a Wier, which being 
bent almoft in the form of a Screw, 
conftituted {fuch an Inftrument to contein 
Coals and leave them every way acceffi- 
ble to the Air, asthe tenth Figure de- 
clares; the breadth of this Veffel was no 
tefs then that ic might with eafe be con- 
vey’d into the Receiver: And having filld 
it to the height of about five Inches with » 
throughly kindled Wood-coals, we let 
1E 


(79) 

it downinto the Glafs ; and fpeedily cloa 
fing it, we caufd the Pumper to ply. 
his work, and obferv’d that upon the ve- 
ry firft exfuction of the Air (though per- 
haps not becaufe of that onely) the Fire 
in the Coals began to grow very dim, and 
though the agitation of the Veffel did 
make them {wing up and down (which in 
the free Air would have retarded the ex- 
tinction of the Fire) yet when we could 
no longer difcern any rednefs at all inany 
of them, cafting our eyes upon a Minute- 
Watch we kept by us on this occafion,we 
found that from the beginning of the 
Pumping (which might be about two mi- 
nutes after the Coals had been put in 
glowing) to the total dif-appearing of 
the Fire, there had paffed but three mie 
putes. 

Whereupon, totry the Experimenta 
little further, we prefently took out. the 
Coals, in which it feems there had re- 
mained fome little parcels of Fire, rather 
cover'd then totally quench’d: For in the 
open Air the Coals beganto bere-kind- 
led in feveral places, wherefore having by 
{winging them about in the Wier, 
throughly lighted them the fecond time, 
welet them down again into the Receiver, 


ang 











(80) 


` and clofdit {peedily as before; and then 
waiting till the Fire feém’d totally ex. 
ting without medling with the Pump, we 
found that from the time the Veflel was 
clofd till that no Fire at all could be per- 
ceiv’d there had paffed about four mi- 
nutes: Whereby it feem’d to appear that 
the drawing away of the ambient Air 
made the Fire go out fooner then other- 
wifeit would have done; though that part 
of the Air that we drew out left the more 
room for the ftifling fteams of the Coals 
to be receivedinto. 

Laftly , Having taken out the Wier 
and put other Coals into it, we did, in the 
fame Room where the Engine ftood, let it 
hang quietly by a ftring inthe open Air, 
to try how long the Fire would laft with- 
out agitation when no Air was kept from 
ite And we found that the Fire began to 
go out firft at the top and out-fides of the 
Coals; but inwards and near the bottom 
the Fire continu’d vifible for above half 
an hour, a great part of the Coals, efpe- 
cially thofe next the bottom, being burnt 
toafhes before the Fire went out, 

We caufd likewife a piece of Iron to 
be forg’d, of the bignefs of a middle fiz’d 
Char-coal, and having made it red hot 

mee through: 


(8t) 

throughout, we caul d it in the lately 
imention’d Wier;to be {peedi!y convey d 
and {hut up into the Receiver, being de- 
firous to try what would herói “of a 
glow ng Body, by reafon of its texture 
mote vehemently bo: then a burning 
Coal of the fame bigaefs, & yet unlike to 
fend forth fuch copious & ftifling Fumes: 
Buc we could not obferve any manifeft 
change upon the exfuction of the Air. 
The Iron began indeed to lofe its Fiery 
rednefs at the top, but that feem’d to be 
bec iufe it was at the upper end fomewhat 
more {lender then at the lower : The red- 
nefs, though it were inthe day time, con- 
tinued vilible about four mi nutes + and 
then, before it did quite dif-appear, we 
turn’d the Key of the Stop-cock but 
could not difcern any change ot the Iron 
upon therufhing in of the Arr, Yet fome 
little remainders of Wax that ftuck to 
the Wier, and were turn’d into Fumes by 
the heat of the neighboring Iron, feem’d 
to afford a more plentiful, or at leaft a 
much more free expanded {moke when 
the Air was fuck’d out, then afterwards 5 
though allowance was made for the de- 
creafing heat of the Iron. And laftly, 
notwithftanding a confiderable exfuction 

G of 





4 


ES 





Experi- 
ment 12, 

















(82) 
of the ambient’Air, though not by far fo 
great aone as might have been made by 
the Engine; and notwithftanding the in- 
confiderable diffipation of the parts of the 
Tron, the furrounding fides of the Recei- 
ver were fenfibly, and almoft offenfively 
heated by it; infomuch that a pretty while 
after the Iron was takenout, the fides of 
the Glafs manifeftly retain’d a warmth: 
which would not be unfit to be confider’d 
by aPerfon at more leafure then Iam 
now. 


Eing willing to try after this fome- 

thing that would not cherifh much 
Fire at once, and would keep Fire much 
Jonger thena Coal. We took apiece of 
Maich,fuch as Souldiers ufe,of the thick- 
nefs of a Mans little Finger, or fomewhat 
thicker , and this being well lighted at 
oneend, was by a ftring fufpended with 
that end downwards in the cavity of the 
Receiver which was immediately clofd: 
Andyet by that time it could well be fo, 
the copious Fumes of the Match had neer 
fill'd and darken’d the Receiver. Where- 
fore, left the Veffel fhould be endanger’d, 
the Pump was nimbly ply’d, anda great 
deal 





(33) 

deal of Air and Smoke mixt together was 
drawn out, whereby the Receiver grow- 
ing more clear, wecould difcern the Fire 
in the Match to burn more and more lan- 
guidly: And notwithftanding that by the 
diligence ud in Pumping, it feem’d to 
have room enough allow’d it to throw 
out Fumes; yet after no long time it 
ceafd from being difcernable either by its 
Light or its Smoke. And though by 
that we were invited to fuppofe it quite 
extinguifhed, yet we continu’d pumping 
awhile, inprofecution of ancther Expe- 
riment we were trying at the fame time: 
And this we did the more willingly be- 
caufe of afufpicion the Experiment a- 
bout the Coals might eafily fuggeft, and 
which the event declar’d not to have been 
altogether groundlefs. For upon the 
Admiffion of the external Air, the Fire, 
that feem’d to have gone out a pretty 
while before, did prefently revive; and 
being as it were refrefh d by the new Air, 
and blown by the Wind made by that 
Air inruthing in, it began again to fhine 
and diffipate the neighboring Fuel into 
` Smoke as formerly. 


G 2 A while 



















Experi- 


Mát 13. 


(84) 


While after we let down into 

the Receiver together with a lighe 
tedpiece of Match, a great Bladder well 
tyed atthe Neck, but very lank, as not 
containing actually much (if any thing) a- 
bove a Pint of Air, but being capable of ` 
containing ten or twelve times as much. 

Our icope in this Experiment was 
partly to try whether or no the fmoke of 
the Match, replenifhing the Receiver; 
would be able to hinder the Dilatation of 
the inward Air, upon the ex{uction of the 
Ambient. And partly to difcover whe- 
ther the extinction of the Fire in the 
Match did proceed from want of Air, or 
barely from the preflure of its own 
Fumes, which for want of room to ex- 
pand themfelves in, might be fuppofd 
to Recoyl upon the Fire, and fo to 
ftifleit. 

The event of our wyal was, That 
at the beginning of our Pumping the 
Match appear ri well lighted, though 
it had almoft fill’d the Receiver with 
its plentiful Fumes: But by degrees it 
burnt more and more dimly, notwith- 
ftanding that by the nimble drawing 
out 


(85 ) 

out the Air and Smoke, the Veflel 
were made lefs opacous, and jets full of 
compreffing matter; as appeard by this, 
That the longer we pump’d, the iefler 
Air and Smoke came out of the Cyiin- 
der at the opening the Valve, and conte- 
quently the lefs came into it befores yet 
the Fire in the Match went bur flowly 
out, And when afterwards, to fatisfie 
our felves of its expiration, we had dar- 
ken’d the Room, andin vain endeavored 
to difcover any {park of Fire, as we could 
not for fome time before by the help of 
Candles difcern the leaft rifing of Smoke, 
we yet continued pumping fix or fever 
times; andafter all that letting in the 
Air, the feemingly dead Fire quickly 
revived, and manifefted its recovery by 
Light and ftore of Smoke, with the 
latter of which it quickly began tore- 
plenifh the Receiver, Then we fell 
to pumping afrefh, and continued that 
labour fo long till the re-kindled 
Match went out again: and thinking 
it then fit not to ceafe from Pum- 
ping fo foon as before, we found that 
inlefs chen half a quarter of an hour the 
Fire was got owt for good and ala 

anc 









































(86) 
and paft the pofhbility of being recover’d 
by the re-admitted Air. 

Some Circumftances, befides thofe al- 
ready mention’d, occurr’d in the making 
of the Experiment, of which thefe are 
the principal. 

Firft, when the Receiver was full of 
Smoke, if the Cylinder were emptied, 
immediately upon the turning of the 
Stop-cock, the Receiver would appear 
manifeftly darken’d to his eye that look’d 
upon the light through it: and this dark- 
nefs was much lefs when the Receiver was 
much lefs fill’d with Fumes: It was alfo 
inftantaneous,and feem’d to proceed from 
a {udden change of place and fcitwation 
in the exhalations, upon the vent fud- 
denly afforded them and the Air they 
were mixt with, out of the Receiver into 
the Cylinder. 

The next thing we obferv'd was, a kinde 
of Halo that appeard a good while about 
the Fire, and feem’d to be produced by 
the furrounding Exhalations. 

And laftly, it is remarkable, That even 
when the Fumes feemed moft to reple- 
nifh the Receiver, they did not fenfibly 
hinder the Air included in the Bladder 
from dilating it felfafter the fame m an 
(tor 





(87) 
(for ought we could difcern) as it would 
have otherwife done: So that before the 
Fire or the Match was quite extinct, the 
Bladder appear’d {well’d at leaft to fix or 
feven times its former capacity. 

Since the writing of thefe laft Lines, 
we took a (mall Receiver, capable of 
containing (by guefs) about a. pound and 
a half of Water; and in the midft of it 
we fufpended a lighted Match, but though 
within one minute of anhour (or there- 
abouts) from the putting in of the Match, 
we had cemented on the Cover, yet we 
could not make {uch hafte,but that before 
we began to pump, the Smoke had fo 
fill’d chat fmall Receiver, as for ought we 
difcern’d, to choke the Fire. And having 
again and again reiterated the Experi- 
ment, it feem’d ftillas at firft, that we 
could not clofe up the Veffeland pump 
outall the Fumes time enough to refcue 
the Fire from Extinction; whereupon we 
made ufe of this Expedient. Afloonas 
we had pump’d once or twice, we fudden- 
ly curn’d the Key,and thereby gave accefs 
to the excluded Air, which rufhing vio- 
lently in, asifit had been forced thorow 
apair of Bellows, did both drive away 
the afhes, fill the Glafs with fref Air,and 

G 4 by 


hoa 
Maclean he 
tet 
f 
i } 
4 F 
ie 
TE 
if 4 
i 
| $ 
t ii i" 








Experi- 


Ment I4. 


j (38) 

by blowing the almoft extinguiflyd Fire, 
re-kindl ‘dit, as appear’d. by the Matches 
beginning again to {moke, which betore it 
had ceal’d to do, we yi by this 
means obtain’d a ligh ted tarch in the 
Receiver, without beins te. uc’d to {pend 
time to clofe it u up, commanded the Air 
to be immediatly pump’dour, and found 
that upon the exiuction of it, the Match 
quickly left {mokeng, as it feem’d, by 
reafon of the abfence of the Air; and 
yet if fome urgent occafions had not hin- 
derd us, we would for greater fecurity 
have try’d, whether or no the Match re- 
kindled. as formerly, would tmoke much 
longer. in cafe of no exfuction of the am- 


bient Air, 


O try diverfe things at once, 
and particularly whether Fire , 
though we found it would not long laf, 
might not yet be produced in our eva- 
cuated Receiver: We took a Piftol of 
about a Foot in length, and having 
firmly tyed it to a ftick almoftas long as 
the Cavity of the Receiver, we very 
carefully prim’d it with well dry’d a 


powder, andthen cockingit, we ty’d 
the 


(39) , 

the Tricker one end of a ftring, whofe 
other end was faften’d to the Key former- 
ly mention’d to belong tothe Cover of 
our Receiver. This done, weconvey’d 
the Piftol, together with the annexed 
Staff, into the Veffel: which being clofd 
up, and empty’d after the ufual man- 
ner, we began to turn the Key in the 
Cover; and thereby fhortning the ftring 
that reach’d from it to the Piftol, we 
pull’d afide the Tricker, and obferv'd, 
that according to our expectation the 
force of the Spring of the Lock was 
not fenfibly abated by the abfence of 
the Air. (trom whofe impetus yet fome 
Modern Naturalifts would derive the 
caufe of the motion of Reftitution in 
folid Bodies) For the Cock falling 
with its wonted violence upon the Steel, 
{truck out of it as many and as confpi- 
cuous parts of Fire, as, for ought we 
could perceive, it would have done in 
the open Air, Repeating this Experi- 
ment divers times, we alfo obferved 
whether or no there would appear 
any confiderable Diverfity in the 
Motion of the fhining Sparks in a 
place where the remaining Aire was 
fo much ratified, but could not perceive 

but 

























(100) 
but that they moved fome of them up- 
wards, as well as fome of them down- 
wards, and fome of them fide-ways, as 
they are wont to do, when upon fuch col- 
lifions they fly out in the open Air. 
Welikewife caufd apiece of Steel to 
be made of the form and bignefs of the 
Flint, in whofe place we put it, and then 
the Piftol being cock’d and conveyed in- 
to the Receiver, the Trigger was vull’d 
after the Aur was drawn out: And though 
the place were purpofely fomewhat dar- 
ken’d, yet there appear’d not upon the 
ftriking of thetwo Steels againft each o- 
ther the leaft {park of Fire: Nor did we 
expect any (having before in vain attem- 
pted to ftrike Fire this way in the open 
Air) though we thought fitto make the 
Experiment to undeceive thofe who fan- 
cy in rarified Air,I know not what ftrange 
difpofition, to take Fire upon a much 
{lighter occafion then this Experiment 
afforded. We have indeed found, that 
by the dextrous Collifion of two har- 
den’d pieces of Steel, ftore of fparks 
may be ftruck out: But that was done with 
{fuch vehement percuffion of the edges of 
the two Steels, as could not well be com- 
pati?d in our Receiver, 
But 


{ror} 

But the chief thing we defign’dto do 
with our Piftol, was, To obferve whe- 
ther Gun-powder would take Fire in our 
empty’d and clofely ftop’d Glafs ? Whe- 
ther the expanfion of the Flame would be 
confiderably varied by the abfence of fo 
much of the ambient Air as was drawn 
out of the Receiver? and whether the 
Flame would diffufe it felf upward, as it is 
wont, notwithftanding its not having a- 
bout it the ufual proportion of Air to 
forceitup ? And though moft of our at- 
tempts to fire the Gun-powder in the 
Pan of the Piftol fucceeded not, becaufe 
we were fain to let it hang almoft perpen- 
dicular in the Receiver; whereby the 
Powder was fhaken down before the 
{parks couldreach it: yet once the Ex- 
oo fucceeded , and the kindled 

owder feem’d to make a more expanded 
Flame then it would have done in the 
open Air, but mounted upwards accord- 
ing to its wont, whether by reafon of that 
little portion of Air, which in {pight of 
our pumping remained in the Receiver, or 
for any other caufe, we have not now the 
leifure to confider. But we muft not for- 
get, that upon the extinction of the Flame 
the Receiver appear'd darkend with 

| {moke 




























Experi- 
mcnt I Şe 








(102) 
{moke, which feem’d to move freely up 
and down, and upon the letting in the Air 
at the Srop-cock began to circulate much 
fafter then before. We wonld have made 
more obfervations concerning this Flame, 
but that of two or three attempts we 
afterwards made to repeat the kindling of 
Powder, not anv one fucceeded ; and 
we have not the learure to dwell long up- 
on one kinde of Tryals. 


"FO thefe Experiments concerning Fire 

we added another, which,though it fuc- 
ceded not, may perhaps without imper- 
tinency berecorded: partly becaufe that 
fas we have in another Treatife amply de- 
elar’d) it is ufefuil torecitewhst Experi- 
ments mifcarry aswell as what furo se 
And partly alfo becaufeit is very po. ne 
that what we enceavored in vaine, ma, 
performed by Your Lorcihip, or fome 
other Virtvofo rhat thall have flancker 
Veflells then we had, and more Sunny 
dayes then the prefent Winter allows 
us. 

We convey’d theaiais one of our {mall 
Receivers a piece of mater combuft:ble, 
dry and black (experience declaring things 
of 


36 

















(103) 
of that colour to be moft eafily kindled) 
& carefully clofing the Veflel we brought 
it toa Window at which the Sun,not very 
farre from the Meridian, fhone in very free- 
ly : then drawing out the Aire with {peed 
united the Sun-beames with a burning 
Glafs upon the combuftible matter which 
began immediatly to fesd fortha Smoke 
that quickly darkice the Receiver, but 
notwith{tanding ali our care and diligence 
the externall Aire gotin fo faft that after 
diverfe tryals we were fayne to leave off 
the Experiment in that Glaffe and indue’d 
to make tryall of it in our great Re- 
ceiver. l 
Haveing then after fome difficulty 
lodg’d the combuftible matter in the ca- 
vity of this Veffell in fuch manner as that 
it was almoit contiguous to that fide 
thereof that was next the Sun, we did en- 
deavor with a pretty large burning Glafs 
to kindle it, but found , as we fear’d, 
That by reafon of the thicknefs of the 
Glals, (which was alfo of a lets pure and 
lefs Diaphanous matter then the o- 
ther) the Sun.beams thrown in by the 
burning Glafs, were in their paflage 
fo Diflocated and Scattered (not now to 
mention thofe many that being reflected, 
{cor ould 
























(104) 
{ could not pierce into the cavity of the 
Receiver) that we could not poffibly u- 
nite enough of them to kindle the matter, 
nor fo much as to make it fenfibly {moke. 
Yet we hope that the feeing whether Bo- 
dies (other then Gun-powder) may be 
kindled, and what would happen to them 
when fet on fire, ina placein great mea- 
fure devoid of Air, may prove to Lucife- 
rousan Experiment, that when the Sea- 
fon is more favorable we fhall, God per- 
mitting, make further tryal of it, and ac- 
quaint Your Lordfhip with the Event, if 
it prove profperous. Inthe mean time 
we fhall pafs on to other Experiments, 
affoon as we have advertif’d Your Lord- 
fhip that we have forborn to make fuch 
Reflections upon the feveral Experiments 
we have fet down concerning Fire, as the 
matter would have eafily enough afford- 
ed, andY our Lordfhip may perhaps have 
expected. But I made the lefs {cruple to 
forbear the annexing of Speculations to 
thefe Recitals, becaufe Carneades & Eleu- 
thertus havein fome Dialogues concern- 
ing Heat and Flame, which were laft year 
feen by {fome Friends, and may be, when 
you pleafe, commanded by You, men- 
E oe tomad 





























(105) 
tion’d divers of my Thoughts and Expe< 
riments concerning Fire, 


divers Magnetical Experiments ”*# 16. 
would exhibit any unufual Phenomena, 
being made in our Evacuated Receiver 
inftead of the open Air: But for want of 
Jeifure and conveniency to profecute fuch 
Tryals, we were induced to referve the 
reft for an other time, and to content our 
felves with making that which follows. 
We convey’d into the Receiver a little 
Pedeftal of Wood, inthe midft of which 
was perpendicularly ereéted a flender 
Iron, upon whofe {harp point an excited 
Needle of Steel purpofely made, and of 
about five Inches long, was fo placed 
that hanging in an e£quilibrinm it could 
move freely towards either hand, Then 
the Air being after the ufual manner 
pumped out, we apply’d a Load-ftone 
moderately vigorous to the out-fide of 
of the Glafs, and found that it Attracted 
or Repell’d the ends of the Needle, accor- 
ding to the Laws Magnetical, without 
any remarkable difference from what the 
fame Load-itone would have done had 
none 


VVE defigned to try whether or no Experi- 











Experi- ` 


ment 17. 


(106) 
none of the Air been drawn away from 4- 
bout the Needle, which whenthe Load- 
ftone was removed, after fome tremu- 
lous Vibrations to and fro, refted in a po- 
fition wherein it look’d North and 
South. 


>Roceed we now to the mention of 

that Experiment,..whereof the fatif- 
fatory tryal was the principal Fruit I 
promifd my felf from our Engine. It 
being then fufficiently known, that, in 
the Experiment De Vacuo, the Quick. 
filver in the Tube is wont to remain ele- 
vated, above the furface of that whereon 
it leans, about 27 digits: I confidered, 
that, if the true and onely reafon why the 
Quick-filver fallsno lower, be, that at 
that Altitude, the Mercurial Cylinder in 
the Tube, is an e£quilibrium with the 
Cylinder of Air, fuppofd to reach from 
the adjacent Mercury to the top of the 
Atmofphere: If this Experiment could 
be tryd out of the Atmofphere, the 
Quick-filver in the Tube would fall 
downto a levell with thatin the Veflel, 
fince then there would be no preffure up- 


onthe Subjacent, to refift the weight of 


the 





























(197) 

the Incumbent Mercury. Whence I in- 
feix’d(as eafily Imight) that, if the Ex+ 
periment could be try’din our Engine, the 
Quick-fiiver would fubfide below 27 Di- 
gits, in proportion to the exfuction of 
Air, that fhould be made out of the Re- 
ceiver.. For; as when the Air is fhut in- 
to the Receiver, it does (according to 
what hath above been taught) continue . 
there as ftrongly compreff’d, as it did 
whil’ft all the incumbent Cylinder of the 
Atmofphere lean’d immediatly upon it 3 
becaule the Glafs, whereinit is pent up, 
hinders it to deliver it felf, by an expanfi- 
on of its parts, from the preflure where- 
withic was fhut up. So, if we could per- 
fectly draw the Air out of the Receiver, 
it would conduce as well to our pui pote, 
as if we were allow’d to try the Experi- 
ment beyond the Atmofphere. 

Wherefore (after having furmounted 
fome little difficulties which occurr’d at 
the beginning) the Experiment was made 
after this manner. We took a flender and 
very curioufly blown Cylinder of Glafs, 
of near three Foot in length, and whofe 
bore had in Diameter a quarter of an Inch, 
wanting a hairs breadth: This Pipe being 
Hermetically feal’d at one end, was, at 
the 








(108 ) 

the other, fil’d with Quick-filver, care 
being taken in the filling, that as few 
bubles as was poffible fhould be leftin the 
Mercury: Then the Tube being ftopr 
with the Finger and inverted, was open‘d, 
according to the manner of the Experi- 
ment, into a fomewhat long and flender 
Cylindrical Box (inftead of which we now 
are wont to ufe a Glafs of the fame form) 
halt lld with Quick-filver: And fo, the 
liquid metal being fuffered to fubfide, and 
a piece of Paper being pafted on leveli 
with its upper furface, the Boxand Tube 
and all were by ftrings carefully let down 
into the Receiver, andthen, by means of 
the hole formerly mention’d to be left in 
the Cover,the faid Cover was flip’t along 
as much of the Tube as reach’d above the 
top of the Receiver; And the Interval, 
left betwixt the fides of the Hole and 
thofe of the Tube, was very excuifitely 
filed up with melted (bet not over hor) 
Diachylon ; and the round chink, betwixt 
the Cover and the Receiver, was likewife 
very carefully clot’d up : Upon which clo- 
{fure there appear’d not any change in the 
height of the Mercurial Cylinder; no 
more, thenif the interpofd Glafs Recei- 
ver didnot hinder the immediate preflure 

of 








(109) 
of the ambient Atmofphere upon the 
inclofed Air, which hereby appears to 
bear up on the Mercury, rather by virtue 
ofits {pring, then ofits weight: {ince its 
weight cannot be fuppofd to amount to 
above two or three Ounces, which is in- 
confiderable in comparifon of fucha Cy- 
linder of Mercury as it would keep from 
fubfiding. 

All things being thus in areadinels, the 
Sucker was drawn down; and, immedi- 
ately upon the egrefs of a Cylinder of 
Air out of the Receiver, the Quick-filver 
in the Tube did, according to expectati- 
on, fubfide: and notice being carefully 
taken (by a mark faften’d to the outfide) 
of the place where it ftopt, we caufd him 
that manag’d the Pump to pump again, 
and mark’d how low the Quick- filver fell 
at the fecond exfuction; but continuing 
this work, we were quickly hindred from 
accurately marking the Stages made by 
the Mercury in its defcent, becaufe it foon 
funk belowthe top of the Receiver; fo 

that we could thenceforward mark it no 
other ways then by theeye. And thus, 
continuing the labor of pumping for a- 
bout a quarter of an hour, we found our 
felves unable to bring the Quick: filverin 
12 the 






































i 








(110) 
the Tube totally to fubfides becanfe ; 
when the Receiver was confider ably em- 
pty’dof its Air, and confequently that 
little that remain’d grown unable to refift 
the Irruption of the external, that Air 
would (in fpight of whatever we could 
do) prefs in at fome little Avenue or 
other; and though much could not there- 
at getin yeta little was fufficient to coun- 
tetballance the preflure of {o {mall a Cy- 
linder of Ouch filver, as then remain’d 
inthe Tube. 
Now (to fatisfie our fel ves further, thae 
the falling of the Quick-filver in the 
Tube to a determinate height, proceeds 
from the e#qutlibrium, wherein it is at 
that height with the external Air, the one 
gravitating, the other prefling with equal 
force upon the fubjacent Mercury)we Re- 
turned the Key and let in fome new Air ; 
upon which the Mercury immediatly be- 
gan to afcend (or rather to be impell’d up- 
wards) in the Tube, and continu’d afcend- 
ing, till having Returnd the Key it im- 
mediatly refted at the height which it had 
thenattain'd: And fo, by Turning and 
Returning the Key, we did feveral times 
at pleafure impel it upwards, and check its 
afcent, Andlaftly, having given a free 
egrefs 














(111) 

egrefs at the Stop-cock to as much of the : 
external Airas would come in,the Quick- 
filver was impeil’d up almoft toits firft 
height: I fay almoft, becaufe it ftopr 
near a quarter of an Inch beneath the Pa- 
per mark formerly mention’d, which we 
afcrib’d to this, That there was (as isu- 
fual in this Experiment) fome iittle Parti- 
cles of Air engag’d among thofe of the 
Quick-filver; which Particles, upon the 
detcent of the Quick- filver, did manifeft- 
ly rife up in Bubbles towards the top of 
the Tube, and by their preflure, as well 
as by leflening the Cylinder by as much 
room as they formerly took up in it, hin- 
der’d the Quick-filver from regaining its 
firft height, 

This Experiment was a few days after 
repeated in the prefence of thofe excellent 
and defervedly Famous Mathematicl 
Proteffors, Dr. Walls, Dr, Ward, and Mr, 
Wren, who were pleafed to Honor it with 
their Pretence: And whom I name, both 
as juftly counting it an Honor to be 
known to them,and as being glad of fuch 
Judicious and illuftrious Witnefles of our 
Experiment ; and “twas by their guefs that 
the cop of the Quick-filver in the Tube 
was defin'd to be brought within an Inch 

H3 of 









(x12) 
of the furface of thatin the Veffel. 

And here, for the I]luftration of the 
foregoing Experiment, it will not be a- 
mifs to mention fome other particulars 
relating to it. 

Firft then, When we endeavor’d to 
make the Experiment with the Tube 
clofd at one end with Diachylow inftead 
of an Hermetical Seal; we perceiv’d, that 
upon the drawing of fome of the Air out 
of the Receiver, the Mercury did indeed 
begin to fall, but continu’d atter wards to 
fubfide,though we did not continue pum- 
ping. Whence it appear’d, that though 
the Diachylon that ftopt the enc of the 
Tube were fo thick and ftrong, that the 
external Air could not prefs it in (2s expe- 
rience taught us that it would have done, 
if there had been but little of it) yet the 
fubt‘ler parts of it were able ( though 
flowly) to infinuate themfelves through 
the very body of the Plaifter, which it 
feems wasof foclofea Texture, as that 
which we mention’d our felves to have 
fuccefsfully made ufe of in the Experi- 
ment De Vacuo fome years ago. Sothat 
now we begin to fufpect, that perhaps one 
Reafon, why we cannot perfe@ly pump 
out che Atr,may be, that when the Veflel 
is 































/ 





(113) 
is amok empty, fome of the Hare 
parts of the external Air may, by the 
preflure of the Atmofphere, be ftrain’d 
through the very body of the Diachylon 
into the Receiver, But thisis onely con- 
jecture. 

Another Circumftance of our Exper 
riment was this, That, if (when the 
Quick-filver in the Tube w as fallen low) 
too much ingre{s were, atthe hole of the 
Stop-cock, fuddenly permitted to the ex- 
ternal Air ; it would ruth in with that vio- 
lence, and bear fo forcibly upon the fur- 
faceof the fubjacent Quick-filver, that 
it would impel it up into the Tube rudely 
enough to endanger the breaking of the 
Glaf. 

We formerly mention’d, that the 
Quick-filver did not in its defi {cent fall as 
much at a time after the two or three firft 
exfuctions of the Air, as at the beginning: 
For, having mark’dits fevera J Stages up- 
on the T ube, we found, that at the firft 
fuck it defcended an Inch and2, and at the 
fecond an Inch and } ; ‘and when the Vef 
fel was almoft empty’d, it would {carce at 
one exfuction be drawn down above the 
breadth of a Barly-corn. And indeed we 
found it very difficult to meafure in what 

H 4 pro” 





(114) 

proportion thefe decrements of the Mer- 
curial Cylinder did proceed: partly be- 
caufe (as we have already intimated) the 
Quick filver was foon arawn below the 
top of the Receiver; and paitly becaufe, 
upon its defcent at each extuction, it 
would immediatly reafcend a littie up- 
wards , either by reafon of the leaking of 
the Veffel at fome imperceptible hole or 
other, or by reafon of the motion ot 
Reftitution in the Air, which, being fome- 
what compreft by the fall as well as weight 
of the Quick-fiiver, would repell it alit- 
tle upwards,and make tt vibrate a little up 
and down, before they could reduce each 
other to fuch an e£quilibri ium as both 
mightreftin. Butthough we could not 
hitherto make obfervations accurate e- 
nough concerning the meafures of the 
Quick- filver’s deicent, to reduce them in- 
to any Hypothefis, yet would we not dif- 
courage any from attempting its fince, if it 
could be reduc’d to a certainty, ’tis proba- 
ble that the difcovery would not be un- 
ufeful. 

And, to illuftrate this matter a little 
more, we will adde, That we madea thift 
to try the Experiment in one of our above 
mention’d {mall Receivers,not containing 


a Quarts 








(115) 

@Quart , but that (agreeably to what we 

formerly obferved) we found itas difficult 
to bring this to be quite empty as toeva- 
cuite the g eater ; the leaft external Air 
that coula get in (and we could not pof- 
bly keep itall perfeétly out) fufticing in fo 
{mall a Veflel to difplay a confiderable 
preffure upon the furface of the Mercury, 
and thereby hinder that in the Tube from 
falling toa level with it, Bue this is remark. 
abie, that having two or three times try'd 
the Experiment in that {mall Veffel, upon 
the very firft Cylinder of Air that was 
drawn out of the Receiver, the Mercury 
fell in che Tube 18 Inches and a half, and 
at another : 9 Inches and a half, 

But, on this occafion, Iholdit not un- 
fitto give Your Lordfhip notice that I 
hop’d, from the defcent of the Quick- 
filver in the Tube uporthe firft fuck, to 
derive this advantage:that I fhould thence 
be enabled to give a near guefs at the pro- 
portion of force betwixt the preflure of 
the Air (according to its various ftates, as 
to Denfity and Rarefaction) and the gra- 
vity of Quick-filver, then hitherto “has 
beendone. For in our Experiment there 
are diverfe things given, that may be 
made ufe of towa rds fuch a difcovery. 

For 

















(116) 


For firft we may know the capacity of the 
Receiver wherein the Experiment is 
made, fince, by filling it with water, we 
may eafily compute how many Quarts,or 
Meatures of any other denomination, it 
contains of Air; which Air, when fhut 
up in the Veffel, may be fuppofd to have 
a preffure equal to that of the Atmo» 
{phere, finceitis able to keep the Quick- 
filver in the Tube from falling any lower 
then it didin the free and open Air, Next 
hereis given us the capacity of the brafs 
Cylinder empty'd by the drawing down 
of the Sucker (its bore and height being 
mention d in the defcription of our Pump) 
whereby we may come to know how 
much of the Air contain’d in the Recei- 
ver is drawn out at the firft fuck. And 
we may alfo eafily define, either in weight 
or cubick meafures the Cylinder of 
Quick-filver that anfwers to the Cy- 
linder of Air lately mention’d (that 
Mercuriall Cylinder being in our En- 
gine computable by deducting from 
the entire altitude of that Cylinder of 
Quick-filver, the altitude at which it refts 
upon the firft exfuction.) But though, if 
this Experiment were very watchfully 
try'din Veflels of feveral fizes, and the 
värl- 








(117) 
various defcents of the Quick-filver com- 
per’d among themfelves, ’tis not impro- 
bable that fome fuch thing as we hop’d for 
may thereby be difcover’d. Yet becaufe , 
not onely the folid contents of as much 
of the Glafs-tube as remains within the 
concave furface of the Receiver , and 
(which is more difficult) the varying con- 
tents of the Veffel containing the Mer- 
cury, and of as much of the Mercury it 
felf as is not inthe Tube, muft be dedu- 
ted out of the capacity of the Receiver; 
but there muft alfo an allowance be made 
for this,that the Cylinder that is empty’d 
by the drawing down of the Sucker, and 
comes to be fill’d upon the letting of the 
Air out of the Receiver into it, isnot fo 
replenifh’d with Air as the Receiver it felf 
at firft was : becaufe'there paffes no more 
Air out of the Receiver into the Cylin- 
der, then is requifite toreduce the Air in 
the cavity of the Cylinder, and in that of 
the Receiver to the fame meature of dila- 
tation: Becaufe of thefe (I fay) and fome 
other difficulties that require more skill in 
Mathematicks then I pretend to,and much 
more leafure then my prefent occations 
would allow me,I was willing to refer the 
nicer confideration of this matter epsom 
af 








(118) 


of our Learned and Acurate Mathema: 
ticians, thinking it enough for me to have 
given the Hint already fuggefted. 

For further confirmation of what hath 
been delivered, we likewife tryed the Ex- 
periment ina Tube of lefs then two foot 
long : and, when there was fo much Air 
drawn out of the Veflel, that che remain- 
ing Air was not able to counterballance 
the Mercurial Cylinder, the Quick-filver 
in the Tube fubiided fo vifibly, that ( the 
Experiment being try’din the little Vef- 
fel lately mention’d) at the firk fuck it 
fell above a fpan, and was afterwards 
drawn lower and lower for a little whue 5 
and the external Air being let in upon it, 
impell'd itup again almott to the top of 
the Tube: So little matters it how he: avy 
orlight the Cylinder of Quick filver to 
fubfide is, provided its gravity over- 
power the preflure of as much external 
Air as bears upon the furface of that Mer- 
cury into whichitis to fall. 

Laftly we alfo obferv’d, That if (when 
the Mercury in the Tube had been drawn 
down, and by an Ingrefs permitted to the 
external Air, impell’dup again to its for- 
mer height) there were fome more Air 
thruftup by thehelp of the Pump ve 

the 


(119) 

the Receiver, the Quickefilver in the Tube 
would afcend much above the wonted 
height of 27 digits, and immediatly up- 
on the letting out of that Air would fall a- 
gain to the height it refted at before. 

Your Lordfhip will here perhaps expect, 
that as thofe who have treated of the Tor- 
vicellian Experiment, have for the moft 
part maintaind the Afirmative,or the Nee 
gative of that famous Queftion, Whether 
or no that Noble Experiment infer a Va- 
cuum? fo U{houldon this occafion inter- 
pofe my Opinion touching that Contro- 
verfie, or at leaft declare whether or no, in 
our Engine, the exfuction of the Air ‘do 
prove the place deferted by the Air fuck’d 
out, to betruly empty, that is, devoid of 
all Corporeal Subftance. But befides that, 
J have neither the leifure, nor the ability, 
to enter into afolemn Debate of fo nicea 
Queftion; Your Lordfhip may, if you 
think it worth the trouble, in the Dia- 
Jogues not long fince referr’dto, finde the 
Difficulties on both fides reprefenteds 
which then made me yield but av ery wa- 
vering aflent to either of the parties con- 
tending about the Queftion: Nor dare I 
yet take upon me to determine fo difficult 
a Controvertie. 

Tor 








(120) 


For on the one fide it appears, that not 
withftanding the exfuction of the Air, our 
Receiver may not be deflitute of all Bo- 
dies, fince any thing placed in it, may be 
feen there; which would not be, if it 
were not pervious to thofe Beams of. 
Light which rebounding from the feen 
Object to our eyes, affect us with the fenfe 
of it: And that either thefe Beams are 
Corporeal Emanations from fome lucid 
body,or elfe at leaft the light they convey 
doth refult from the brisk Motion of fome 
fubtle Matter, Icould, if I miftake nor, 
fufficiently manifeft out of the Dialogues 
above-mention’d,if I thought your Lord- 
fhip could ferioufly imagine that Light. 
could be convey `d without,at leaft,having 
(it I may fo fpeak) a Body for its Ve- 
hicle, i 

` By the fixteenth Experiment, it alfo 
appears that the clofenefs of our Receiver 
hinders it not from admitting the Efflu- 
viaof the Load-ftone; which makes it 
very probable that it alfo treely admits 
the Magnetical {teams of the Earth; con- 
cerning which, we have in another Trea- 
tife endeavour’d to maniteft that numbers 
of them doalways permeate our Air. 

But on theother fide it may be faid, 

et ee That 


(121) 

That as for the fubtle Matter which makes 
the Objects enclofed nour evacuated Re- 
ceiver, vifible, andthe Magnetical Efflu- 
via of the Earth that may be prefum’d to 
pafs thorowit, though we fhould grant 
our Veffel not to be quite devoyd of 
them, yet we cannot fo reafonably affirm 
it to bereplenifh’d with them, as we may 
fuppofe, thacif they were gather’d toge- 
ther intoone place without Intervals be- 
tween them, they would fill but a fmall 
part of the whole Receiver. As inthe 
thirteenth*Experiment, apiece of Match 
was inconfiderable for its bulk, whileft its 
parts lay clofe together, that afterwards 
(when the Fire had fcatterd them into 
{moke) feem’d toreplenifh all the Veflel. 
For (as elfewhere our Experiments have 
demonftrated) both Light and the Efflu- 
via of the Load-ftone, may be readily ad- 
mitted intoa Glats, Hermetically feal’d, 
though before their Admifion, as full of 
Air as hollow Bodies here below are wont 
tobe, fo that upon the exfuction of the 
Air, the large {pace deferted by it, may 
remain empty, notwithftanding the pre- 
tence of thofe fubtle Corpuicles, by 
which Lucid and Magnetical Bodies pro- 
duce their effects, 









































(122) 


And as for the Allegations above 
mention’d, they feem to prove but that 
the Receiver devoy’dof Air, Maybe re- 
plentth'd with fome fuch Etherial Matter, 
as {ome Modern Naturalifts write of; but 
not that it really zs fo. And indeed to me 
it yet feems, that as to thofe {paces which 
the Vacuz/ts would have to be empty, be- 
caule they are manifeftly devoid of Air s 
and all groffer Bodies, the Plenifts (if I 
may fo call them) do not prove that fuch 
{paces are replenifh’d with fuch a fubtle 
Matter as they {peak of, by any fenfible 
effects, or operations of it (of which di- 
vers new Tryals purpofely made,have not 
yet fhown me any) but onely conclude 
that there muft be fuch a Body, becaufe 
there cannot bea Void. And the reafon 
why there cannot be a Void, being by 
them taken, not from any Experiments, 
or Phenomena of Nature, that clearly and 
particularly prove their Hypothefis, but 
trom their notion of a Body, whofe Na- 
ture, according to them, confifting one- 
ly in extenfion (which indeed feems the 
property moft eflential to,becaufeiafepa- 
rable from a Body) to fay afpace devoid 
of Body, isto {peak in the School-mens 
Phrafe, a Contradiction in Adjecto: This 
. i ad Reafon, 





(123) 

reafon, I fay, being chus defuin’d, feetns: 
to maké the Controverfie about a Vaca- 
nm, rather a Metaphyfical, then a Phyfio- 
logical Queftion; which therefore we {hall 
here no longer debate, finding it very dif- 
ficult either to fatisfie Nacuralifts with 
this Cartefian Notion of a Body, or to 
mianifeft wherein it is erroneous, and fub- 
ftitutea better in its ftead. 

But though we are unwilling to exa- 
mine any further the Inferences wont, to 
be made from the Torricellran Experi- 
ment, yet we think it not impertinent to 
prefent Your Lordthip, with a couple of 
Advertifements concerning it. 

Firft, then if in trying che Experiment 
here or elfewhere, you make ufe of the 
Englith meafures that Mathematicians 
and Tradelmen are here wont toimploy, 
You will, unlefs you be forewarn’d of it, 
be apt to fufpect that thole that have writ- 
ten of the Experiment have been mifta- 
ken. For whereas men are wont gene- 
rally to talk of the Quick- filver’s remain- 
ing fulpended at the heighth of between 
fix or {even and twenty Inches ; we com. 
monly obferv'd, when divers years fince 
we firft were follicitous about this Expe- 
riment, that the Quick-filver in the Tube 

ve refted 








(124) 
tefted at about 29 Inches & an half above 
the furface of the Reftagnant Quick-filver 
inthe Veflel,which did az firft both amaze 
and perplex us, becaufe though we held it 
not improbable that the difference of the 
groffer Englifh Air, and that of Italy and 
France might keep the Quick-filver from 
falling quite as low in this colder, as in 
thofe warmer Climates; yet we could 
not believe that that difference in the Air 
fhould alone be able to make fo great a one 
in the heights of the Mercurial Cylinders; 
and accordingly upon enquiry we found, 
that though the various denfity of the 
Air benot to be over-look’din this Ex- 
periment, yet the main -Reafon why we 
found the Gylinder of Mercury to confift 
of fo many Inches, was this, That our 
Englifh Inches are fomewhat inferior in 
lengthtothe digits made ufe of in Fo- 
rein Parts, by the Writers of the Expe- 
riment, 
The next thing I defire Your Lordihip to 
take notice of,is, That the heigth of the 
Mercurial Cylinder is not wonttobefotid 
altogether {o great as really it might 
prove, by reafon of the negligence or in. 
cogitancy of moft that make the Experi- 
ment. For often times upon the opening 
or 


(125) 
of the inverted Tube into the Veffell’d 
Mercury, you may obferve a bubble of 
Air to afcend from the bottom of the 
Tube through the fubfiding Quick-filver 
to thetop; andalmoft always you may, 
if you look narrowly, take notice of a 
multitude of fmell bubbles all along the ` 
infide of the Tube betwixt the Quick- 
filver & the glafs:(not nowto mention the 
Particles of Air that lye’conceal’d tn the 
very Body of the Mercury ) Many of 
which, upon the Quick-filvers forfaking 
the upper part of the Tube, do break in- 
to that deferted {pace where they finde 
little or no refiftance to their expanding 
of themfelves. Whether this be the rea- 
fon that upon the Application of warm 
Bodies to the emptyed part of the Tube, 
the fubjacent Mercury would be depreff’d 
fomewhat lower, we fhall not determine s 
though it feem very probable, efpecially 
fince we found that upon the application 
of Linnen cloaths dipped in Water, to 
the fame partof the Tube, the Quick- 
filver would fomewhat afcend, as if the 
_ cold had condenf'd the Imprifon’d Air, 
that preff’d upon ic, into a leffer room. 
But that the deferted {pace is not wont to 
be totally devoid of Air, we were induc’d 
I2 to 








( 126°) 
to think by feveral Circumftances. For 
when aneminent Mathematician, and ex- 
cellent ‘Experimenter, had taken great 
pains and fpent much time in accuratly fil~ 
ling up a Tube of Mercury, we found 
that yet there remain’d ftore of incon{pi- 
cuous bubbles, by inverting the Tube, 
letting the Quick -filver fall to its wonted 
heighth ; ang by approaching (by de- 
grees) ared hot Iron to the out-fide of the 
Tube, over againft the upper part of the 
Mercurial Cylinder , for hereby the lictle 
unheeded bubbles, being mightily expan- 
ded, afcended in fuch numbers, and fo fait 
to the deferted fpace, that che upper pare 
of the Quick-filver feem’d,to our wonder, 
toboyl. We further obferv’d, That in 
a tryals of the Torricellzan Experiment 

e have feen made by others, and (one 
ti all our own, we never found that 
upon the inclining of the Tube the Quick- 
filver would fully reich to the very top of 
the feal'd end: which argued, that there 
was fome Airretreated thither that kept 
the Mercury out of the unreplenifh’d 
fpace. 
If Your Lordihip thould now demand 
what are the be ft expe edients to hinder the 
intrufion of the Airin this Experiment 5 


y 
r 


(127) 

we muft anfwer, That of thofe whichare 
eafily intelligible without ocular demon- 
ftration, we can at. prefent fuggeft upon 
our own tryals no better then thefe. Firft, 
at.the open end of the Tube the Gla} 
muft not onely be made as evenat the ed- 
ges as youcan, but it iS very conveni- 
ent (efpecially if the Tube be large) that 
the bottom be every way bent inwards, 
that {othe Orifice, not much exceeding a 
quarterof an Inchin Diameter, may be 
the more eafily and exactly ftopp’d by thé 
coe aaa: s finger; between’ which 
and the Quick- Bivens that there may be 
no Air intercepted (as very often it hap- 
pens’ that thereis) itis requifice that the 
Tube be fill’d as full as poffily it can be, 
that the finger which is to Kop it , prefling 
upon, the accumulated and protubera ant 
Mercury, may rather throw down fome, 
thennot finde enough exactly to keep out 
theAir. It is alfo an uleful an icompen- 
dious way not to fill the Tube at firft 
quite fal of Mercury,but to leave near the 
top about a quarter of an Inch empty; for 
if you then {top the openend with your 
finger, and invert the Tube that quarter 
of an Inch of Air will afcend in a great 
bubble to the top, andin its paffage thi- 

i ls ` thers 





(128) | 
ther, will gather up all the little bubbles; 
and unite them with it felf into one great 
one, fothat if by reinverting the Tube 
you let that bubble return to the open 
end of it,you will havea muchclofer Mer- 
curial Cylinder then before, and need but 
to addea very little Quick-filver more to 
fill up the Tube exaétly. And laftly,as for 
thofe leffer and incon{picuous parcels of 
Air which cannot this way be gleaned up, 
You may endeavor before you invert the 
‘Tube, to free the Quick-filver from them 
by fhaking the Tube, and gently knock- 
ing onthe out-fide of it, after every little 
parcel of Quick-filver which you pour in; 
and afterwards, by forcing the {mall la- 
titant bubbles of Air to difclofe them- 
felves and break, by imploying ahot Iron 
in fuch manner as we lately mention’d, I 
remember that by carefully filling the - 
Tube, though yet it were not quite free 
from Air, we have made the Mercurial 
Cylinder reach to 39 Inches andabove an 
eighth, and this in a very fhort Tube: 
which we therefore mention, becaufe we 
have found, by experience, that in fhort 
‘Tubesa little Air is more prejudicial to 
the Experiment then in long ones, where 
the Air having more room to S 

eres 








(129) 

felf, does lefs potently prefs upon the fub- 
jacent Mercury. 7 

And fince we are fallen upon the confi- 
deration of the Altitude of the Mercurial 
Cylinder, I:muft not conceal from Your 
Lordfhip an Experiment relating thereun- 
to, which perhaps will fet both You and 
many of your Friends the Virtuofi a think- 
ing; and, by difclofing fome things a- 
bout the Air or Atmofphere that have 
{carce hitherto been taken notice of, may 
afford you fome hints conducive to a fur- 
ther difcovery of the fubject of this E- 
piftle, 


wW E took a Glafs Tube, which, Zvperi- 

though it were not much above ment 18, 
three Footlong, we made choice of be- 
caufe it was of a more then ordinarily 
eventhicknefs. This we fill’d with Mer- 
cury, though not with as much care as we 
could, yet with fomewhat more then is 
wont to be ufed in making the Torricellian 
Experiment. Then, having according to 
the manner inverted the Tube,and open’d 
the mouth of ic beneath the furface of 
{ome other Quick- filver,that in the Tube 
fell down to the wonted heigth, leaving, 
14 as 








S 
as is ufual, fome little Particles!of Air in 
thefpaceit deferred, as we gheft by ob- 
ferving, that. upon the Application of hot 
Bodies to the upper part of the Tube,the 


“Quick-fiiver would be a little depreff èd. 


Laftly, having put both the Tube and the 
Veffel it lean’d on into a convenient 
-Wooden Frame, to keep them from mif- 
chances: we plac’ dthat Frameina Win- 
dow within my Bed-chamber,that I might 
both keep the Mercury from being ftirr'd, 
and have opportunity to watch trom time 
totime the Phenomena it was to exhibit. 
For the better difcovery of which, when 
the Quick-filver both in the Tube and 
fubjacent Veilel was perfectly at reft, we 
took notice, by a mark made on the out- 
fide of the Glais, how high the included 
Liquor then reach’d. 

During feveral Weeks that the Tube 
was kept in that Window (which was very 
rarely open’d) I had the oe to 

obferve, that the Quick-filver did fome- 
times faintly imitate - Liquor of a 
Weather-glals fubficing a little in warm, 
andrifing a little in cold PW eather, which 
we alcribed to the Spend or lefler preflure 
of that little Air that remain‘ at the top 
of the Tube, expanded or condenfd by 
the 


(137) 

the heat or cold that affected the ambient 
‘Air, But that which I was chiefly careful 
to obferve, was this, That oftentimes the 
Quick-filver did rife and fall in the Tube, 
and that very notably, withoutconforming 
it {elf to what is ufual in Weather- glaffes, 
whofe Air is at the top, nay quitecontrary 
thereunto: for fometimes I obferv’d it in 
very cold weather(fuch as this. Winter has 
already afforded us good ftore of) to fall 
down much lower then at other times , 
when by reafon of the abfence of both 
Froft,Snow,and {harp Winds, the Air was 
comparatively much warmer, And I fur- 
ther obferv’d; That fometimes the Quick- 
filver would for fome days together reft 
almoft atthe fame height; and at other 
times again it would in the compafs of the 
fame day confiderably vary its altitude, 
though there appear’d no change either in 
the Air abroad, or in the temper of the Air 
within the Room (wherein was conftantly 
kepta good Fire) nor in any thing elfe,to 
which either Lor fome eminently Learned 
Men whom I then acquainted with the 
Experiment ; could oe impute 
{uch a change: Efpecially confidering that 
the {pace w herein the Mercury wandred up 
anddown, within about five Weeks, a- 
mounted to full two Inches, of which we 

found 








(132) 

found by our feveral marks whereby we 
had taken noticeofits feveral removes, that 
it haddefcédedabout 2 of anInch from the 
place where it firft fetled,& the other Inch 
-and4 it had afcended. Anditfeems pro- 
bable that the height of the Mercurial Cy- 
linder would have varied yet more, if the 
Experiment had been made in the open 
Air and inalong Tube, where the Parti- 
cles of the Imprifon’d Air , by having 
more room to difplay themfelves in, 
might nor have had fo ftrong a Spring to 
work upon the Quick-filver with. But for 
want both of time and of a competent 
quantity of Mercury (which was not to be 
procur’d where we then happen’d to bey 
we were unable to make any further try- 
als: which therefore chiefly troubled us, 
becaufe we would gladly have try’d an in- 
genious Experiment which was fuggefted 
unto us by that excellent Mathematician 
Mr. Wren,who being invited to name any 
thing he would have us try touching the 
preflure of the Air, defired us to obferve 
whether or no the Quick-filver in along 
Tube would not alittle vary its height ac- 
cording to the Tides,efpecially about the 
New and Full Moon, about which times 
Mariners obferve thofe great Flowings 
and Ebbs of the Sea, that they call che 

| | = Spring- 





(133) 

Spring-Tides. For he fagacioufly and 
plaufibly conjectur’d that fuch obfervati- 
ons accurately made, would difcover the 
truth or erroneoufnefs of the Cartefian 
Hypothefis concerning the Ebbing and 
Flowing of the Sea: which Des Cartes 
afcribes to the greater preflure made upon 
the Air by the Moon, and the Intercur- 
rent Ethereal Subftance at certain times 
(ofthe Day, and of the Lunary Moneth) 
then at others.. But in regard we found 
the Quick-filver in the Tube to move up 
and down fo uncertainly, by reafon, as it 
feems, of accidental mutation in the Air 5 
I fomewhat doubt whether we fhall finde 
the Altitude of the Quick-filver to vary 
as regularly as the Experiment is ingeni- 
oufly propofd. The fuccefs we fhall (God 
permitting us to make tryal of it) acquaint 
Your Lordthip with; and in the mean 
time take notice, that when we had occa- 
fion to takethe Tube out of the Frame 
(after it had ftaid there part of November 
and part of December ) a good Fire being 
then in the room, becaufe it was a Snowy 
day, we found the Quick-filver in the 
Tube to be above the upper furface of 
the fubjacent Mercury 29 Inches three 
quarters. 

If 




































(134) 
If Your Lordthip thould nowask me 
what are the true caufes of this;varying al- 
titude of the Mercurial Cylinders I fhould 
not undertake to anfwer fo difficult.a que- 
ftion, and fhould, venter to fay no more, 
then that an Heng divers pofiible caufes to 
which it may be afcribed, it would not be, 
perhaps, abfurd to reckon thete that fol- 
low 
Eh ft then we may confider, that the Air 
inthe upper part of the, Tube is much 
more rarified, and therefore mote weak 
then the external Air, as may appear by 
this among other things, That upon the in- 
clining of the Tube the Quick-filver will 
readily alcend almoft to the very top ot 
it, and fo takeup eight or nine tenth parts, 
and perhaps more of that {pace which ic 
deferted before: which would not happen 
if that whole {pace had been full of unra- 
ified Air, fince that (as tryal may ealily 
fatisfie you) would not have’ fuffer’d it 
{elf to be thruft into fo narrow aroom by 
fo. weak a preflure. So that although in 
our Tube when the included Air was 
heated, the Quick-filver was fomewhat 
depreft d: Yet there is this difference be- 
twixt fucha Tube and common W ee 
Glafles, that in thefe the included and the 
ambient 














(335) 
ambient Air are in an e£quilibrium as to 
preffure, and the weight of the Water 
that keeps them feparate i is {carce confi- 
derable. Whereas in {ucha Tube as we 
are {peaking of, the Air within is very 
much more dilated then that without ; and 
‘cis not fo much the {pring or refiftance 
of the included Air, ag the weight of the 
Mercurial C aes it felf that hinders the 
Quick-filyer from afcending higher; for 
if we fhould {uppofe that deferted part of 
the Tube perfectly devoid of Air, - yet; 
would the Quick-filver rife but a; little 
higher init, and be far from filling it, in 
regard the outward Air would not be 

able to impel up fuch a weight much, 
higher : w hereas it may, by our former 
Experiments appear, that if all the Air in, 
the upper part of a Weather-Gla{s were 
away,the Water would be impell’d up to 
the very top of it, though the Pipe were 
above thirty Foot long. 

Wemay next confider, that this ra- 
vified Air atthe upper part ‘of our Tube 
being exactly {hut up betwixt the Glais 
and the Quick-filver, it was {carce fubject 
to any difcernable alter ations, fave thofe 
it receiv ’d from heat and cold, 
















































(136) 
And we may further confider that yet 


the external Air or Atmo/phere is fubject 
to many alterations, befides them that 


proceed from either of thofe Quali- 


ties. 
For the Experiment that occafion’d 
this Difcourfe, feemsto make it proba- 
ble enough that there may be ftrange 
Ebbings and Flowings, as it were, in the 
Atmofphere s or at leaft, chat it may ad- 
mut great and fudden Mutations, either as 
to its Altitude or its Denfity,from caufes, 
as well unknown to us, as the effects are 
unheeded by us. And that You may not 
think that there is nothing in Nature but 
our Experiment that agrees with this our 
conjecture, we might put Your Lordfhip 
in minde of the Pains and Aches that are 
often complain’d of by thofe that have 
had great Wounds or Bruifes, and that 
doe prefage great Mutations in the Air 
oftentimes, whilft to itrong and healthy 
Perfons no fign of any fuch thing appears, 
And that is alfo very memorable to this 
purpofe, which I remember I have fome- 
where readin a Book of the Ingenious 
Kircherus who giving apertinent admoni- 
tion concerning the various refractions 
that may happen inthe Ajr, relates, That 
ARESA ENS aot dare 








(137) 

during his ftayin Malta, he often faw 
Mount e£tna, though the next day, not- 
withftanding its being extreamly clear,he 
could not fee it; adding, that Vintemillius, 
avery Learned Perfon, did oftentimes, 
from a Hill he names, behold the whole 
{fland he calls Luprica protuberant above 
the Sea, though at other times, notwith- 
ftanding a clear Sky, he could not fee it: 
Andthough perhaps this may be in part a- 
{cribed to the various light & pofition of 
the{un,or co the various difpofition of the 
Spectators eye, or peradventure to fome 
other caufe, yet the moft probable caufe 
feems to be the differing Denfity of the 
Air, occafion'd by Exhalations capable to 
increafe the refraction, and confequently 
bring Beams tothe Eye, which otherwile 
would not fallonit. We have likewife 
in another Treatife mention’d our having 
often obferv’d with Telefcopes a plenty 
of Steams inthe Air, which withouc fuch 
a help would not be taken notice of; and 
which as they were noc at all times to be 
feen even through a Telefcope, fo they 
did fometimes,efpecially after a {hower of 
Rain, haftily difappear:- and when we 
have vifited thofe places that abound with 
Mines , we have feveral times been told 

end by 











(1387 

by the Diggers, that even when the Sky 
feem’d clear, there would not feldom fud- 
denly arife, and fometimes long continue, 
a certain Steam (which they ufual lly call a 
damp) fo grofs and thick, that it ‘would 
oftentimes put our their very Candles, if 
they didnot feafonably preventit. And 
I think it will eafily be granted, that the 
afcenfion of fuch Steams into this or that 
part of the Air, and their mixing with it, 
are very like to thickenit; as on the o- 
ther fide either heat or the fudden conden- 
fation of the Air in another part of the At- 
mofphere (to mention now no other cau- 
fes) are capable of rarifying it. 

Nor will it very much import the main 
{cope of our Difcourfe , whether it be 
fuppof'd that the copious Steams the 
earth fends into the air, thicken that part 
of the Atmofphere that receives them, 
and make it more heavy: Or that fome- 
times the Fumes may afcend with fuch ce- 
mete that though the Air be thicken’d 
yet they rather ciminifh then encreafe its 
gravitation, inregard that the quicknefs 
of their afcent , not onely keeps them 
from gravitating themfelves, but may 
hinder the prefling downwards of many 


Aérial Corpulcles that they meet with in 
their 











(139) 
their way upwards: This, T fay, is of 
no great importance to our prefent Dif 
courfe, fince either way the Terreftrial 
Steam may here and there confiderably 
alter the gravity or pretfure of the At- 
mofphere, 

Your Lorcfhip mayalfo be pleafed to 
remember, That.by our feventeenth Exa 
periment it appear’d that as when thei Atr 
inthe Receiver was ex panded more then 
ordinarily, the Quick-filverin the ‘Tube 
did sod ie scanery fubfide; fo when the 
Air in the fame Receiver was a little more 
then ordinarily comprefi’d, it did impell 
up the Quick-filver in the Tube above 
the wonted height of betwixt fix and fe- 
ven and twenty digits. 

And if to thefe things we annex; ehát 
for ought we can finde by tryals purpofe> 
ly made, the degree of rarity or denfity 
of the Air, fhut up into our Receiver, does 
not fenfibly alter its temperature as to 
cold orheat. It will not, I hope, appear 
abfurd to conceive, That fince the Air, 
included in the Tube,could but very faint- 
ly hinder the afcent of the Quick: filver, 
or prefs it downwards, fince too that inclu- 
ded. Air could fcarce immediately: receive 
any fenfible alteration, fave either by heat 
K or 

































































Experi- 
meat 19.. 





(14°) 
orcold. And fince alfo that according to 
thé bare denfiry or rarity of the Air in- 
cumbent on the fubjacent Quick-filver in 
the: Veflel, that in the Tube was impell’d 
mdreor lefs high; fuch changes happen- 
ing inthe neighboring part of the out- 
ward Air, either by the a(cenfion of grofs 
or. ‘copious exhalations, or by any other 
cale: (of which there may be divers) as 
were capable to make confiderable altera- 
tionsinthe confiftence of the Air, as to 
sacityand -denfity, zzay be able propor- 
tronably to alter the heighth of the 
Quick-filver: Trather fay, that fuch alte- 
rations may be, then that they ave the 
caufes.of our Phenomenon sbecaufe I think 
it fufficient, if I have propofd conje- 
cures not altogether irrationel about a 
new Myftery of Nature, touching which, 
the chief thing I pretend to, is to give oc- 
cafion to the Curious to inquire “farther 
into it then I have been yet able to do, 


He fame Reafon that mov’d us to 
conclude, that by the drawing of the 
Air.out of the Receiver, the Mercury 
would: defcend ina Tube fhorter then {1x 
and twenty digits, induc’d us alfo to ex- 


pect, 


(141) 

pect, that by the fame means Water 
might be brought to fubfide in Glafs 
Tubes of a moderate length, though by 
the noble Experiment, faid to have been 
accurately made in France by Monfieur 
Pafchal, we are informed that a Tube of 
no lefs then about two and thirty Foot, 
was found requifite to make the Experi- 
ment De Vacuwe fucceed with Water in- 
ftead of Quick-filver: fo tall a Cylinder 
of that lighter Liquor, being, itfeems, 
requifite to equal the weight of a Mercu- 
rial Cylinder of fix or feven and twenty 
digits, and f{urmount the preffure of che 
Atmofphere. 

We took then a Tube of Glafs, Her- 
metically feal’d at one end, of about four 
foot in length, and not very flender : This 
at the open end we fill’d with common 
Water, and then ftopt that end till we 
had inverted the Tube, and open’d it be- 
neath the furface of a quantity of the like 
Water, contain’d inafomewhat deep and 
flender Veflel. This Veflel, with the 
Tube init, was let down into the Recei- 
ver, and the Receiver being clofd up af- 
ter the accuftom’d manner, the Pump was 
fet awork, 

K 2 As 











(142°) 

As muchof the event as concerns our 
prefent purpofe, was this, That till a con- 
fiderable part of the Air was drawn out 
of the Receiver, the Tube:continu'd top- 
full of Water as when it was putin, it be- 
ing requifice that a great part of the Air 
formerly contain’din the Receiver, fhould 
be drawn out, to bring the remaining 
Air to an Aguilibrinn with fo fhort and 
light a Cylinder of Water. But when 
once the Water began to fall inthe Tube, 
then each exfuction of Air made it de- 
{cend.a little lower, though nothing near 
{o much as the Quick- filver at the begin- 
ning didin the Experiment formerly men- 
tion’d. Nor did there appear fo much 
inequality in the {paces tran{mitted by 
the Water in its detcent, as there did in 
thofe obferv'd in the tall of the Quick- 
filver, of which the caute will [carce feem 
abftrufe to him that {hall duly refleé up- 
on what has been already deliver’d. And 
whereas we drew down the Quick- filver 
inthe Tube fo far as to bring it within an 
Inch of the furface of the other Quick- 
filver into which it was to fall; the loweft 
we were able to draw down the Water 
was, by our conjecture, to abouta Foot 
or 






























(143) 
or more above the furface of that in the 
Veffel; of which I know not whether it 
willbe needful to afttgn fo obvious acaufe 
as that, though the I:ctle Air remaining 
in the Receiver could not hinder a Cylin- 
der of above an Inch high of Quick -filver 
from fubfiding 5 yer it might very well 
be able, by its preflure, to countervail the 
weightof a Cylinder of a Foot long or 
more,of a Liquor {o muchlefs ponderous 
then Quick-filver, -as* Water is.» ‘Andin 
fine, to conclude our Experiment, when 
the Water was drawn down thus:low, we 
found, that by letting in the outward Air, 
ic might be immediately impell'd up as. 
gainto thehigher partsof the Tube. 

We will adde.no. more concerning this 
Experiment, fave:that having try’d it in 
one of our {mall Receivers, we obferv’d, 
That upon the firft-exf{uction of the Air 
the Water did ulually f{ubfide divers In- 
ches: and at the-fecond (exfudétion) fall 
down much lower, fubfiding fometimes 
near two Foot ; as alfo that upon the let- 
tinginof the Air from without, the Wa- 
ter was impell’d up with very great ce- 
lerity- 


Kis That 




































Experi- 


(144) 


Hat the Air has‘a notable Elattical 
power (whencefoever that proceeds) 


mnt 20. we have, Tfuppofe, abundantly evinc’d, 


and. it begins to be acknowledg’d by the 
eminenteft Modern Naturalifts. But whe- 
ther orno there bein Water fo much as 
a languid one,feems hitherto to have been 
fcarce confider’d, nor has been yet, for 
ought I know, determin’d either way by 
any Writer, which invited us to make the 
following Ex periment. 

There was taken agreat Glafs-bubble, 
with along neck; (fuch as Chymifts are 
wont to call a Philofophical Egg) which 
being fill’d with common Water till the 
Liquor reach’d about: a {pan above the 
bubble, anda piece of Paper being there 
patted on, was put unftop’d into the Re- 
ceiver, and then the Air was fuck’d out 
after the wonted manner. The event was 
this, Thataconfiderable part of the Air, 
pentup inthe Receiver, was drawn out 
before we difcern'd any expanfion of the 
Water; but, continuing the labor of 
pumping, the Water manifeftly began to 
afcend in the ftem of the Glafs, and di- 
vers bubbles loofening themfelves min 
the 


(145) 

the loweér-paits of che Veflel, made their 
way. through the Body of the Water} tó 
the top of it, and’ there’ brake into the 
Receiver: And after the Water once'ap» 
pear’d to {well chen at each time the Stope 
cock was turn’d to let out the air from the 
Receiver into the Pump,the Water in the 
Neck of the Glafs did fuddenly rife a+ 
bout-the breadth of a Barly-corn in the 
Neck of the Glafs, and fo attain’d, v by 
degrees , to a confiderable height above 
the mark formerly mention’d. Andiat 
length (to make the expanfion of the Wear 
ter more, evident). the outward Air was 
fuddenly let in, and che Water imimedi+ 
ately fubfided and deferted all the {paceit 
had newly gain’din the Glafs, © st) 
And, on this occafion, it will not:pers 
haps be amifs to acquaint Your Lordthip 
here (though we have already mention’d 
it in another, Paper, to. another purpafe) 
with another Expedient that we made yfe 
of two orthree years ago, to try whether 
orno: Water hada Spring init. »Abont 
that timethen, That:Great and Learned 
Promoter of Experimental Philofophy 
Dr. Wilkins, doing me the Honor to 
come himfelf, and bring fome of his. in- 
quifitive «Friends to my Lodging, we 
it K 4 there 





(146) 
there had in readinefs ‘a round and hollow 
Veffel of Pewter, great enough to: con- 
taintwo pounds of Water, and ‘exactly 
clofe every where, but at one little hole 
where it was to be:fill’d; then partly by 
fucking out the Air,’ and partly. by inject- 
ing Water with a Syringe, itwas (not 
without fome difficulty) fill’d up to the 
top; and that hole being plac’d' directly 
upwards, there was alittle more Water 
letfurely forc’d in by the Syringe. Upon 
which, though the Veffel were permitted 
toféft,and thehole kept in its former po- 
fture, yet the comprefl’d Water leifurely 
{well’d above the Orifice of the hole, and 
divers drops.ran over along the fides of the 
Veflel, After this,we cauf'd a skilful Pew- 
terer:(who had made the Globe) -to clofe 
itup in our prefence with Soder fo exqui- 
fitely, that none fulpected there was any 
thing left in it befides Water. And lafl- 
ly, the Veflel thus foder'd up, was wari- 
ly.and often ftruck in divers places with a 
Wooden Maller, and thereby was mani- 
fettly compreffd; ‘whereby the inclofed 
Water was crouded into lefs room then it 
had before: And thereupon when we took 
a Needle, and with it and the Mallet per- 
forated the Veflel, and drew out the 

j i Needle 








C147) 

Needle again; the Water (but ina very 
flender Stream) was fuddenly thrown åf- 
tericinto the Air, tothe height of two 
or thte¢ Feet. As for the other Phenome. 
na of this Experiment, fince they belong 
not to our prefent purpole, and are partly 
mention’d in another of our Papers,.. we 
fhall, inftead of recording them here, give 
this Advertifement: That as evidently 
as this Experiment, and that made in our 
Receiver, feem to prove a power inthe 
Water to ex pand and: reftore it:felf atter 
compreffion; yet: for a reafon to:be met 
with erelong, Ijjudgeéd it not: fafetoins 
fer that Conclufion fromm thefe :Premifes, 
till :had made fome.ofi the tollowing try- 
als, to the mention.of which I will there- 
fore haften, > yt 


1O difcover whether the Expanfion Esperi 

of the Water: really proceeded ment 219 
from an Elaftical: power inthe parts’ of 
the Water it felf, we thought it vequifite 
totry two things: Theone, Whether or no 
the Atmofphere gravitates upon Bodies 
under Water and the other,. Whether 
in cafe it do gtavitate, the Intumefcence 
of the Water may not:beafcribed to fome 
fub- 





(148) 

febftance ‘fubtler thenit felf, refiding in 
it. la order to the fatistying my felf abour 
the firth of thefe, I intended tolet down 
intoothe ‘Receiver :aVeflel of i Water’, 
wherein fhould be immerf'd.a very: frmall 
oyl'd Bladder, almoft:devoidot ‘Air, but 
ftrongly ty’d up atthe Neck with aftring, 
and detainid:a litte under Water by: fuch 
aweighr faften’d t6 that ftring, as fhould 
juft be able to keep the Bladder ` from 
fwimming, and nomore. For Lfuppofd, 
thavif. whenall things were thus order’d, 
the Receiver wereempty’d, in cafe there 
were any {uch preflureof the Atmofphere 
upon Water , ‘as T'was inchin’d to believe, 
the Air within the Bladder,being upon the 
exfuctionof the! Airuwithin the Receiver, 
freed from that preflure, and being prefl*d 
onely by the fmall weight of the in- 
cumbent Water, would confiderably ex- 
panditfelf,; bucwhil'ft wewere prépa- 
ring Bladders forthis Experiment, there 
occust'd an eafie-way:fbr:the making at 

once. both the Difcoveries I defir'd. 
Wetook then a Glafs Viol, containing 
by :ghiefs.a:pound: and: fome ounces: of 
Water,’ ‘this we fill’dtop full, andthen 
we putinto the Neck of ita Glafs Pipe 
apretty deal biggerthen a Goofe Quill, 
i open 








(149) 

openat both ends, and of divers Inches 
in length: One. end of this Pipe was fo 
put into the Neck of the Viol, as toteach 
a little below it, and then was carefully 
cemented thereto that no Air might get 
into the Viol,. nor no Water get.out of 
it, otherwife then through the Pipe; and 
then the Pipe being warily fill’d, about 
half way upto the top, with more Wa- 
ter, anda mark being pafted over againft 
the upper furface of the Liquor ; the Viol 
thus fitted with the Pipe, was, by ftrings 
let down into the Receiver, and according 
tothe wonted manner exquifitely clofd 

up init. 
This done, we began to Pump out the 
Air, and whena pretry quantity of it had 
‘been drawn away, the Water in the-Pipe 
began to rife higher in the Pipe, at the 
fides of which fome little bubbles difco- 
verd themfelves. After a little while 
longer, the Water ftill fwelling, there 
appear’d at the bottom of the Pipe a bub- 
ble about the bignefs of a {mall Pea, 
which afcending through the Pipe to the 
top of the Water, ftaid there awhile and 
then broke; but the Pump being nimbly 
ply’d, the expanfion of the Water fo ene 
creaf'd, that quickly, getting upto the 
: top 











(150) 

top of the Pipe {fome drops of.it be- 
gan torun down along the out- fide of it, 

which. oblig’d us to, forbear pumping a- 

while; and givethe Water leave to fub- 
fide within lefs then two Inches of the 
bottom of the Pipe. After: this the 
Pump being again fet at work, the:bub- 
bles began to afcend from the -bot:om 
of the Pipe, being.not all of a fize, but yet 
fo big, that eftimating. one with another, 
they appear’d to be of the fize of the {mal- 
ler fort of Peas, andiof thefe we reckon’d 
about fixty which came up one after ano- 
ther, befides ftore of {maller ones,ot which 
we made no reckoning: And at length ; 
growing weary.of reckoning and pumping 
tod (becaufe. we found, :that in {pight 
of all our pains and induftry; {fome un-- 
aifcern’d Leak: or other in the: Recel- 
ver hinder’d us from being able to empty 
it altogether) we thought fit.to defift for 
thattime. After tryal made of what o- 
peration the external Air, being Jet in 
upon the expanded Water, would have 5 
and accordingly turning the Key to let in 
the Air, we faw, as we expected, that 
the Water in the Pipe in a moment fell 
down almoft to. the bottom of it, 


Now 


G51) 

Now of this Ex periment there are two 
or three Circumftances yet to be. men- 
tion’d, which are no lefs then thofe alrea- 
dy recited, pertinent to our prefent pur- 
pofe. 

Inthe firft place then, when the great- 
er part of the Airhad been pump’d out of 
the Receiver, the rifing bubbles afcend- 
ed fo very flowly in the Pipe, that their 
Progrels was fcarce difcernable; which 
f{eem'd to proceed from this, That their 
bignets was fuch, That they could not 
fuificiently extend themfelves in the 
cavity of the Glafs, without prefling 
on both hands againft the fides of it, 
whereby they became of more difficult 
extrufion to the Water. And though it 
may feem ftrange thefe bubbles fhould 
be of any confiderable bulk, fince °tis 
like they confifted of lefler parcels of 
the Air lurking inthe Water, then thofe 
that were vigorous enough to make their 
way through long before them : yet they 
were commonly much larger then before, 
fome of them being equal in quantity to 
four or five Peas: Whether this their in- 
creafe of bulk proceeded.from the greater 
decrement of the preflure of the Air, 

or 









































(152) 

or from the Union of two or three of 
thofe numerous bubbles which were then 
generated below the bottom of the Pipe, 
where we could not fee what was done a- 
mong them. 

Another thing we noted in our bubbles 
was, That whereas in ordinary ones the 
Air, together with the thin film of Water 
that invefts and detains, is wont to fwell 
above the furface of the Water it (wims 
on, and commonly to conftitute Hemif- 
Pherical Bodies with it, the little parcels 
of Air that came up after the Receiver 
was pretty well empty’d, did not make 
protuberant bubbles, but fuch whofe up- 
per furface was either level with or be- 
neath that of the Water, fo that the up- 
per furface being ufually fomewhat con- 
vex, the lefs protuberant parts of it had 
a pretty quantity of Water remaining a- 
bove them, 

Wealfo further obferv’d, That where- 
as inthe bubbles that firt appear’d in 
the Pipe, the afcending Air did, as in o- 
ther common bubbles, makeits way up- 
wards, by dividing the Water through 
which it paffd, in thofe bubbles that ap- 
pear’d at the latter end of our Experi- 
ment, when the preffure of the little = 

terna 


ry 





(153) 

ternal Air, remaining in the Receiver 5 
was grown inconfiderable, the aicending 
parcels of Air having. now little more 
then the weightof the incumbent Warer 
to {urmount,were able both fo to exp: inc 
themfelves as to fill up that pare of the 
Pipe which they pervaded, & by prefling 
every way againft the fides of it, to itt 
upwards with them what Water:they 
found above them, without letting any 
confiderable quantity glide down along 
the fides of the Glafs: So that fometimes 
we could fee a bubble thruft on before it 
awhole Cylinder of Water of perhaps 
an Inchhigh, and carry it up to thetop 
of the Pipe; thoughas we formerly no- 
ted, upon the letting in the external Air, 
thele tumid bubbles s fuddenly relapfd to 
their former inconfpicuou{nefs. 

‘All thefe things laid together feem’d 
fufliciently to confirm that, which the 
confideration of the thing it felf would 
eafily enough perfiade, “namely, That 
the Air, and fuch like Bodies being under 
Water, may be preil’d:upon as well by 
the Atmofphere, as by the weight of the 
incumbent Water it felf. 

Hence likewife we mi 1y verifie what we 
obfery’d. at the clofe of the foregoing 

Expe- 


























(154 
Experiment, namely, That from the fole 
{welling of Water there recorded, it can- 
not be fo fafely concluded that Water, 
when freed from comprefiion, isendow d 
with an Elaftical power of expanding it 
felf, fince thereby it appears that the In- 
tumefcence produc’d by that Experiment, 
may (at leaft in great part) be afcrib’dto 
the numerous little bubbles which are 
wont to be produc’d:in Water, from 
which the preffure of the Atmofphere is 
in great meafuretaken off, Soapt are we 
to bemif-led,even by Experiments them- 
felves, into Miftakes, when either we con- 
fider not that moft Effects may proceed 
from various Caufes, or minde onely thofe 
Citcumftances of our Ex periment,which 
feem to comply with our preconceiv’d 
Hypothefis or Conjectures. 

And hence it feems alfo probable, that 
in the Pores or invifible little recefles of 
Water it felf there lie commonly inter- 
{perfd many parcels of either Air, or at 
leaft fomething Analogous thereunto, al- 
though fo very {mall that they have not 
been hitherto fo much as fulpected to 
lurk there. But ifit be demanded howit 
appears that there is interfperfd through 
the Body of Water any fubftance thinner 
j = then 





(155) l 
thenit felf, and why that which produe’d 
the’ bubbles above mention’d fhould not 
be refolutely faid tobe nothing elfe then 
a-more active and fpiricuous part of the 
Water, we fhall; in order to the Elucida- 
tion of this matter, fubjoyn to what 
was formerly deliver’d the following Ex- 
periment. 


WY E recitedin our nineteenth Exe 
periment, how by drawing moft Expert 

of the Air out of the Receiver, we made” 228 

the Water fubfide by degrees ina Glafs 

not four Footlong: We thall now adde, 

that in the like Experiment made in fuch 

a Tube, ora greater, it may be obferv d, 

That when the Water begins to fall,there 

will appear ftore of bubbles faften’d all a- 

long to the fides of the Glafs; of which 

bubbles, by the agitation of the Veffel 

confequent upon pumping, there will arife 

good numbers tothe top of the Water, 

and there break; and as the Cylinder of 

Water is brought to be lower and lower, 

fo the bubbles will appear more numerous 

in chat part of the Tube which the Water 

yet fills; and the nearer the furface of the 

Water, in its defcent, approaches to thefe 


j bubbles, 

























bubbles, the greater they will grow, be- 
caufe having the lefs weight and preffure 
upon them, the Expanfion of that Air 
which makes them, can be the lefsrefifted 
bythe preflure of the incumbent Water 
and Air; as feems probable from hence, 
that upon the letting in a little external 
Air, thofe bubbles immediately fhrink. 
It may indeed, as we lately intimated, 

be conjectur d, that thefe bubbles pro- 
ceed not fo much from any Air pre-exi- 
ftent in the Water, and lurking in the 
Pores of it, as from the more fubrle parts 
of the Water it felf; which by the expan- 
dion allow’d them upon the diminifh’d 
preffure of the ambient Bodies may gene- 
rate fuchbubbles. Andindeed, I am not 
yet fo well fatished that bubbles may not 
{at leaft fometimes ) have fuch an Origina- 
tion: but that which makes me fufpect 
that thofe in our tryals contain’d real Air 
formerly Jatitantin the Pores of the Wa- 
ter, is this, That upon the inletting of 
the external Air, the Water was not 
again impell’d to the very top of the 
"Tube whence it began to fall, but was 
ftopt ia its afcent near an Inch beneath 
the top. And fince, if theupper part of 
the Tube had been devoyd of any other 
then 


(157) 

then fuch: Ethereal matter as was fubtle 
enough freely to penetrate the pores of 
the Glafs, the external Air would have 
been able to impel the Water to the top 
of a Tube feven or eight times as long as 
ours was; The Phenomenon under confi- 
deration feem’d manifeftly to argue that 
the many bubbles that broke at the top 
of the Water did contain a real Air 
which, being collected into one place and 
hinder’d by the top of the Glafs from re- 
ceding, was able to with{tand the preflure 
of the outward Air. As we fee that if 
never fo little Air remain in the Tube up- 
onthe making the Experiment De Vacuno 
with Quick-filver, no inclining of the 
Tube, though along one, will enablea 
Man to impel the Mercury up to the very 
top, by reafon (as we formerly noted) 
of the refiftance of the included Air, which 
will not be comprefl’d beyonda certain 
degree. . 

But in order to a further Difcovery what 
our bubbles were, we will, on this occa- 
fion, inform Your Lordfhip that we try’d 
the XIX Experiment in one of our {mall 
Receivers, and:found,that upon the draw- 
ing down of the Water, fo many bubbles 
dilclofd themfelves and broke into the 

L2 upper 





































(158) 
upper part of the at that having-after- 
wards let in the external Air, the “Water 
was not thereby impell’d to the.tap of the 
Tube (three Foot inleagth) within a lit- 
tle more then half an Inch. And’ whe- 
ther or no icwere Air that poftefi'd that 
fpace at the top of the Tube which was 
not fill’d with Water,we took this courfe 
toexamine, We drew the fecond time 
the Airout of the Receiver, and found, 
that by reafon of the body that pofleff'd 
the top of the Tube, we were able not 
onely to make the Water in the Tube fall 
to.alevel with the furtace of che Water 
in the Veflel: But alfo (by plying the 
Pump alittle longer) a great way beneath 
it: which fince it could not well be afcrib’d 
to the bare fubfiding of the Water by rea- 
fon ofits own weight, argued that the Wa- 
ter was deprefl'd by the Air: which was 
éonfirin’d by the Figure of the furface of 
the Water in the Tube, which was much 
more concave then that of Water in 
‘Fubes of that bigneis ufesto be. And 

this further tryal (to adde that upon 
the by) wemadeat the fame time, That 
when the Water in the Pipe was drawn 
down almoft as low as the Water without 
it, we obferv’d, that (though we defifted 
from 





(159) 

from pumping) by the bare application 
of ahand moderately warm to the defert- 
ed part of the Tube, the remaining Wa- 
ter would be {peedily and notably de- 
preif'd. . And having for a while held a 
kindled Coal to the outlide of the Tube, 
(the Pump being {till uniinploy’d, becaufe 
the Veflel chanced to hold extraordinarily 
well): the Air was by the heat fo far ex- 
panded, thatit quickly drave the Water 
tothe bottom of the Tube, which was 
divers Inches beneath the furface of the 
ambient Water. Whereby it appears(by 
the fame way by which we formerly mea- 
{urd the dilatation of the Air) that the 
Air, even when it is expanded to between 
go and 100 times; its extent will yet rea- 
dily admitof a much further rarifaction 
by heat. 

I confider’d alfo that in cafe the Bub- 
bles we have been {peaking of, were pro- 
duc'd by the parcels of Air latitant in the 
Water, chat Air being now got together 
tothetop of the Tube, though the Atr 
were again drawn out of the Receiver, 
the taking off its preflure would not dif- 
clofe bubbles as before; and accordingly, 
the Air being again pump’d our, the Wa- 
ter inthe Tube deicended as formerly: 

L3 but 





(160) 


but for a great while we {carce faw one 
bubble appear, onely when the Receiver 
had been very much exhaufted, and the 
Water was fallen very low, thereappear’d 
near the bottom of the Tube, -certain 
little bubbles, which feem’d to confift of 
fuch parcels of Air as had not, by reafon 
of their fmalnefs, got up to the top of 
the Water, with the more bulkie and vi- 
gorous ones; And that whichis not in- 
confiderable, is, ‘That having, by letting 
inthe Air, forc’d up the Water into the 
Tube, we could not perceive chat it af- 
cended nearer the top, though we per- 
mittedthe Engine to remain unimploy’d 
for two or thiee Nights together, and 
watch'd whether the Water would {well 
upand fillthe Tube. Andon this occa- 
fion Iremember, that having try’d fuch an 
Experiment as this with Quick-filver in- 
{tead of Water, ina Tube of abouta Foot 
and a half long, wherein it might feem 
more hopeful to efcape bubbles; yet up- 
on the drawing down the Quick-filver as 
low as we could, and letting in the exter- 
nal Air upon it, we found that fome lurk- 
ing particles of Air were got up to the top 
of the Tube, and hinder’d the Quick- 
filver from being forc’d up again fo nieh, 
n 











(161) 
And though the Quick-filver were by 
this means brought to appear a very clofe 
andlovely Metalline Cylinder, not inter- 
rupted by interfperfd bubbles as before 5 
yet having caufd the Air to ‘be again 
drawn out of the Receiver, I could per- 
ceive feveral little bubbles to difclofe 
themfelves, faften’d to the infide of the 
Tube; near the bottom of it; and having 
purpofely watch’d one or two of the chiet- 
eft, I had the pleafure to obferve, that 
though they grew bigger and bigger as 
the furface of the Mercurial Cylinder fell 
nearer and nearer to them, fo as that at 
length they fwell’d into a con{picuous 
bulk; yet upon the wary letting inthe 
Air upon them, they did not break, but 
prefently fhrunk up into a littlenefs that 
render’d them incon[picuous. 

Whence it feems very probable, ifnot 
certain, that even in the clofeft and moft 
ponderous Liquors, and therefore much 
morein Water, there may lurk undifcern- 
able parcels of Air, capable, upon the 
removal of the preflure of the ambient 
Air (though but in parc) and that of the 
Liquor wherein it lurks, to produce con- 
{picuous bubbles.» -And confequently, if 
itfeem inconvenient to admit an Elaftical 

L 4 power 


















































(162) 

power inthe Water, it may be faid that 
the {welling of the compreff’d Water in 
the Pewter Veflel lately mentiond, and 
the fpringing up of the Water at the hole 
made by the Needle, were not the effects 
of any internal Elster of the Water, but 
of thefpring of the many little particles 
of Air difperd through that Water, and 
acting upon it in their fudden recovering 
themfelves to a greater extent, then that 
to which a violent compreffion had re- 
duc’d them. 


But though, from all chefe particulars, 
it feems manifeft that the bubbles we have 
been all this while treating of, were pro- 
duc’d by fuch a fubftance as may be pro- 
perly enough call'd Air; yet till we fhall 
have had the opportunity of making 
fome further tryals concerning the nature 
of the Air, wefhall not refolutely deter- 
mine whether or no Air be a Primogenial 
Body (if I may fo fpeak) that cannot 
now be generated or turn’d either into 
Water or any other Body. Yet in the 
mean while (becaufe it is an important 
Queftion,. andif rightly determin’d, may 
much conduce tothe knowledge of the 
nature 








(163) 
nature of the Air) Wethink icnot unfit 
to makea brief mention of fome of the 
particulars which at prefent occur to our 
thoughts in favor of either part of the 
Queftion. ca 
Firft chen, divers Naturalifts efteem the 
Air (as well as other Elements) to bein- 
generable and incorruptible. Andreafons 
piaufible enough may be drawn to coun- 
tenance this Opinion from the confidera- 
tion of that permanency that ought to 
belong fo the corporeal Principles of o- 
ther Bodies. : 
Next, Experience may be pleaded to 
the fame purpole, for I have read of fome 
who have in vain attempted to turn Air 
into Water, or V Vater into Air. 
The diligent Schottus tells us, That a- Saya 
mongft the other rarities to be met with hydraulices 
in that great Repofitory of them, the feist: 
Mufeum Kercherianum, there is a round Chi n. 
Glafs with a tapering Neck near half full 
(as one may guefs by the Scheme he an- 
neses) of ordinary Spring-warer, which 
having been Hermetically fhut up there 
by Clavius the famous Geometrician , 
The included water is to this day pre- 
ferv’d, not onely clear and pure, as if 
it were but newly put in: But (as it feems) 
without 






































(16.4) 
without (in the leaft) turning into Air; 
notwithftanding its having been kept 
therethefe fifty years: For he:tells us, 
That.che Water hath, continued there all 
this while without any diminution. 

Nor does it appear in thofe Glaffes, 
which for Chymical Experiments we ufu- 
ally clofe with Hermes his Seal (as they 
call it) that the included Air does, during 
its long Imprifonment, notwithftanding 
the alteration it receives from various de- 
grees of heat, difcernably alter its nature. 
Whereas we plainly perceive in our Dige- 
{tions and Diftillations, that though it 
may be rarified into invifible Vapors, yet 
it is not really chang’d into Air, but onely 
divided by heat, and fcatter’d into very 
minute parts, which meeting together in 
the Alembick or in the Receiver, do pre- 
{ently return into fuch Water as they con- 
ftituted before. And we alfo fee, that 
ev'n Spirit of Wine, and other fubtle and 
fugitive Spirits, though they eafily fly in- 
tothe Air, and mingle withit, do yet in 
the Glafles of Chymitts eafily lay afide 
the difguife of Air, and refume the deve- 
fted form of Liquors. And fo volatile 
Salts,as of Urine, Harts-horn, ¢c.though 
they will readily difperfe themfelves 
l ` through 


(165) 

through the Air, and play up and downin 
the capacity of an Alembick or a Receis 
ver: yet will they, after awhile, faflen 
themfelves to the infides of fuch Glaffes 
in the form of Salts. Te 

Befides, fince Air is confefledly. en- 
dow’d with an Elaftical power that proba- 
bly proceeds from its Texture, itappears 
not what it is that in fuch light alterations 
of Water, asare by many prefum’d ca- 
pableof turning it into Air, can berea- 
fonably fuppol’d fo to contrive the Parti- 
cles of Water, asto give them, and that 
permanently, the ftructure requifite toa 
Spring. Iadde the word, Permanently, 
becaufe the newly mention ’d obfervations 
feem to argue the Corpufcles of Air to 
be irreducible into Water, whereas the 
Aqueous Particles may perhaps for a 
while be fo vehemently agitated, as to 
prefs almoft like Springs upon other Bo- 
dies ; yet upon the ceafing of the agitati- 
on, they quickly, by relapfing into Wa- 
ter, difclofe themfelves to have been no- 
thing elfe whil’ftthey counterfeited the 


Air. 
Laftly, The Experiment formerly made 
in our Engine with a piece of Match, 
{eems to evince, that even thofe light and 
EDF -e iubtle 









(166) 
fubtle Fumes (for the moft part not aque? 
ous neither) into: which the Fire it felf 
fhatters dry Bodies, have no fuch Spring 
in them as the Air, fince they were unable 
to hinder or reprefs the expanfion of the 
Aix included in the Bladder they furroun- 
ded. 
tide a. I-vemember indeed that the Learned 
of then. Fofephus Acofta, in his Hiftory of the 
dies, Lib.3. Weft Indies, tellsus, That he faw in thofe 
C9. parts fome Grates of Iron forufted and 
confam’d by the Air, that the Metal be- 
ing preff'd between the Fingers, diflolv’d 
(to ufe his words) to powder, as if it had 
pes co. been Hay or parched Straw, ‘And I re- 
Sesim Member too, thatthe accurate Varenius 
ncs. tells us, That in the Iflands commonly 
called Azores, the Air (and Wind) is fo 
fharp, that in afhort time it frets not only 
TronPlates, but the very Tiles upon the 
Roofs of Houfes, and reduces them to 
duft, And I have elfewhere mention-d 
fome recent Obfervations of this kinde. 
But it may be faid, ‘That the aoove-men- 
tion'd Authors afcribe the recited effects 
chiefly to the Winds, and that however 
the corrofion of the Iron and the Tiles 
may proceed not from the Air it felf, or 
any of its genuine parts, but from fome 
faline 





| 
| 
| 


(167) 

faline Corpufcles difperfd through the 
Air, and driven by. the Winds againft the 
Bodies itis prefum’d to fret, And that 
fuch volatile Salts may copioufly afcend 
into the Air, and yet retain their Nature, 
as doth the more fixt Salt in the Sea Wa- 
ter, the fublimations: of Sal- Armontack 
may fufficiently evince.. Nottomention 
that I have fhown fome Friends-4, fecret 
kinde of faline Subftance incomparably 
fubtler then Sal- Armoniack , which did 
not onely eafily enough afcend it felf, but 
carried up with it (and that in avery great 
‘proportion) the folid and ponderous Bo- 
dy.ev’n of uncalcin’d Gold in the form of 
f{ubtle exhalations, which did-afterwards 
faften themfelves to the upper: parts of 
the Veffels, and yet manifeft themfelves 
to continue Gold. We remember alfo, 
that to try whether Water could be tura'd 
into Air, we once took ane £olzpile, into 
which we had before convey’d fome Wa- 
ter, and placing it upon kindled Coals 
when the heat forc’d out a vehement 
{tream of aqueous Vapors ; we ty’d about 
the neck of it, that of a Bladder, which 
we had before empty’dof Air; and find- 
ing the «£olfpile after a while to blow up 
the Bladder, we carefully ty’d it sgan 

that 








that the included fubftance might hot get 
away, Then flipping it off from the £4- 
livilewe convey’d it into our Receiver, to 
trywhether or no that which in part di- 
{tended the Bladder would appear by its 
Spring to be true Air: whereby we found 
that upon the exfuction of the ambient 
Air, the included fubftance expanded it 
felf and the Bladcer to avery much great- 
er bulk then it was of before, And for 
further ‘fatisfaction, having again taken 
out the Bladder, we fuffer’dit to remain 
ty’d up till next morning, to try whether 
time,and the coldnefs of the night, would’ 
make the contain’d fubftance relapfe in- 
to Water: But the next Morning we 
found: it littlelefs tumid then before, I 
remember, Ifay, that I once made this 
Experiment; but I might fay in anfwer 
to it,’ that the chief reafon of my men- 
tioning It, is, To let Your Lordhip fee 
how requifite it isto be circumfpect and 
confiderate, when we are to make and to 
build upon nice Experiments. For though 
I may feem to have ufed fufficient cauti- 
on, yet afterward confidering with my 
felf that the e£olipile I had imploy’d was 
a very large one, and that it required much 
more care then one that has not try’d it 
oe would 
































(169) 

would imagine, to drive out all the Air 
from alarge e£olipile, Leafily fufpected 
that the diftenfion of the Bladder in our 
pneumatical Veffel , might proceed not 
from the Watery fteams that came out at 
the narrow mouth of the eolipile, and 
had very much wetted the Bladder, but 
from the rarified Air which in that fort of 
Veflels is wont fora good while together 
to come out with the rarified Water: and 
accordingly having reiterated the Experi- 
ment I found it very difficult (by rea- 
fon of the {hrinking of the Bladders (up- 
on their being heated) and of other impe- 
diments )to make it fo accurately as to dẹ- 
duce from it, that Water may be rarified 
into true Air. 5 

Againft the four other above-mention’d 
Confiderations, we cannot fpend time to 
frame Objections, but muft forth: with 
proceed to the mention of thofe things 
that feem to argue that Air (at leaft fuch 
as produc’d our bubbles) maybe gene- 
rated of Water and other Bodies, 

Firft then we have found by Experi- 
ence that avapid Air, or Water rarified 
into vapor, may atleaft for a while emu- 
late the elaftical power of that whichis 
generally acknowledg’d to be true Air. 

For 





















(170) 
Forif you takea good -4iolzpile, with a 
moderately ftrong and flender Neck, and 
filling ic with Water, lay it upon quick 
Coals, you may after a while obferve fo 
great a preflure by fome of the parts con- 
tain'din the eolépile upon others, that 
the Water will fometimes be thrown up 
into the Air above three ot tour Foot 
high; andif you then take the -£olipile 
almoft red hot from off the Fire, you may 
perceive that the Water will for a longer 
time then one would eafily imagine con- 
tinue to be fpouted out in a violent 
Stream. And if there remains but little 
Water in the e£o/inile when tis taken ve- 
ry hot from the Fire, immerfing the 
Neck of it into cold Water, you will 
finde, that after it begins to fuck in fome 
Water, there will be made from time to 
time ftore of large bubbles in that Water 
whereinto the neck was plunged. Which 
bubbles feem manifeftly to proceed from 
hence, that for a while the heat in the -#- 
olipile continues ftrong enough to rarifie 
part of the Water that is fuck’d in, and 
expelit inthe form of Vapors through 
the Water incumbent on rhe Pipe. If al- 
fo when the -£olipile is almoft full of wa- 
ter, and therefore can contain bur i 

Its 






























(171) 

Air; youhold a Coal or Brandin that 
ftream of V apors’ that iflues out of the 
narrow mouth ofiit, you will finde this 
vapid or rorid Air, (if I may fo call it) 
to blow the Fire very aoe y and with a 
roaring noife, And that it be not faid 
that ’tis.by the external Air which the a- 
queous {teams drive before them, and 
not by the Steams them(elves, that the 
Blaftis made and the Flame excited; it 
has been obferv’d, that by approaching 
the Coul or Brand almoft to the mouth 
of the e£olipile, the winde appear’d more 
vehement then if the Body to be kindled 
were held fome Inches off, 

But in regard the elaftical power of the 
Stream, iffuing out of ane £olzpile, feems 
manifeftly due to the he at that expands 
and agitates the aqueous Particles where- 
of that Stream confifts, and that fuch 
rapid winds feem to be but water {catter'd 
into little parts and fet amovings fince 
we finde, that holding a Knife, or any 
folid, {mooth and ciofe Body againft the 
ftream that fues out ot the Æolipile, the 
vapors condenfing upon it, will prefently 
cover it with water: It will be very per- 
tinent to fubjoyna notable Experiment 
that I remember I have met with in the 

M de- 











Kirch: Art: 


Mag: Con: 
& Diljoa: 
lib. 9. 
P. 309. 


See the fif- 


teenth Fi- 


olre, 
gii Ce 


(172) 
defcription given us by the Induftrious 
Kircher, of feveral Mufical Engines, And 
(though ic may feem fomewhat prolix) 
we will recite what he delivers in his own 
words, which are thefe. 
Cum codem tempore quo hac fcripfi 
fummi Pont: Innocentii X™ mandato or- 
ani bydraulici in horto Quirinali confti- 
tuendi cura mihi commendata effet; Æoliam 
cameram infigni fane [ucceffu conftrui jufsi- 
mmus, eA que fequitur ratione. — 
Erat longitudo five altitudo camere A H 
5 Pedum, Latitudine 3 fere ex lateribus 
confiructa; in medio duo tenebat Diaphrag- 
mata CD eF EJ in modum cribri pluri- 
bus foraminibus pertufa. Paulo infra ca- 
zalis G aquam advehens inferebatur in H 
eidemaepiftominum parabat exitum. Aqua 
itáque per canalem G maximo impetu ruens 
vehementifsimum ventum mox intus exci- 
tabat; qui ventus nimia humiditate imbu- 
tus, ut purior exiret ficciorfg, Diaphrag- 
mata illa in cribri modum pertufa, ordinata 
funt. Intrahec enim ague vehemens agi- 
tatio rupta frattag, acrem puriorem per A 
canalem [ubtilioremaue emittebat © Verum 
cum poftea taventit fit acré plus equo humi- 
di interioribus Organi meatibus maximu 
detrimentum inferre : Hinc ut aer aquofus 


ficei[si- 









(173) 
| ficcifsimam cofiftentiam acquireret ordinas 
| vimus canalem plumbeum QR. in helicem 
contortum vafi S aliquantulum capaciori in 
modum Urna formato, infertum, Intra 
urnam enim plumbeam cr canalem tortuo- 
fum illifus aer humidus, ita ab omni aquofi- 
tate defacabatur, ut ex furno in Organum 
derivatus dici potuerit, Urna S canalis 
tortuofus Q R ultimum orificium Q infe- 
vitur anemothece organi. Et hunc moaum 
organis hydraulicis omniū aptifsimū reperi. 
Debet autem camera illa fituariin loco 
quantum fieri poteft ficciori ita ut longo ca- 
nali aqua intra eam derivetur ne locus hye 
miditate [ua Organis officiat, 
Thus far the Ingenious Kircherus whom 
I the rather cite, becaufe although I have 
been informed of divers Ventidu&s (as 
they call them) by very knowing Tra- 
vellers that have obferv’d them: Yet this 
relation of our Author being very pun- 
étual, and deliver'd upon his own particu- 
lar Experience, has, I confefs, made me 
with I had had the good fortune when I 
Was at Rome, to take notice of thefe Or- 
gans; or that I had now the opportunity 
of examining of fuch an Experiment. 
For if upona ftri& inquiry I fhould find 
that the breath that blows the Organs 
M 2 does 





















(174) 
do#s not reallyupon the ceafing of its un- 
ufual-agitation. by little and little relapfe 
into.water, [fhould {trongly futpeét that 
“tis poflible for Water to be eaiily tirn'd 
into Air, `I remember indeed, that we 
have formerly taught that.there lurks an 
interfperfed Airin the pores.of. ordinary 
Water, which'may poffibly be ftruck out 
by the) ‘breaking ‘of the Water in its fall 
into the 4olian Chamber, (ashe calls it.) 
Butin regard the Scheme feems to repre- 
fent that Chainber as phar and 
thereby forbids.us.to fuppofe that any Air 
is carried into it but what is latitant in the 
Water, it will {carce feem. probable to 
him who gee how {malla propor- 
tioniof: Air; that appear’d to be when its 
varification feafed, which was conceal’d in 
the Water we -freed from bubbles in our 
Receiver, that fo little Air as: is common- 
ly.dif ifperf Cd through Water, fhould be a- 
bie; info little Water as was requifite for 
fo{mall aroom, to make fo vehement a 
Windas our Author here tells usof. I 
have fometime therefore {uipected, that 
urthis cafe the Wind may be produc’d by 
{mall particles of the waterit felf, forci- 
bly expell’d out of the Chamber into the 
Organs. And to the Objection. to which 
Í fore- 


bis) J ee 

Tfdrefaw this ghefs to be ae namely; 
That, no heat intervening, there appear’d 
nothing that fhould raife the Water into 
exhalations and give them animpulfe. I 
thought ic might be faid that motion a4 
lone; if vehement enough, may, with- 
out fenfibleheat, fuffice to:break Water 
into very minute parts,and make them af- 
cend upwards, if they canno where elfe 
more eafily continue ‘their agitation. For 
Tremember, that Trav elling betwixt Ly- 
ons and Geneva, Iaw, not very far ouvof 
the Way, a place where the River of 
Rhone coming fuddenly to be ftreighten’d 
betwixt two Rocks, fo near each other; 
that a Man may (if my Memory fail’ me 
not) ftand aftride upon both atonceé : that 
rapid Stream dafhing with great impetuo- 
fity againtt its Rocky Boundaries, does 
break part of its Water into fuch minute 
Corpulcles , and put them into fucha mo- 
tion,that Paflengers obferveat a good di- 
{tance off, as it were a M:i arifing from 
that place,- and aicencing a good way up 
into the Air. Such, Thay, was my fuf- 

picion touching the Wind we have been 
confidering, buti itfeems fomething oddë' 
that aqueous Vapors fhould, like a dry 
Wind, pafs through fo long and tortu- 
M 3 ous 














(176) 
ous a Pipe of Lead, as that defcrib’d by 
our Author, fince we fee in the Heads of 
Stills, and the Necks of e£olipiles, how 
quickly fuch vapors are even by avery lite 
tle cold recondenfed into Water. But 
to this alfo fomething may be {pecioufly 
reply’ds wherefore contenting my felf to 
have mention’d our Authors Ex periment 
asaplaufible, thoughnot demonftrative 
proof, that Water may be tranfmutedin- 
to Air. We will pafs on to mention in 
the third place another Experiment,which 
we try’d in order to the fame enquiry, 
We took a clear Glafs bubble (capable 
of containing by ghefs about three Oun- 
ces of Water) with a Neck fomewhat 
Jong and wide, of a Cylindrical form ; 
this we fill'd with Oyl of Vitriol and fair 
water, of eachalmoft a like quantity,and 
cafting in half a dozen {mall Iron Nails, 
we ftopt the mouth of the Glafs (which 
was top-full of Liquor) with a flat piece 
of Diapalma provided for the purpofe, 
that accommodating it felf to the furface 
of the water, the Air might be exqui- 
fitely excluded: and fpeedily inverting 
the Viol, :we put the Neck of it into a 
{mall wide-mouth’d Glafs that ftood rea- 
dy with more of the fame Liquor in it, to 
re- 











(177) 
| receive it,As foon as the neck had reach’d 
the bottom of the Liquor it was dipp’d 
into, there appear’d at the upper patt 
(which was before the bottom) of the 
Viol a bubble, of about the bignefs of 
a Pea, which feem’d rather to confift of 
fmall and recent bubbles, produc’d by the 
action of the diffolving Liquor upon the 
Iron, then any parcel of the external Air 
that might be fufpected to have got in 
upon the inverfion of the Glafs, efpect- 
ally fince we gave time to thofe little 
Particles of Air which were carried down 
with the Nails into the Liquor to fly up 
again. But whence this firt bubble was 
produced, is not fo material to our Expe- 
riment, in regard it was fo {mall: For 
foon after we perceiv’d the bubbles 
produced by the action of the Men- 
firunm, upon the Metal afcending co- 
pioufly to the bubble already named, and 
breaking intoit, did foon exceedingly in- 
creafe it, and by degrees deprefs the wa- 
ter lower and lower, till at length the fub- 
ftance contain’d in thefe bubbles poffeffed 
the whole cavity of the Glafs Viol, and 
almoft of its Neck too, reaching much 
lower in the Neck then the furtace of the 
ambient Liquor, wherewith the open- 

mouthd Glafs was by this means almoft 
M 4 repleni{h- 








































BT Re eS 





F 
replenifhed. And becaufe it might be 
fufpected that the depreffion of the Li- 
quor might proceed from the agitation 
whereinto the exhaling and imprifon’d 
fteams were put, by that heat which is 
wont to retult from that action of corro- 
fivefalts upon Metals, we fuftered both 
the Viol and the open-mouthed Glafs to 
remainas they were, in a Window, tor 
three or four day s and nights rogether: but 
looking upou them feveral times ‘during 
that while, as well as at the expiration of 
it, the whole cavity of the Glafs bubble, 
and moft of its Neck, feem’d: to-be pof- 
fed by Air, fince by its {pring it was a- 
ble for fo long to hinder the expell’d and 
ambient Liquor from regaining its former 
place. Andit was remarkable, that juft 
before we took the Glals bubble out of 
the other Glafs, upon the application 
of a warm hand to the convex part of the 
bubble; the Imprifon’ dfubftance readily 
dilated it felflike Air, and broke through 
the Liquor in divers bubbles, fucceeding 
one another. 

Having alfo another time try’d the like 
Experiment with a {mall Viol, and with 
Nails diffolv’d in Aquaforts, we found 
nothing incongruous to what we have 
now deliver'd. And this Circumftance 
we 










(179) 

we obferv’d , that the newly generated 
fteams did not onel y poffefs almoftall the 
whole cavity of the Glafs, but divers 
times without the affiftance of the heat of 
my hand, broke away in large bubbles 
through the ambient Liquor i into the o- 
pen Air: So that thefe Experiments 
with corrofive Liquors, feem’d maniteft- 
ly enough to prove, though not that Air 

may be ‘generated out of the Water, yet 
thatin general air may be generated anew, 
Laftly, to the foregoing Arguments 
from Experience we might ealily Tubjoyn 
the Authority of Ariffotle, and of (his 
followers) the Schools who are known to 
have taught, that Air and Water being 
Symbolizing Elements (in the quality of 
moifture) are eaftiy tranfmutable into one 
another. But we fhall rather to the fore- 
going Argument adde this, drawn from 
Realon, That if as Leucippus, Democrt- 
tus, Epicurus and others, tollowd by 
divers modern Naturalifts, have taught, 
the difference of Bodies ’ proceeds “but 
from the various Magnitudes, Figures, 
Motions, and Textures of the {mall 
parts they confit of, (all the quali- 
ties that make them differ, being de- 
ducible trom thence) there appeares 
no 








ee 


; 
i 
+) 
i, 
n 
i 
i 
{ 
3 





(180) 

no reafon-why the minute parts of Wa- 
ter, and other Bodies, may not be fo agi- 
tated or connected as to deferve the name 
of Air, For if we allow the Cartefian 
Hypothefis, according to which, as we'no- 
ted at the beginning of this Letter, the 
Air may confift of any terrene or aqueous 
Corpuicles, provided they be kept fwim- 
ming in the interfluent Celeftial Matter ; 
it is obvious that Air may be as often ge- 
nerated, as Terreftrial Particles minute 
enough to be carried up and down, by the 
Celeftial Matter afcend into the Atmo- 
{phere. Andif we will have the Air to 
be a congeries of little flender Springs, it 
f{eems not impoffible, though it be difi- 
cult, that the {mall parts of divers Bo- 
dies may by a lucky concourfe of caufes 
be fo connected as to conftitute fuch 
little Springs, fince (as we note in another 
Treatife) Water in the Plants it nourifhes 
isufually contriv'd into Springy Bodies, 
and even the bare alter’d pofition and con- 
nexion of the parts of a Body may fuf- 
fice to give it a Spring that it had not be- 
fore, as may be feen ina thin and flexible 
Plate of Silver; anto which, by fome 
ftroaks of a Hammer, you may give a 
Spring, and by onely heating it red hot 

you 


(181) 
you may make it again flexible as be- 
fore. 
iThefe, My Lord, are fome of the 
Confiderations at prefent occurring to 
my thoughts, by which it may be made 
probable that Air may be generated a- 
new. Andthough it be not impoffible 
to propofe Objections againft thefe, as 
well as againft what has been reprefented 
in favor of the contrary Doctrine; yet 
having already almoft tyr’d my felf, and 
I fear more then almoft tyr'd Your Lord- 
fhip with fo troublefome an Enquiry af- 
ter the Nature of bubbles, I fhall wil- 
lingly leave Your Lordfhip to judge of 
the Arguments alledged on either fide, 
and I fhould {carce have ventur’d to enter- 
tain You fo long concerning fuch empty 
things as the Bubbles, which have occa- 
fion’d all this Difcourfe, but that I am 
willing to invite You to take notice with 
me of the ob{curity of things, or the dim- 
nefs of our created Intellects (which yet 
of late too many fo far prefume upon, as 
either to Deny or Cenfure the Almighty 
and Omnifcient Creator himfelf ) and to 
learn hence this Leffon, That there are 
very many Things in Nature that we dif- 
dainfully over-look as obvious or defpi- 
wie cable, 






















ei 


— 
Se 


REAA. 


cable, each of which would exercife our: 
Underftandings, if not pofe them too;if 
we would but attentively enough confider 
it, and not fuperficially contemplate, ,buc 
attempt fatisfactorily toexplicate the na- 
ture of it, 





Since the writing of the twenty one and 
~ twenty fecond Experiments (and not- 
withftanding all that hath been. on their 
occafion deliver'd concerning bubbles) we 
made fome: further tryals in profecution 
of the fame inquiry whereto they were 
defigned...; - 


We chofe then, amongft thofe Glaffes 
which Chymifts are wont to call Philofo- 
phical Eggs;'one that containing. abont 
nine Ounces of . Water, hada Neck of 
half an Inch in Diameter at the top, and 
as we gheft, almoft an Inch at the bot- 
toms which breadth we pitch’d upon for 
areafon that will by and by appear: then 
filling it with common Water to the 
height of about a Foot and a half, fo 
that the upper part remain’d empty, we 
fhut it into the Receiver and watch d what 
would follow upon pumping, which pro- 

pee ved 





(183) 

ved that a great part of the Air being 
drawn out, the bubbles began to difcover 
thefnfel ves at the bottom and fides of the 
Glafs , and increafing , as the Air was 
more and more-drawn away ji they did 
from time to-time afcend copioutly e- 
nough to the top of the Water, and there 
quickly break but by reafon that the 
widenefs of the Glafs allow’d;them free 
paflage through the Water, ‘they did not 
appear as in the former Experimeats. to 
make it (well: -The Water fcarce ever ri- 
fing ac all above the mark affixe to its up- 
per {urface when it was put in, and upon 
the return permitted to the outward Airy: 
arid confequently the {hrinking. in of the 
remaining ‘bubbles, the Water feem’d to! 
have loft of its firft extent, by the avo- 
lation of the formerly incerfperf 'd Air. 


Being willing likewife to try whether 
diftilled Water were by having been dis 
vided into minute parts, and then re-unt- 
ted, more or lefs difpofd to expand it 
felt then Water not diftill d: We took 
out of our Laboratory fome careful- 
ly diftill’d Rain-warer , and put about 
two Ounces: of. it into a round Glafs 

bubble, 








(184) 
bubble with a very {mall Neck (not ex- 
ceeding the fixth part of an Inch in Dia- 
meter) which we fill’d half way tothe 
top, and then convey’d it into the Recei- 
ver; the iffue was, That though we drew 
out more then ordinary , yet there ap- 
pear’d not the leaft intumefcence of the 
Water, nor arly afcending bubbles. 

But fufpecting that either the {mall 
quantity of the water or the Figure of the 
Veffel might have an intereft.in this odde 
Phanomenon,we took thelately mention’d 
Philofophical Egge, and another not 
much differing from it; the former we 
filla up with diftill’d Rain-water to the 
old mark, and into the latter we puta 
long Cylinder or Rod of folid Glafs to 
ftreighten the cavity of the Neck by al- 
moft filling it up ; and then pouring fome 
diftilled Water into that alfo, till it 
reach’d within fome Fingers breadth of 
the top, the Eggs were let down into the 
Receiver. In this Experiment the Air 
was fo far drawn forth before there ap- 
Reeds 4 pear’d any bubble in either of the Glaffes, 
mei d that the difparity betwixt this and com- 
| mon water was manifeft enough, But at 
EIE | length, when the Air was almoft quite 

i pump'd out, the bubbles began to a 
clofe 









(185) 

clofe themfelves, and to increafe as the 
preflure of the Air in the Receiver de- 
creafd. But whereas in the firft men- 
tion'd Philofophical Egge the busbies 
were very fmall, and never able to {well 
the Water, that we took notice of, at all 
above the mark: In the other, whofe 
Neck, aswe lately faid, was ftraightned, 
and their paflage obftructed, great num- 
bers of them, and bigger, faftned them- 
felves to the lower end of the Glafs ram- 
mer (if we may fo call ic) and gather’d in 
fuch numbers between that and the fides 
of the Neck, that the Water fwelld ae 
bout 2 Fingers breadth above the mark, 

though upon the admitting of the exter- 
nal Ait it relapf'd to the former mark, or 
rather fell (omewhat below it. And al- 
though thereupon in the firk nam’d Vef- 
fel all the bubbles prefently dif-appear’d, 
yetin the other we obferv’d, that divers 
remained faftned to che lower part of the 
Glafs rammer, and continued there fome- 
what to our wonder, for above an hour 
after, but contracted in their Dimen- 
fions. 


Moreover, having fuftered the Glaffes 
to remain above twenty four hours in the 
Receiver, 

















(186) 


Receiver, we.afterwards repeated the Ex- 
periment, to try what change the ex fucti- 
on of theexternal Air would produce in 
the Water, after the internal and laticant 
Air had (as is above recited) in great mea- 
fure gotawayin bubbles, and whether or 
no the Water would by ftanding re-admit 
any new particles ‘of Air in the room of 
thofe that had forfaken it. But though 
we exhaufted the Receiver very diligent- 
ly, yet we fcarce faw a bubble in either 
of the Glafles; notwithftanding which, 
we perceiv’d the Water to rife about the 
breadth of a Barly-corn, or more, in the 
Neck of that Glafs wherein the folid Cy- 
linder had been put; The Liquor in the 
other Glafs not {enfibly fivelling. 

And laftly, upon the letting in of the 
Air, the Water in the ftraightned Neck 
foon fubfided'to the mark above which 
it had iwollen, which whether it ought 
to be alcrib’d to the fame {mall expanfion 
of the parts of the Water it felt, or to 
the raritaction of fome yet latitant Air 
brokeninto fuch {mall particles, as to e- 
{cape our obfervation, feems not eafily 
determinable, without fuch further tryals, 
as would perhaps prove tedious to be re- 
cited as well as to be made > though I was 
cone 













(187) 
content to fet down thofe already men 
tion’d, that it might appear how requi- 
fite it is in nice Experiments to: confider 
variety of Circumftances. 
























Fter having thus difcover’d what ope- 
ration the exfuction of the ambient £*?e* | 
Air had upon Water, we thought good” *4 
to try alfo what changes would happen in 
other Liquors upon the like taking off the 
preflureof the external Air, We took 
then a Glafs Egge, fomewhat bigger then 
a Turkey Egge, which hada long Neck 
or Stem of about a > part of an Inch in 
Diameter; and filling. it up with Sallet 
Oyl until it reach’d above half way to the 
top of the Neck, we inclofd it in the Re- 
ceiver together with common Water in 
arefembling Veffel, that we might the 
better compare together the operation of 
the exfuction of the Air upon thofe two 
Liquors, The Pump being fet awork there 
began to appear bubbles in the Oy! much 
fooner then in the Water, and afterwards 
they alfo afcended much more copioufly 
in the former Liquor then the latter: Nay, 
and when by having quite tired the Pum- 
per, and almoft our own patience, we 
gave 








(188 ) 


gaveover, the bubbles rife almoft (if 
not altogether) in as great numbers 
asever, infomuch as none of the various 
Liquors we tryed either before or fince, 
feem’d toabound more with Aerial Parti- 
cles then did this Oyl. In which it was 
further remarkable, that between the time 
it was fet into the Receiver, and that at 
which we could get ready to Pump,it fub- 
fided notably (by ghefs about half an 
Tach) below the mark itreach’d before it 
was putin. 

After this exprefl’d Oyl,we made tryal 
of a ciftill’d one, and for that purpofe 
made choice of the common Oy] ox Spi- 
rit (for in the Shops where it is fold, the 
fame Liquor is promifcuoufly call’d by ei- 
ther name) of Turpentine ,; because twas 
enely of that: Chymical Oyi, we had a 
fufficient quantity: which, being put in- 
to a {mail Glafs bubble with a flender 
Neck, foasto fill ic toabout two Inches 
fromthe top, did, upon the evacuating 
of the Receiver, prelent us with great 
{tore of bubbles; molt of, which rifing 
from the bottom, expanded themfelves 
exceedingly in their afcent,. and. made the 
Liquor in the Neck to {well fo much by 


degrees, that anlerccth it divers times ran 


over 








f (189) 
over at the top: by which means, we 
were hindred from being able to difcern 
upon the letting inof the Air, how much 
the fubfidence of the Oy! below the firft 
mark was due to therecefs of the bub- 
bles. 

Having likewife a minde to try whe- 
ther as ftrong a folution of Salt of Tartar 
in fair Water as could be made (we ha- 
ving then no Oy! of Tartar per deliqui- 
nm at hand) though it be accounted , 
Quick-filver excepted , the heavieft of 
Liquors would aftord us any bubbles; we 
put in a Glafs Egge full of it at the fame 
time, with other Liquors, and found that 
they didlong yield ftore of bubbles be- 
fore any difcovered themfelves in the 
Liquor of Tartar; and having purfued 
the Experiment, itappear’d, That of all 
the Liquors we madetryal of, this afford- 
ed the feweft and the {malleft Bubbles. 

Spirit of Vinager being try’d after the 
fame manner, exhibited a moderate num- 
ber of bubbles, but fcarce any thing elfe 
worth the mentioning. 

Nor could we in red Wine, try’din.a 
Glafs Egge, take notice of any thing ve- 
ry obfervable. For though upon theex- 
fuction of the Air the bubbles afcended 
N 2 in 

















(190) 

in this Liquor, as it were in fholes, 
and fhifted places among themfelves in 
their afcent; yet the Intumefcence of the 
whole bulk of the Liquor was {carceat all 
fenfible , the bubbles moft commonly 
breaking very foon after their arrival at 
the top, where during their ftay, they 
compofd a kinde of fhallow froth, which 
alone appear’d higher in the Neck of the 
Glafs, then was the Wine when it was 
firft lec down, Neither yet did Milk,con- 
vey’d into our Pneumatical Veflel, pre- 
fent us with any thing memorable, {ave 

that (asit feem’d by reafon of fome un- 
étuoufnefs of the Liquor) the bubbles 
not eafily breaking at the top, and thruft- 

ing up one another made the intumefcence 
appear much greater then that of common 
‘Water. 

We likewile convey’d Hens E Eggs into 
the Receiver, but, after the ex{uction of 
the Ait,took them out whole again. That 
which invited us to put them in,was, That 
(as perhaps we mention in other Papers) 
we had among other Experiments of 
cold, made Eggs burft, by freezing them 
within doors with Snow and Salt: The 
Ice, into which the aqueous parts of the 
Egge were turned by the cold, fo diftend- 

ing 






(191) 
ing (probably by reafon of the numerous 
bubbles wont to be obfervable in Ice) the 
outward parts of the Egge, that it ufually 
crack’d the fhell, though the inner Mem- 
brane that involv’d the feveral Liquors 
of the Egge, becaufe it would ftretch 
and yield,remain’d unbroken. And here- 
upon we imagin’d that in our Engine it 
might appear whether or no there were 
any confiderable Spring, either in any of 
the Liquors, or in any other more fpiri- 
tuous {ubftance included in the Egge. 
ie took alfo fome Spirit of Urine, 
carelefly enough deflegmed, and putit in- 
to the fame Glas (firtt carefully fcowr’d 
and cleanfd) wherein we had put the Oyle 
olive above mention’d: We took alfo an- 
other Glals, differing from a Glafs Egge, 
onely in that its bottom was flat,and fill’d 
it up to about= of the Neck (which was 
wider then chat of the Egge) with rectifi- 
ed Spirit of Wine, l 
Wetook alfo another Glafs Egge, and 
having fill’dit with common Water till it 
reach'd to the middle of the Neck, we 
pour'd to it of the fame Spirit of Wine, 
till it reach'd about an Inch higher. 
Thefe three Glaffes having marks fet 
on them, over againit the edges of the 
N3 cona 

















































TEA g S: 
















(192) 
contain’d Liquors were put into the Re- 
ceiver, and that beginning to be evacua- 
ted, the bubbles in all the three Liquors 
began to appear, The mixture of the 
Spirit of Wine and Water difclof'd a 
great ftore of bubbles, efpecially towards 
thetop ; but fcarce afforded us any thing 
worth remembring. The Spirit of Urine 
appear’d to {well near an Inch and an half 
above the mark , and befides that, fent 
forth ftore of bubbles, which made a 
kinde of froth at the upper part of it. And 
above that fpume there appear’d eight or 
ten great bubbles one above another, ina 
very decent order, each of them conftitu. 
ting, asit were, aCylinder of about half 
anInchhigh, and as broad as the internal 
cavity ofthe Neck: So that all the upper 
partofthe Neck(tor thefe bubbles reachd 
tothetop) feem’d to be divided into al- 
moft equal parts, by certain Diaphrag- 
mes, confifting of the coats of the bub- 
bles, whole edges appear d like fo many 

Rings fufpended one above another. 
Inthe Spirit of Wine there did arife a 
great multitude of bubbles, even till 
wearinefs did make us give over the Ex- 
periment. And in thefe bubbles two or 
three things were remarkable; as tft, 
- That 





(193) 

That they afcended with avery notable 
celerity: Next, That being arriv’d at the 
top, they made no ftay there, and yet, 
notwithftanding the great thinnefs and 
frirituoufnefs of the Liquor, did, before 
they broke, lift up the upper furface of 
it, and for a moment or two form thereof 
a thin filmor skin which appear’d protu- 
berant above the reft of the fuperficies 
like afmall Hemifphere, Thirdly, That 
they alcended ftraight up, whereas thofe 
produc d at the lower part of the Veflel, 
containing the mixture of the Water and 
Spirit of Wine, afcended with a waver- 
ing or wrigling motion, whereby they 
detcrib’d.an indented Line. Laftly, It 
was obfervable in the Spirit of Wine (and 
we took notice of the like in the Oylof 
Turpentine lately mention’d) that not 
onely the bubbles feem’d to rife from cer- 
tain determinate places at the bottom of 
the Glas, but that in their a{cenfion they 
kept an almoft equal diftance trom each 
other, and tollow’d one auother ina cer- 
tain order, whereby they feem’d part of 
{mall Bracelets, confifting of equally lit- 
tle incontiguous Beads: thelower end of 
each Bracelet, being as it were, faften’d to 
a certain point ac the bottom of the Giafs. 

N 4 The 





{ 


o 


aac a 








(194) 

The Air being fparingly let into the 
Receiver, the great bubbles formerly 
mention’d as incumbent upon one ano- 
ther, in that Gla{s that contain’d the Spi- 
rit of Urine , were by orderly degrees 
Jeflen’d, till at length they wholly fubfi- 
ded, notwithftanding the recefs of fo ma- 
ny bubbles as broke on the top of the 
Spirit of Urine, during all the time of the 
Experiment; yet it fcarcely appear’d at all 
to be funk below the mark:,{Nor did the 
mixture of Spirit of Wine and Water 
confiderably fubfide, But that is no- 
thing to what we obfervd in the Spirit 
of Wine, for not-onely it confpicuoufly 
expanded it felf in the Neck of the 


Velel that contain’d it, notwithftand- 


ing the largenefs of it, and that the 
bubbles were about to break at the 
top of it almoft affoon as they arriv’d 
there: but upon the re-admiffion of 
the external Air, the Spirit of Wine 
retain'd its newly acquired expantion. 
And though we let it alone for near 
an hour together, in expectation that it 
might fubfide,; yet when we took it 
out, we found it Kill {well’d between a 
quarter and half an Inch above the 
mark; and although it was not eafily 

imagi- 


(195) 

imaginable how this Phenomenon could 
‘proceed from any miftake. in trying 
the Experiment, yet the ftrangenefle 
of it invited me to repeat it with frefh 
Spirit of Wine; which, {welling in the 
Neck as formerly , I left all Night in 
the Receiver, allowing free accefs to the 
external Air at the Stop-cock, and the 
next day found it ftill expanded as be- 
fore, fave that it feem’d a little lower: 
which decrement perhaps proceeded from 
the avolation of fome of the fugitive 
parts of fo volatilea Liquor. And for 
better fatisfaction having taken out the 
Glafs, and confider’d it in the open Air, 
and ata Window, I could not finde that 
there was any remaining Bubbles that 
could occafion the perfevering ‘and ad- 
mit’d ex panfion. 


Ex peri- 


Eing defirous to difcover what diffe- i 
Ment 2 a 


rence there might be as to gravity and 
levity, between Air expanded under Wa- 
ter,and it felfe before fuch expanfion,we 
took two very {mall Viols, fuch as Chy- 
mical Effences(as they call them)are wont 
to be kept in,and of the fize and fhape ex- 
prefed by the 8" Figure:into one of thefe 
we 





(196) 

we put fo much of- a certain ponderous 
Mercurial mixture (hapning to'be then at 
hand) that the mouth being ftopt witha 
little foft Wax, the Glafs would juft fink 
in Water andno more; this we let fall to 
the-bottom:.of a wide-mouth’d Cryftal 
Jar, fill’d with about half a pint of com- 
mon Water, and into the fame Veflel we 
funk the other Effence Glafs unftopp’d, 
with as much Water in it as was more 
then fufficient to make it fubfide. Both 
thefe funk with their mouthes downward, 
the former being about three quarters full 
of Air, the latter containing in ita bub- 
ble of Air that was gheil’d to be of the 
bignefs of half a Pea:. This done, the 
wide-mouth’d Glafs was let down into 
the Receiver, and the way of imploy- 
ing the Engine was carefully made ufe 
of. 

The fuccefs was, That having drawn 
out a pretty quantity of Air, the bubbles 
began to difclofe themfelves in the Wa- 
ter, asinthe former Experiments; and 
though for a good while after the bubbles 
afcended in {warms from the lower parts 
of the Water, and haftily broke at the 
top; yet we profecuted the Experiment 
fo long without feeing any effect wrought 

upon 





(197) 

upon the Effence Bottles, that we began 
to difpair of feeing either of them rife, but 
continuing to ply the Pump, that little 
Glafs, whofe mouth was open’d, came to 
the topof the Water, being, as it were, 
boy'd up thither by a great number of 
bubbles that had faftned themfelves to 
the fides of it; {wimming thus with the 
mouth downward, we could eafily per- 
ceive that the internal Air above men- 
tion’d had much delated it felf, and there- 
by feem’dto have contributed to the e- 
merging of the Glafs, which remain’d 
floating , notwithftanding the breaking 
and vanifhing of moft of the contiguous 
bubbles : being hereby incouraged to per- 
fiftin pumping, we obferved with fome 
pleafure, that at each time we turn’d the 
Key, the Air inthe little Glafs did mani- 
feftly expand it felf and thruf out the wa- 
ter, generally retaining avery protuberant 
furface where it was contiguous tothe res 
maining Water. And when after divers 
ex{uctions of the Air in the Receiver, 
that in the little Viol fo dilatedit felf as 
toexpel almoft all the Water, ic turn’d 
up its mouth towards the furface of the 
Water in the Jar, and there deliver’d a 
large bubble, and then relapfed into its 

for- 


E : z 


| 
H 
fi 

y I 
ii 

ey fi 

i 4 i 
| 
i 4 





































former floating pofture : And this Expe- 
riment taught us, among other things, 
that it was a work of more time and la- 
bor then we tmagin’d, to exhauft our En- 
gine as muchas it may be exhaufted: for 
although before the emerging of the {mal} 
Viol, we did (as has been touch’d alrea- 
dy) think: sve had very confiderably em- 
ptyed the Receiver, becaufe there feem’d 
to come out but very little or almoft 
no fenfible Air at each exfuétion into 
and out of the Cylinder; yet after- 
wards, at each drawing down the Suc- 
ker, the Air included in the Viol did 
manifeftly dilate ie felf, fo long, that 
it did no lefs then nine times turn its 
mouth upwards, and difcharge a bub- 
ble by conjecture about the bignefs of 
a Pea, after the manner newly recited. 
But as for that Violl which had the 
weight init, it rofe not at all, So 
that being not able by quick pumping 
to gain another bubble from the Air 
in the {wimming Glafs, which proceed- 
ed from fome {mallleak in the Veflel, 
though it heldin this Experiment more 
ftanch then was ufual, we thought fic 
to let in leafurely the Air from with- 
out, upon whofe admiflion that with- 

in 


(199) 
in the Viol fhrinking into a very nars 
row compafs, the Glafs did, as we expe- 
&ed; fall down to the bottom of the 


ar, secant 
But being defirous before we proceed- 
ed to any new Experiment, totry once . 
more whether the little Glafs that had 
the weight init might not alfo be raifd. 
After we had fuffer’d the Engine to re- 
main clofd as it was, for five or fix 
hours, the Pump was again ply’d with 
fo much obftinacy, that not onely a- 
bout the upper part of the Jar there ap- 
peard a good number of bubbles (but 
very much fmaller then thofe we faw 
the firft time) but afterwards there 
came from the bottom of the Jar, bub- 
bles about the bignefs of {mal Peas:which 
the Pump being ftill kept going, fol- 
low’d one another,to the number of forty, 
coming from the ftopp’d Violl, whofe 
mouth, itfeems, had not been fhut fo 
ftrongly and clofely , but that the included 
Air, dilating it felf by its own {pring made 
it felffome little pailage betwixt the Wall 
_and the Glafs, and got away in thefe bub- 
bles; after which, the unftopp’d Glafs be- 
ganto float again, the Air fhut up in ic 
being 





i 
h 
g 
W 
i 





(200) 


being manifeftly fo dilated as to expel a 
good part of the Water, but not fo much 
as to. break quitethorow. And at length, 
when our expectation of it was almoft ti- 
red out, the heavier of the two Viols be- 
ganto come aloft, and immediately to 
{ubfide again, which appear’d to be oc- 
cafion’d by the Air within it, whofe bulk 
and {pring being weaken’d by the recefs 
of the forty bubbles before-mention’d, it 
was. no longer able, as formerly, to break 
forcibly through the incumbent Water ; 
but forming a bubble at the mouth of the 
Glafs, boyed it up towards the top, and 
there getting away, left itto fink again 
till the preflure of the Air in the Recei- 
ver being further taken off, the Air in the 
Viol was permitted to expand it felf fur- 
ther, and to create another bubble, by 
which it was again for awhile carried up, 
And it wasremarkable, that though after 
hazing emptyed the Receiver as far as 
well we could, we ceaf‘d from pumping; 
yet the Veflel continuing more ftanch 
then it was wont, this afcent and fall of 
the Viol was repeated to the ninth time 5 
the included Air, by reafon of the fmal- 
nels of the vent at which it mutt pals out, 
being not able to get away shen 

ittle 


(201) 

little by little; and confequently,in divers 
fuch, parcels as were able to confticute 
bubbles, each of them big enough to 
raife the Viol and keep it aloft until the 
avolation of that bubble. .Whereby. it 
may appear, that the grand rule in Hy- 
aroftaticks, That a Body will {wim in the 
Water, in cafe it be lighter then as much 
of that Water that equals i it in bulk, will 
hold likewife when the preflure ofthe At. - 
mof(phere is in very great meafure, if not 
when it is totally taken off from the Li- 
quor and the Body : though it were worth 
inquiring what it is that fo plentifully 
concurs to fill the bubbles made in our 
Experiment, by the fo much expanded 
Air, for to fay with the old Peripatetick 
Schools; That the Air, in Rarefaction, 
may acquire;a new extent, without the 
admiffion of, any new fubftance , would 
be an account of the Phetomenon very 
much out of date, and which, I fuppofe, 
eur Modern Naturalifts would neither 
give,nor acquiefs in. 

I know not whether it may be requifi ite 
toadde,, that in this Experiment, as in 
the former, | the,outward Air being let in 
did foon precipitate the floating Viol, But 
Athink it will not be amifs to note, that 

(con: 
































(202) 


(congruoufly to what hath been above 
recorded of the vaft expanfion of the Air) 
the Water which in the heavier Viol fuc- 
ceeded in the room of thofe forty odde, if 
not fifty great bubbles of Air, which at 
feveral times got outof it, amounted but 
to avery inconfiderable bignefs. 


T having been obferv’d by thofe that 
have confider'd what belongs to Pendu- 

lums (a Speculation that may, in m 
poor judgement, be highly ufeful to the 
Naturalifts) that their Vibrations are 
more flowly made, and that their moti- 
on lafts lefs in athicker, then in a thinner 
Medium: We thought it not amifs to 
try if a Pendulum would {wing fafter, or 
continue {winging longer in our Receiver, 
in cafe of the ex{uction of the Air, then 
otherwife. Wherefore we took acouple 
of round and polith’d Pendulums of Iron 
or Steel, of equal bignefs, as near as we 
could get the Artificer to make them, and 
weighing each of them twenty Dragmes, 
wanting asmany Grains. One of thefe 
we fufpended in the cavity of the Recei- 
ver by a very flender filken ftring, of a- 
bout feven Inches and a half in leo 
rom 





(103) 

ftom the cover of the Receiver to which. 
it was faften'd, . Then (by inclining the 
Engine) we made the:Perdulum {wing too 

andfro in it, and defcrib’d as long Arches 
asin the capacity of fo brittle a Veflel we 
thought fafe and convenient. And one of 
the Affittants telli ng the recarfions of the, 
other Pendulum hanging in the free Air, 
by a ftring of about the tame length, we 
fharten’d and | engthen'd this other Pez- 
dulum, till it appeard to keep the fame 
se ae Vibrations, with chat fhuc up in 
he Receiver. -Fhen having carefully 
sah away, the Air; we did again fet the 
Pendulum in the Receiver a vibrating 5 
and giving che other Peadulum fucha mo- 
tion as made it defcribe an Arch, accord- 
ing to ones gheis, equal to that of the in. 
cluded Pendulum; we reckon’d, one of 
us, the Recurfions of that Pendulum which 
was {winging within the Receiver; and 
another of us that which was. moving in 
(that which one would think a much more 
relifting medinm) the Air. But once, one 
of .us reckon’d near two and twenty Re- 
curfions of the included Pesdylum, whilft 
the other reckon’d but twenty of the Pes- 
dulum that vibrated without. Andan- 
other time alfo, the former of thefe Pen- 
O dula 








Sn atc 


(204) 

dula was reckon’d to have made one and 
twenty Recurfions, wherein the other » 
made but twenty: Yet this Experiment 
feem’d to teach us little, fave that the dif- 
ference betwixt the motion of fuch a Pez- 
dulumin the common Air, and in one ex- 
ceedingly rarified, is {carce fenfible in 
Veflels no bigger then our Receiver ; e- 
{pecially fince’ though during this Expe- 
riment it held very well, yet we could 
not fuppole it to be altogether devoid of 
Air. We obferv’d alfo, that when the 
Receiver was full of Air, the included 
Pendulum continu’d its Recurfions about 
fifteen minutes (or 2 quarter of an hour) 
before it left off {winging ; and that after 
the exfuction of the Air, the Vibration 
of the fame Pendulum (being fref putin- 
to motion) appear’d not (by a minutes 
Watch) to laft fenfibly longer. So that 
the event of this Ex periment being other 
then we expected, {carce afforded us any 
other fatisfaction, then that of our not 
having omitted to try it. And whether 
in cafe thetryal be made with a Pendslum 
much lefs difproportionate to the Air then 
Steel is, the event will much bettes an- 
{wer expectation, experience may be con- 
fulted. 

That 





(205) 


T Hat the Airis the medium whereby 
founds are convey’`d to the Ear, has Experi- 
been for many Ages, and is yet the com- cnt 27: 
mon Doctrine of the Schools. But this 
Received Opinion has been of late op- 
pofd by fome Philofophers upon the ac- 
count of an Experiment made by the 
Induftrious Kircher, and other Learned 
Men, who have (as they affure us) ob- 
ferv’d, That if a Bell, with a Steel Clap- 
per, be fo taften’dto the infide of a Tube, 
that upon the making the Experiment Dé 
Vacuo with that Tube, the Bell remained 
f{ulpended in the deferted {pace at the up- 
per end of the Tube: And if alfo a vi- 
gorous Load- ftone be apply’d on the out- 
fide of the Tube to the Bell, it will at- 
tract the Clapper, which upon'the Remo- 
val of the Load-ftone falling back, will 
{trike againft the oppofite fide of the 
Bell, and thereby produce a very audible 
found; whence divers have concluded» 
That ‘tis not che Air, but fome more fub- 
tle Body that is the medium of founds. 
But becaufe we conceiv’d that, to invali- 
date fuch a confequence from this ingeni- 
ous Experiment (though the moft lucite- 
O 2 TOUS 













(206y 


rous, that could well be made without 
fae fuch, Engine as ours) fome things 
might be fpecioufly enough al leadg'd; we 
thought fit to makea try: alor two, in or- 
der to the Difcovery of what the Air does 
in conveying of founds, referving divers 
other Experiments tryable i in our Engine 
concerning founds, till we can obtain more 
Jeafure to profecute them. Conceiving it 
then the beft way:to make our tryal with 
fuch a noife as might not beloud ‘enough 
to make it difficult tro difcern flighter va- 
riations in it, but_rather might be, both 
lafting, that we might take notice by what 
degrees it decreal’d ; and fo (mall, that 
it could not grow much weaker with- 
out becoming tmperceptible.* We took 
a Watch, whole Cafe we open’d, that 
the contain’d,Atr might have free egrels 
into that of the Receiver, And this Watch 
was fufpended in the cavity of the Veflel 
onely by a Pack-thred, as the unlikelieft 
thing to convey a found to the top of the 
Receiver : And then clofing up the Vef- 
tel wich melted Plaifter, we liftend near 
the fides of it, and plainly enough heard 
the noife made by the ballance. Thofe al- 

fo of us, ce watch’d for that ie 
ftance, obferv’d, that the noife feem’d to 
come 











(207) 

come dir e&ly i in a ftraight Line from thé 
Watch unto the Ear. And it was obferva- 
ble to this purpofe, that we founda mani- 
felt difparity of noife,by holding our Ears 
near the fides of the Receiver, and néar the 
Cover of it: which difference (éem’d to 
sain from that of the Texture of the 
Glafs, from the ftructure of the cover(and 
of the Cement) through which the found 
was propagated from the Watch to thé 
Far. But let us profecute our ee 

The Pump after this being imployd, 
feemd that from time to time the fot 
grew fainter and fainter ; fo chat when the 
Rec iver was empty’d as much as it utd 
to be for the foregoing Experiments, net- 
ther we, hor fome ftrangers that chane’d 
to be then in the room,could, by applying 
our Ears to the very fides, hear any noife 
from within ; though. we could ea fily per- 
ceive that by the moving of. the hand 
which mack’d the fecond minutes, and by 
that of the ballance,: that the Watch net- 
ther ftood ftil;nor remarkably varied from 
its wonted motion. And to fatisfie our 
felvs further that it was indeed the ablence 
of the Air about the Watch that hinder d 
us from hearingic, we let in the external 
Airat the Scop-cock,and then though we 
Og turn’d 





(208) 


rurn’d the Key and ftopt the Valve,yet we 
could plainly hear the noife made by the 
ballance, though we held our Ears fome- 
times at two Foot diftance from the out- 
fide of the Receiver. And this Experi- 
ment being reiterated in another place, 
fucceded atter the likemanner, Which 
feems to prove, that whether or no the 
Air be the onely, itis at leaft, the princi- 
pal medium of Sounds. And by the way 
itis very well worth noting, that ina Vef- 
fel fo well clofd as our Receiver, fo weak 
a pulfe as that of the ballance of a Watch 
fhould propagate a motion to the Ear ina 
Phifically ftraight Line, notwithftanding 
the interpofition of fo clofe a Body as 
Glafs, efpecially Glafs of fucht thicknefs 
as thatof our Receiver; fince by this tt 
feems that the air imprifon’d in the Glals, 
muft, by the motion of the ballance, be 
made to beat again{t the concave part of 
the Receiver, ftrongly enough to make 
its convex part b:at upon the contiguous 
Air, and fo propagate the motion to the 
Liftners ears, I know this cannot but 
feem ftrange to thofe, who, with an emi- 
nent Modern Philofopher, will not allow 
that 2 Sound, made in the cavity of a 
Room, or other place fo clofd, that there 

IS 





(209) . 

is no intercourfe betwixt the external and 
internal Air, can be heard: by thofe with- 
out, unlefs the founding Body do imme- 
diately {trike againft {fome part of the in- 
clofing Body. But not having now time 
to handle Controverfies, we fhall onely 
annex, Thatatter the foregoing Experi. 
ment, we took a Bell of about two Inches 
in Diameter at the bottom, which was 
fupported inthe midft of the cavity of 
the Receiver by a bent ftick, which by 
reafon of its Spring prefl'd with its two 
ends againft the oppofite parts of the in- 
fide of che Veffel : in which, when ıt was 
clofd up, we obferv’d that the Bell feem’d 
to found more dead then it did when juft 
before it founded in the open Air. And 
yet, whenatterwards we had as. formerly 
emptyed the Receiver, we could not dif- 
cern any confiderable change (for fome 
faid they obferv'd a {mall one)in the loud- 
nefs of the found, whereby icfeem’d that 
though the Air be the principal medium 
of found, yet either a more {ubtle mat- 
ter may be alfo a medium of it, or elfean 
ambient Body that contains but very 
few particles of Air, in comparifon of 
thofe itis eafily capable of, is fufficient 
for that purpofe, And this, among o- 

O 4 ther 














(210) 
ther things, invited us'to confider whether 
inthe, above-mention’d Experiment made 
with the Bell and the Load-ftone,: there 
might not in the deferted part of the Tube 
remein Air enough to produce a found: 
‘fince the Tubes for the Experiment De 
Vacuo : (not to mention the ufual- thin- 
nefs of the Glafs) being feldom made 
‘greater then is requifite, alittle Air might 
bear 2 not inconfiderable proportion to 
the deferted {pace. And that alfo, inthe 
Experiment De Yacno, as itis wont to be 
made, thereis generally fome little Air 
that gets in from without,or at leaft {tore 
of bubbles that arife fromthe Body of 
the Quick-filver, or other Liquor it felf, 
Obfervations heedfully made have fre- 
quently informed us: And it may alfo 
appear, by what has been formerly deli- 
vered concerning the Torriccllian Experi- 
ment. 

On the occalion of this Experiment 
concerning founds, we may adde in’ this 
place, That when we try d the Experiment 
formerly mention’d, of. firing Gun.pow- 
der with a Piftolin our evacuated Recei- 
ver, the noife made by the dtriking of the 
Flint againft the Steel, was exceeding 
languid in comparifon of what It: sr 

ave 








(211) 

have been in the open Air. Andon idi- 
+ vers other occafions it appear’d that. the 
founds created within our exhaufted 
Glafs, if they werenot loft before they 
reach’d the Ear, feem’d: at leaft to arrive 
there very much weaken’d, We intended 
to try whether or no the Wire-ftring of an 
Inftrument {hut up into: our Receiver: 
would, whenthe ambient Air was {uck'd 
out,at all rremble,if in another Inftrument 
held clofe toit, but without the Recetver 
aftring tun’d (as Muficians fpeak, how 
properly I now examine notjto an Unifon 
with it, were briskly touche, and fet a Vi- 
brating. This, I fay, we purpofd to try 
to fee how the motion made in: the Air 
without, would be propagated throughthe 
cavity of our evacuated Receiver. . But 
when the Inftrument wherewith the tryal 
was to be made came to be imploy’d, it 
prov d too big to go into the Pneumatical 
Veflel, and we have not now the conveni- 

cacy to have a fitter made, 


We thought likewife to convey into 
the Receiver a long and flender pair of 
Bellows, made after the fafhion of thofe 
ufually employ’d to blow.Organs;ane fur. 
nill’d with a {mall Mufical inftead of - 

ordi- 




















(212) 
ordinary Pipe. For we hop’d, that by 

means of a ftring faftned to the upper 
-part of the Bellows, and to the moveable 
{topple that makes a part of the Cover 
of our Receiver, we fhould, by frequent- 
ly turning round that ftopple, and the an- 
nexed ftring, after the manner already 
often recited, be able to lift up and diftend 
the Bellows; and by the helpof acom- 
petent weight faften’dto the fame upper 
partof the Bellows, we fhould likewife 
be able, at pleafure, tocomprefs them : 
and by confequence, try whether that 
fubtler matter then Air (which, accord- 
ing tothofe that deny a Vacuum, mult be 
fuppofd to fill the exhaufted Receiver) 
would be able to produce a found in the 
Muafical Pipes or in a Pipe like that of or- 
dinary Bellows, to beget a Wind capable 
toturnor fet amoving fome very light 
matter, either fhap’d like the Sails of a 
Wind- Mill, or of iome other conveni- 
‘ent form, and expof‘d to its Orifice. This 
Experiment, I fay, we thought to make, 
but have nor yet actually made it tor want 
of an Artificer to make us fuch a pair of 
Bellows as it requires. 

We had thoughts alfo of trying whe- 

ther or no, as Sounds made by Bodiesin 
our 


(213) : 

our Receiver become: much more, languid 
then ordinary, by reafon of the want of 
Air, fo they would grow ftronger, in cafe 
there were an unufual quantity of Air 
crduded and fhut up in the fame. Veffel, 
which may be done (though not without: 
fome difficulty) by the help of che Pump, 
provided the Cover and Stopple be fo 
firmly faften'd (by binding and Cement, 
or otherwife) to the Glafs ;. and to each 
other, thar there be no danger of the 
conden{’d Airs blowing of either of them 
away, orits breaking through the jun- 
Gures, Thefe thoughts, My Lord, as Í 
was faying, weentertain’d; but for want 
of leafure, as, of as good Receivers as 
ours, to fubftitute in its place, in cafe we 
fhould break it before we learn’d the skill 
of condencing the Air init, we durft not 
put them in practice: Yet, on this occa- 
fion, give me leave to advertife Your 
Lordfhip once for all, That though for 
the reafons newly intimated, we have, 
Onely in the feventeenth Experiment, 
taken notice, that by thehelp of our En- 
gine the Air may be condenf'd as well as 
ratified; yetthereare divers other of our 
Experiments, whofe Phenomena it were 

| worth 














(214) 
worthwhile to try: tovary, by means o 
pa es hs of seo us 


t 


Experi- y VE satin among divers: other 
mnt 28. things, when we difcourt'd of our 
firft' Experiment; That the Air fhut up in 
our’ Receiver, prefleth as ftrongly upon 
the Bodies fhut up with it, as it they 
were ex pofd to the-preflure of the whole 
Atmofphere, ‘That. this was not incon- 
fiderately propounded, we hope Your 
Lordfhip has gather’d from divers of the 
things already recited : But yet’ perhaps it 
will not be amifs to fubjoyn, by way of 
further confirmation of the fame truth,the 
following Experiment, which fhould have 
ny! 8 accompanied the 2.0, but the Paper where 
ay in the one was written chanc'd not to beat 

, hand, when the other was fent away. 
nE We convey’d into the Receiver anew 
Glafs Viol, capable of holding about 6 or 
7 ounces of Water, into which we had 
before put 2 or 3 Spoon-fulls of that Li- 
quor, and ftopt it clofe with a fir Cork. 
The Pneumatical Veflel being empty’d, 
there appear’d not any change in the in- 
clofd Water, the Air imprifon’ dwith it, 
not having the force to blow out the ftop- 
ple, 






75) | 
ple, which event, though it wére:no ‘other 
then we expected,was differing:from what 
we defir’d-For we'would gladly: have feen 
what change would‘have.appear’d-in the Hie 
Water upon the Botrles:being fuddenly Md 
unftopp’d , in a place where the ambient ia 
Body was fo differing from our ‘common TEJER 
Air, Wherefore-wedid again:putin the tH 
Viol, but lefs ftrongly clofd:then for- 
merly, though as ftrongly ftope as feem’d 
requifite on ordinary occafions : But when 
the Air was pamp’d out of the’Receiver, 
that within the Viol did qui¢kly,. as we 
expected, find‘orimake it felf little pafla- 
£es.co get. outat:as weargu’d,' trom_this, 
That whereas when the Viol was pac in: 
the time before, the: Water remiain’d alk: 
the: while perfectly freë from bubbles. at a 
this time the bottom of the Glafs ap- 
pear’d all cover’d’ with them, andthey} aera 
upon the.regre{sof the excluded Aif into ae 
the Receiver, did pretently flag and fhrink 
up. Som Udy 90290 eiat 
‘From thefe:tryals it feem’d' deducible 
enough, cthatwhiltt: the Viol: continu d 
to be well ftopr,s: the includéd Water 
did, from the Air; fhue up with it, 
fuftain a preffurei equal to that of the 
Atmofphere ; dince till the Air could get 
T out 


















































(216) 
out of the:Glafs, there appear’d no bub- 
bles in:the Water, notwith{tanding the 
want.of preflure inthe ambient Body. ~; 
But to be fure to reach the chief endiof 
our Experiment, wemade ufe of this o- 
ther expedient: We caufd a convenient 
-quantity of: Water to be put, and Her- 
metically fhut up into.a Glafs Egge, to 
whofe long Neck (which was purpofely 
made of am unequal. thicknefs) was fa- 
ften’d ‘to’ one end of 2 ftring, whofe o- 
ther end was ty’d to the Cover of our 
Receiver,after the manner elfewhere men: 
tion’d already: Then.the Egge being 
convey’d into the Pneumatical Veffel , 
and that being evacuated, we did, by 
turning the brafs Stopple formerly de-: 
fcrib’d amongft the parts of our En- 
gine; fo fhorten the {tring as to break the 
Glafs;. whereby liberty being given to 
the Air imprifon’din the Egge, to pafs 
into the capacity of the Receiver, the fud- 
den receis of the Air made the bubbles in 
a trice appear fo numerous , and afcend 
fo {wiftly in the Water, that their motion 
Jook’d like that of a violent fhower of 
Rain; fave that the bubbles did not, like 
* the drops of Rain, tend downwards, but 
upwards, which made me refemble he 
Phas 


(217) 
Phenomenon to what I have feen happen 
inthe diffolution of Seed-Pearl in fome 
acid MenfEruum, in which, ifa good quan- 
tity of the little Pearls be caft whole, they 
will at firft, if the Mezfiruum be fharp e- 
nough, be carryed in {warms from. the 
bottom tothe top of the Liquor. We 
will adde, that without fealing up the 
Glafs, this Experiment may be tryd in 
one of our {malleft Receivers, for there * 
the exfuction of the ambient Air may be 
perform’d fo nimbly, that immediately 
the bubbles lurking in the Water are al- 
low'dto difplay themfelves, and afcend: 
in throngs, infomuch, as having in fuch 
a Receiver tryd the Experiment with 
Wine (as amore fpirituous Liquor) in- 
ftead of Water, the Red-Wine appear'd ` 
all cover'd, with a copious, but vanifhing 
white Froth, almoft as if a Veffel full of 
botrl’d drink had been unwarily open‘d. 





a 


ut 


; ‘a i 
| 


ý may nota little conduce to the clear~ Experi? 

= er explication of divers Points in the mest 29. 
Doctrine of Meteors, and perhaps. of 
fome other Phyfiological difficulties, to 
difcover what the Air does to the motion 
of thofe Steams or Exhalations that af- 
cend 










(218) 
cénd into it, namely, Whether they-mounc 
upwards by vértue of any fuch pofitive le- 
vity'(as fome. Peripateticks (peak) ac- 
quir'd together with their Aérial nature, 
as mables ‘them to pierce through -part of 
the Atmofphere, and over-come its re- 
fiftänce. Or elfe, whether thefe fteams 
being once raifd:above the Earth by their 
agitation, have- theirafcent and fuftenta- 
tion aloft, ratherpromoted then hindred 
by. the-Air: as the inferior parts of that, 
being thicker and heavier then the fupe- 
rior, P the fteaths can more eafil ly continue 
fora while their agitation upwards then 
downwards ; And “afterwards are by the 
fame fluidity and’ thicknefs of the Air, 
carried to and fro in it, and kept from re- 
lapfing to the Earth, asin the’ Seawater 
the faline parts are Ep fromfubfiding by 
thofe aqueous ones w herewith they are 
aflociated. 

Wehop‘d to il luftrate this matter, by 
obferving the motion of the fmoke, pro- 
ceeding from kindled or flaming Bodies'in 
our exhaufted Receiver. But as we for- 
metly noted, upon the exfuction. of the 
Air, the fmoking of thofe Bodies pre- 
fently ceafd, Wehad thoughts alfo of 
conveying into our Pneumatical Glafsa 
hot 





(219) 

hot Iron, with fome:Bòdy ealie to bé 
diffipated into fmoke fecupon it, but cons 
fiderd, that neither was that way free 
from inconveniencies ; efpecially this,tha¢ 
the hot Body would make the Imprifon’d 
Air circulate within theReceiver, and 
confequently make ıt queftionable whe¢ 
ther the afcent of the {teams would nog 
be due to the new and acquired motion of 
the Air. : 

Wherefore I bethought my felf ofan- 
other way to fatisfiein {ome meafure my 
curlohty, to wit, by means of a certain 
Liquor, which I call’d to minde that fome 
years ago Thad (fora defign that belongs 
not co: our prefent purpofe) prepar’d s 
which, I. fuppofe, I {hew'd Your Lord- 
fhip, and which had the:luck to be tas 
ken notice of by divers. very Ingenious 
and. Famous Men. For this. Liquors 
though moft of its Ingredients be Metals, 
and all of them ponderous enough, is yet 
of that nature, that whilft the Viol wheres 
in itis kept is ftope (how flight a Cover 
foever) both the Liquor and the Glafs 
are tranfparent; and fo.is that upper halt 
of the Glafs to which the Liquor reaches 
not. But atloonas ever the ftopple is ta- 
ken out, and full accefs is given to the ex- 

P ternal 














{220} 
tetnal Air, both’ the inward past of the 
Cork, andthe Liquor it felf,: do prefent- 
ly fend upwards, and f{catter abroad a 
fume-as thick and white, asif there were 
a quantity of Alablafter-duft thrown up 
into the Air: And this {moking of the 
Liquor lafts till my unwillingne(st to wafte 
itg invites me'ftóp it again ; and then the 
afcenfion of the fumes fuddenly ceates, till 
the Viol be again unftop’d. j 

This fuming Liquor then I thought 
would much : -conduce to the difcovery I 
defir’d to make, fince it fav’d me the need 
of ‘conveying any. hot Body with it into 
the Receiver, ‘and would not-darken it 
with fumes before the time; Wherefore 
having ty’d tothe Viol a great weight of 
Tead, to keepit from being lifted up by 
the drawing out of the Cor ks ; and having 
ry’d tothe ftopple one end of a: ftring, of 
which the other end was made faft:to the 
Cover of the Pneumatical Glafs, the Li- 
quor was carefully clofd up: after the 
wonted manner; thenthe Air being dili- 
gently pump’d out, the Viol was unftopr 
in the empty’d- Receiver: and though 
immediately, npon the drawing out of the 
Cork, there appeat’d to be as it were 
thrown up fome white fumes, which 
 feem'd 





(221) 
feem’d' to proceed fromthe Air before 
imprifon’d in the Viol, and diffufing it 
felf fuddenly into the capicity of the 
Receiver. Yer we afterward obferv’d, 
as we expected, That the fumes did not 
mount and difperfe themf{elves as they 
ufe to do inthe open Air, but that, when 
by reafon of the agitation of the Cor- 
pufcles of the Liquor, which could noe 
continue their motion in fo narrow a 
{pace as the Viol afforded them, and were 
therefore reduc’d to thruft one another 
out of ic; when, I fay, by thefe afi- 
ftances the fumes were afcended to the lip 
of the Viol, they mounted no higher, 
but ran down along the out-fideof the 
Viol to the bottom of it; and thence 
along, a long and inclining piece of Lead, 
on which the Viol refted, like a little 
Stream (not very much bigger then a 
Swans Quill) whofe nature it feemd to e- 
mulate fo well, that it quitted not the Viol 
tillit was come tothe bottom of it, and 
then forfook it in fuch a manner as 2 
on, of Water of the fame bignefs 
would have done. And this ftream lafted 
apretty while, and would probably have 
lafted longer, but that being loath to wafte 
my Liquor, I letin at the Stop-cock a 

P 2 pretty 
































(222) 

pretty deal of the external Airs notwith? 
ftanding which, finding after awhile the 
ftream did run afrefh, though, as it feem'd, 


‘not altogether fo copious as before: I let 


as much more Air, as would, come in,and 
found (fomewhat to my wonder) that 
though the ftream for inerly mention’d 
dif-appear’d, yet there appear’d not any 
white fumes to arife either from theC ork, 
or out of the Viol it felf, no not when 
the Cover was remov'd from the aes 
vers though not onely after a while ther 
afcended white Fumes from the Receiver: 
but having forthwith taken out the Viol 
into the open Air, it emitted white ex- 
halations as before ; and having prefently 
after unftop’d it in an open Window, we 
found bothit and the Cork immediatly 
to fend forth a yet much more plentiful 
{moak. Though it be now divers years 
fince this Numerical Liquor was prepa- 
red, after the manner mention’d either 
by Caraeiades or Eleutherius (tor Ido not 


well remember which) in thofe Dialogues 


-concerning Heat and Flame that have a- 


bove been mention’d. 

More Circumftances concerning thefe 
Fumes we might have obferv’d, had we 
not been deterr’d by an Indifpofition in 
point 





(223) 
point of health, from having much to dd 
with {teams of fo dangerous anature,as by 
that of the Ingredients of this Liquor 
thefe fem likely to be of. 


The Reflections that may be made up- 
onthis Experiment, we have not now the 
leafure to profecute, and therefore fhall 
content our felves to recommend the fe- 
veral Circumftances of it to Your Lord- 
fhips ferious confideration, and to take 
notice (ez paffamt) that {teams inan am- 
bient Body, or a medium thinner then 
themfelves, may both tend downwards, 
and otherwife emulate the nature of a 
Liquor; which I therefore point at, that 
ic may appear the lefs {trange, if we fomes 
times {peak of the Atmof{phere as of a 
kinde of Liquor, in comparifon of that 
more thin and fubtle Celeftial Matter that 
{urrounds it. 


And though it might perchance fuf- 
fice to have on this occafion intima- 
ted thus much, yet, left this way 
of {peaking of the Atmofphere fhould 
be thought too bold: and extra- 
vagant, I am content to borrow an 
Experiment of the Difcourfe former- 

| P3 y 














(224) 

{y mention’d (touching fluidity and firm 
nefs) and fubjoyn it here with alterations 
fuitable to the contrivance of our Engine; 
and this the rather, becaufe I hope it may 
conduce to the difcovery of the nature of 
the Atmofphere: for which reafon it 
might have been annext to what has been 
noted either upon the firft, or eighteenth 
Experiment, but that when they were 
Written and fent away, it came not into 
my minde. The Experiment then as we 
try’din our Engine, was as follows. 


E took one of the {mall Receivers, 


prent 30» often mention’d already, and into it 







we convey da piece of well lighted Match; 
and letting it remain there till it had fill’d 
the Receiver with {moak, we took it out 
and haftily clofd again the Receiver, thar 
the fmoak might not get away. Then 
ftaying awhile to let thefe fumes leifurely 
fubfide, we found,' 2s we expected, that 
after fome time they fetled themfelves in 
the lower half of the Receiver, ina dark- 
ifh Body, leaving the upper half of the 
Receiver tran{parent, and as to fight, full 
of nought but clear Air. Now to mani- 
feft-that this {moak thus fetled ty 
a Lie 





(225) 

a Liquor, we inclin’d the Engine that cons 
tain dit, fometimes to one fide,and fomes 
times to. the other; and obferv’d the 
fmoak to. keep its furface almoft Hori- 
zontal, notwithftanding the ftooping of 
the Vettel that held it, as Water or ane 
other Liquor would in the like cafe have 
done. And if by aquicker rocking of .che 
Engine the ímoke were. more {witcly fha- 
ken, it would, like Water, either Vibrate 
to and fro from one fide to the other of 
the Glafs,or elfe have its furface manifelt- 
ly curll’d with Waves, but preferve its 
{elf in an intire and diftin@ Body from the 
incumbent Air; and being permitted to 
reft awhile, would foon recover its for- 
mer {mooth and level faperficies s If alfo 
the Key were turwd andthe. Valve un- 
ftopp’d, fo that there was a free, though 
but anarrow paflage open‘d betwixt the 
external Air and the cavity of the Recei- 
ver, then would fome of this fmoak fall 
dow n, as it were, ina ftream into the fub- 
jacent Cylinder, and a proportionate 
quantity of the outward Air, would ma- 
nifeftly afcend through it into the incum- 
m Aur, much after the fame m; anner as 
if you invert a Viol witha long Neck,and 
well fill’d’ with Red-Wine , into a Glafs 
P 4, full 














fide. 





(226) 

Full of fair water, you fhall fee the Water 
andWine by degrees mingle with one an- 
other; the one falling downe as it werein 
little colour'd ftreames, and the other af. - 
cending into its room in the like curled 
ftreames , fometimes preceded by round 
parcels of water swhich,by reafon of their 
tran{parency, looke almoft like bubbles. 
The other circumftances of this Ex peri- 
ment, belonging not all of them to our 
prefent purpofe, we fhall content our 


{elves with taking notice of one which 


feemes the moft important, and may illu- 

itrate and confirme fome things former- 
ly delivered, And it was, That it, when 
the [uperficies of our Smoke lay fmooth 
‘and horizontal, ahot iron were held near 
the out fide of the Receiver, the Neigh- 

‘bouring part of the included fumes ( for 
the reft did not very much alter their for- 
met /uperficies) being ratified by the heat, 

would readily afcend ina large Pillar of 
{moke to the very top of the Receiver, 

‘yet without feeming to loofe a diftingt 
fuperficies,or to be confounded with Airs 
‘below which 5°: upon the recefs of the ad- 
ventitious heat that by agitating it im. 
pell’d it upward , it would againe fub- 


All 


(227) 

Alt which being added to the late Ex? 
periment of the {moking Liquor, and 
to what may be from that which has been 
elfewhere fayd, gather’d to the fame pur- 
pofe, will, hope, keep it at leaft from ap- 
pearing abfur’d: If fince we fee that there 
is fo great an inequality in the denfiry and 
weight of Liquors ,that water is neere 14 
times thinner or lighter thanQuick-filver 
of the fame bulk, and well dephlegm'd; 
Spirit of Wine yet much lighter than wa~ 
ter ; we venter to {peak fometimes of the 
Atmofphere, as if it were a peculiar kind 
of thin and halicuous Liquor ( if I may fo 
call it) much lighter chan Spirit of Wine, 

To thefe things I know not whether it 
will be requifite toadd, that as we late- 
ly took notice of confpicuous waves that 
appear'd upon the /wperficies of our agi- 
tated {moke. So fome fuch thing may 


not abfurdly be conjectur’d to happen 


on the fuperficies of the Atmofphere , 
by thofe ftrange ruggednefles that ap- 
peare (efpecially inthe Spring and Fall, 
when exhalations and vapours are wont to 
a{cend moft plentifully } upon the Limb 
or Edge of the Rifing and Setting Sun, I 
{peake thus diffidently upon this occafion 


becaufe I know that by the Fluctuation or 


Boyling 











(228). 
Boyling of the Sun’s own [uperficies di- 
verfe eminent Mathematicians have plau- 
fibly. enough ( but how truly I leave 
your Lordthip to Judge ) endeavour'd to 
give an Account of it, ‘But if we will j joine 
with thofe that have afcrib’d of late this 
Phanomenon tothe Refraction the Sun- 
Beames fuffer in our vapid Air; we may, 
as hath beenintimated,promote their Do- 
Grin by deducing from it, that probably 
the furtace Atmofphere is oftentimes (if 
not alway~s)ex ceedingly curl’d or wav'd. 
And certainly it is fomewhat wonderfull 
as well as very pleafant to behold, how, 
to him that looks upon the fetting Sun 
through a long & excellent Teleicope, 
there will not only appeare ftrange ine- 
qualities in the edge of it ( infomuch thar 
I have often feen it more indented thana 
Saw ) but thofe inequalities will vamfh in 
one place and prefently appeare inano- 
ther, and feem perfectly to move like 
waves fucceeding and deftroying one an- 
„other; fave that their. Motion oftentimes 
feemes to be quickeft as ifin that vaft fea 
they were carried on by.a current, or at 
leaft by atide. And this ( as we elfe 
where note ) appegr’s to the eye not on- 
ly whenit looks directly through the te- 
lefcope 








(329) 

fefcope upon the funne; but alfo when a 
farge and well defin’d image of the funne 
is by the fame telef{cope brought into a 
roome and caft upon a fheet of white pa- 
per. Butto infift on this wereto digrefs: 
and therefore I will proceed tọ experi- 
ments of another kind, 


JE has been admir’d by very ingenious Eper- 
Men, that if the exquifitly polifh’d”” 3%: 
furfaces of two flat peeces of marble be fo 
congruous to eachother that from their 
mutuall application there will refule an 
immediate contact, they will ftick fo faft 
together, that he that lifts up the upper- 
moft, fhall, ifthe undermoft be not ex- 
ceeding heavy, liftup that too, and fuf- 
taine it aloft in the free aire. A proba- 
ble caufe of this fo clofe adhefion we have 
elfewhere endeavour’d to deduce from the 
unequall preflure of the Air upon the un- 
dermoft {tone , For the lower fuperficies 
ofthat {tone being freely expos’d to the 
Airis preff'd upon by it, whereas theup- 
permoft furface, being contiguous to the 
fuperiour {tone, is thereby defended from 
the preflure of the Air which confequent- 
ly prefling the lower ftone againft the up- 
pet 5 










(230) ; 
per, hinders it from falling, aswe have 
elfewhere more fully declar’d . Upon 
thefe grounds we conjectur’d that in cafe 
we could procure two marbles exactly 
ground to oneanother; and in cafe we 
could alfo fufhiciently evacuate our Re- 

eiver , the lower ftone would, for want 
of the wonted and fuftaining preffure of 
the Air, fall from the upper. But the 
further tryal of thisEx periment we muft, 
unlefs your Lorafhip think it worth Your 
making at Pars, put off till a fitter 
opportunity. For where we now are , We 
cannot procure marbles foexeétly ground, 
that they will fuftaine one another in the 
Air, abovea minute or two, whichis a 
n uch thorter time than the emptying of 
our Receiver requires. We did indeed 
try to make our marbles ftick clofe to- 
gether by moiftening their pollifhed fur- 
faces with rectifi'd {pirit of Wine, in re- 
gard that Liquor by its fudden avolation 
from marble, if powr'd thereon, without 
leaving it moift or lefs{mooth, feem’d 
unable to füftaine them together after the 
manner of a glutinous body , and yet 
feem’d fufficient to exclude and keep out 
the Air, But this we try’dto little pur. 
pofe, for having convey dinto the Recei- 
ver 








(231) 

yer two black {quare marbles (the one of: 
two inches and a third in length or 
breadth, and fomewhat more than halfe 
an inch in thicknefs: The other of the fame 
extent, but not much above halfe fo 
thick ) faften’d together by the interven- 
tion of pure Spirit of Wine , and having 
fufpended the thicker by a ft: ‘ing from the 
cover, we found not that the exfuttion of 
the ambient Air would teparate them , 
thougha weight amounting to four oun- 
ces were faften’d to the lowermoft mar- 
ble to facilitate it’s falling off. 

I would gladly have the Experiment 
tryd with ‘marble fo well pollifh’t as to 
need no Liquor whacfoever to make them 
cohere , and ina Velel out of which the 
Air may be more perfectly drawn thanit 
was out of ours, Butin the meantime 
though we will not determin whether the 
Spirit of wine did contribute to the ttrong 
cohefion of thefe tones, otherwife than 
by keeping ev'n the fubel’ft parts of the 
Air from getting in between them, yet it 
feemed that the not falling downe of the 
lowermoft marble might without impro- 
bability be afcrib’d to the preflure of the 
Air remaining in the Receiver; which as 
we formerly noted having been able 

to 


















P. Nic. 
Zucchius 
apud Schot: 
pait i. 
«Mec: Hy- 
draulo- 
pac Me 





| (232) 
to keep a Cylinder of water of above 
a Foot in height from falling to the bot- 
tom of the Tube, may well enough be 
fuppofd capable of keeping fo broad a flat 
Marble from defcending. And though this 
may feem a f{trange proof of the ftrength of 
the {pring of Air,ev’n when rarified, vet it 
will {carce feem incredible to him that has 
obferv’d how exceeding ftrong a cohefion 
may be made betwixt broad Bodies, one- 
ly .by their immediate touching one ano- 
ther. A notable inftance of which, I 
have met with inthis fhort Narrative of 
the Learned Zucchius, Fuveni (fays he) 
lacertorum [uorum robur: jactastt propo- 
fita femel eff lamina area, per anfam in 
medio extantem apprehenfam elevanda È 
tabula marmorea, cui optime congruebat : 
qui primo tanquam rem ludicram puero 
committendam contempfit : tum iaftanti- 
bus amicis Manum utrámgue admovens , 
cum luctatus din harentem non removiffet, 
excufavit impotentiam, objecta perigrini 
Co potentifsimi glutinis interpofitione, quo 
fortifsime copulante nequiret divelli, doa 
nec vidit ab alio per tabulam facilime lami- 
nam deduct, e adextrema productam, & 
actam in tran{ver{um inde deportari. But 
that we may learn from our own Engine, 

~ l that 





| 233) | 

that two Bodies, though they touch each 
other ‘but in a {mall part of their furfaces, 
may be made to cohere very ftrongly, 
onely by this, That the Air prefles much 
more forcibly upon the inferior fuperfi- 
cies of the lowermoft Body, then upon 
the upper furfaceof thefame: We will 
hereunto annex the following Experi- 
ment, chough out of the order wherein 
they were made. "7 





Experia 

J remember I have, ina Difcourfe. con- ment 3 2. 
cerning Fluidity and Firmneds.,::made 
mention of my having, by the exfuction 
of the Air out of a Glafs Veller, made 
thac Veffel take up; ot fuck up(to {peak in 
the common Language) a Body weighing 
divers Ounces ; but our Engine affording 
us the opportunity of making confider ~ 
abler Experiments of that kinde, We 
thought fit to make a further tryal of the 
force of the Atmofphere’s preflure up- 

wards, after the following manner. 

The Receiver having been exquifitely 
clofd. as we have often taught already, 
and the Aur being in a good meafure drawn 
out of it, it was'temov'd from off the 
Pump: and to the lower Branch of the 


Stop- 
















(234) 
Stop-cock, there was {peedily apply’d 3 
tapering Valve of brafs, fuch as ts derai d 
in the gt fig: made‘fit to go withits nar- 
rower end into the cavity ‘of the br anch 5 

and to: fill che orifice of that cavity with 
its broader part. And that the Air might 
not gét inat the litle intervals, left here 
and, there between the convex farface of 
the ftopple and the internall edge: of the 
branch, thofe intervals were {top’t with 
alictle Diachylon. And to the doore, 
or,( if you pleafe ) that part of the Valve 
which was to move to and fro, and in 
this Experiment hung perpendicular to 
the Horizon, there was, at a button ot 
brafs belonging to the Valve faften’da 
broad {cale wherein weights were to be 
put. This done the key of the Stop-cocks 
was turo-d, and the externall Air beating 
likea- forcible ftreame upon the Valve 
togetinthere, it did fuddenly both fhut 
the Valve and keep it fhut fo ftrongly, 
thatwe had time to caft in diverfe weights 
one after another into the Scale, tullat 
length the weight overpowering the pref- 
fure ofthe Atmofphere,drew downe the 
Valve by the fringes that ty’d the Scale 
to it, and gave liberty to the outward Air 
to rifh- into th e Receiver, Though a- 
nother 





(235) 

nother time, when the Valve had but lic- 
tle weight hanging at it, being, by I know 
not what accident,drawn down beneath its 
former place, it was by the impetuous 
currentof the outward Air fuddenly im- 
pell’d up into it again, and kepe there- 
But in the former Experiment it is re 
markable, That though the Receiver were 
not well exhaufted, and though it leak’d 
whil ft the reft of the Experiment was in 
profecution, and though the Valve 

whereon the Cylinder of the Atmofphere 
could prets, were not above an Inch and 
a half in Diameter, yet the weight kept 
up by (udtion, or rather fupported by the 
Air, namely the Valve, the Seal and 
what was caft into it, being fent to be 
weigh’d, amounted to about ten of our 
common Pounds, confifting of fixteen 
Ounces apiece: So that we doubted not 
but that, had the Experiment been made 
with favorable Circumftances, the Air 
endeavoring to prefs inat the Orifice of 
the Stop-cock, would have kept avery 
much greater weight from falling out of 
it; I fay the Air, becaufe we found, by 
tryal purpofely made, that neither the 
imperfect contac of the Valve and the 
Stop-cock, nor the Diachylon that was 


Q, em- 





























Experi- 


ment EN 





(236) 

employ’d to fill up the little Crannies left 
betwixt them, were confiderable in this 
Experiment, by which may among other 
things appear > that I did not without 
caufeia the above-nam’d Difcourfe touch- 
ing Fluidity and Firmnefs, afcribe a great 
force, ev’n to fuch Pi llars of Air as may 
be fappotd to begin at the top of the 
Atmofphere , and recoyling from the 
ground to terminate on the Bodies on 
which they prefs: fince inthe prefent Ex « 
periment {uch a weight was fupported by 
fo flender a a der of Air, rebounding 
from the Earth to the Valve whereonit 
did bear. 


Bu It in regatd we have not yet been 

able to empty p greata Veffel as our 
Receiver, fo well as we can the Cylinder 
it felf; our Pump slate may afford usa 
noblevinitance of the force of the Air we 
live in, iafomuch, that by help of this 
part of our Engine, we may give a pretty 
near ghefs at the ftrength of the Atmo- 
{phere, oa as aw eight, And the 
way may be this ; Virft, the Sucker be- 
ing brought to move eafily up and down 
the Cylinder, is to be impell’dto the top 
of 





(237) 

of it: Then the Receiver muft be taken 
off fromthe Pump, that the upper Ori- 
ficeof the Cylinder remainigg open, the 
Air may freely fucceed the Sucker, and 
therefore readily yield to its motion 
downward. This done, there muft be 
faften'd to one of the Iron Teeth of the 
Sucker, fuch a weight as may juft fuffice 
to draw it to the bottom of the Cylinder. 
And having thus examin’d what weight is 
neceflary to draw down the Sucker, when 
the Atmofphere makes no other then the 
ordinary refiftance of the Air againftits 
lefcent ; the Sucker muft be again fore’d 
tothe top of the Cylinder, whofe upper 
Orifice muft now be exactly cloled; and 
then (the firft weight remaining) we eafi- 
ly may, by hanging a Scale to the above- 
mention’d Iron (that makes part of the 
Sucker) caft in known weights fo long, 
till in {pight of the reluctancy of the At- 
mofphere the Sucker be drawn down: For 
to thefe weights inthe Scale, that of the 
Scale it felf being added,the fum will give 
usthe weight of aColumnof Air, equal 
in Diameter to the Sucker, or to theca- 
vity of the Cylinders and in length to 

the heighth of the Atmofphere. 
According to this method we did, fince 
Q2 the 













(238): 
the writing of the laft Experiment, at- 
tempt to meafure the preflure of the At- 
mo{phere, but found it more difficult then 
we expected, to perform it with any ac- 
curatene({s ; for though by the help of the 
Manubriim the Sucker moved up and 
down with jo much eate, that one would 
have thought that both its convex furface, 
and the concave one of the Cylinder were 
exquifitely fmooth, & as it were flipperys 
yet when the Sucker came to be moved 
onely with a dead weight or preffure (that 
was not (like the torce of him that 
pump’d) intended as occafion required) 
we found that the little rufneffes, or other 
inequalities, and perhaps too, the unequal 
preflure of the Leather againft the cavity 
of the Cylinder, were able now and then 
to puta ftop to the defcent or afcent of 
the Sucker, though a very little external 
help would cafily Turmount that impedi- 
ment; andthen the Sucker would, for a 
while, continue its formerly interrupted 
motion, though that affiftance were with- 
drawn. But this difcouragement did not 
deterre us from profecuting our Experi. 
ment, and endeavoring, by a careful trial, 
to make it as inftructive as we could. 
We found then thata Leaden W eight, 
of 





(239) 
of 28 pounds (each confifting of fixteen 
Ounces) being faftned to one of the teeth 
of the Sucker, drew it down flowly e- 
nough; when the upper Orifice of the 
Cyl linder was left open, though by the 
help of Oyland Water, and by the fre- 
quent moving the Sucker up and down 
with the cManubrium, its motion in the 
Cylinder had been before purpofely faci- 
litatced. This done, the upper Orifice of 
the Cylinder was very caretully and clofe- 
ly ftopp’d, the Valve being likewife fhut 
with its wonted Stopple well oyl'd, at- 
ter the Sucker had been again impell’d 
up tothe top of the Cylinder. Then to 
the precedent twenty eight pound, we 
added a hundred and twelve pounds mores 
which forcing down the Sucker, though 
but oa we took off the twenty 
eight pound weight; and being unable to 
procure juft fuch weights as we would 
havehad, we hung on, inftead of it, one 
of fourteen pound, but found thar, with 
the reft, unable tocarry down the Sucker. 
And to fatisfie our felves, and the Spe- 
ctators, that it was the refiftance of the 
ambient Air that hinder’d the defcent of 
fo great a weight, after that we had try’d 
that upon unftopping the Valve, and 
QO 


Q3 there- 









(240) 

thereby opening an accefs to the external 
Air, the Sucker would be immediately 
drawn down: After this, fay, we made 
this further Experiment, That having by 
a Man’s ftrength forcibly de epreffd” the 
Sucker to the bottom of the Cylinder, 
and then faftned weights to the above- 
named Iron that makes part of that Suc- 
ker, the preflure of the external Air find- 
ing little or nothing in the cavity of the 
evacuated Cylinder to refift ic, ene 
fently begin to impell the Sucker, with 
the weights that clogg’d it, tow ards the 
upper pare of the Cylinder , ull fome 
fuch accidental Impediment as we former- 
ly mention’ d, check’d its courfe; and 
when that rub,which eafily might be, was 
taken out of the way, it would continue 
its a{cent tothe top, to theno {mall won- 
der of thofe By-ftanders, that could not 
comprehend how fuch a weight could af- 
cend, as it were, of itfelf; that is, with- 
out any vifible force, or fo muchas Su- 
ction to lift it up. And indeed itis very 
confiderable, that though poffibly there 
might remain fome particles of Aur in the 
Cylinder, after the drawing down of the 
Sucker ; yet the preffure ofa Cylinder of 
the Atmofphere ə fomewhat lefs fe 
cares 





(241) 

three Inches in Diameter (for, as it was 
faid in the defcription of our Engine, the 
cavity of the Cylinder was no broader) 
wasable,uncompreff? d,not only to fuftain, 
but even to drive up a weight of an hun- 
dred and odde pounds : for befides the 
weight of the whole Sucker it felf, which 
amounts to fome pounds, the weights an- 
nexed to it made up a hundred and three 
pounds, befides an Iron Bar, that by con- 
je&ture weighed two pounds more; and 
yet all thefe together fall fomewhat fhort 
of the weight which we lately mention’d, 
the refiftance of the Air to have held fu- 
{pended in the cavity of the Cylinder. 

Andthough (as hath been already ac- 
knowledg’d) we cannot, peradventure, 
obtain by therecited means fo exact an 
account as were to be wilh’d, of what we 
would difcover: Yer, if it ferve us to 
ground Conjectures more approaching to 
the Truth, then we have hitherto met 
with, I hope it will be confider’d (which 
a famous Poet judicioufly fays) 


Eft quoddam prodire tenus, fi non da- 
tur ultra. 


Peradventure it will not be imperti- 
Q4. nent 


ee 


ip 









(242) 

nent to annex to the other Circumftances 
that have been already fet down concern- 
ing this Experiment, That ic was made in 
Winter, in Weather neither Frofty nor 
Rainy, about the change of the Moon, 
and ata place whofe latitude is near about 
51tanda half: For perhaps the force or 
preflure of the Air may vary, according 
tothe Seafons of the Year, the tempera- 
ture of the Weather, the elevation of the 
Pole, or the pha’: s ot the Mow ns allor 
even any of them teeming capable to al- 
ter either the heighth or confiftence of the 
incumbent Atmoiphere: And therefore 
it would not be amifs if this Experiment 
were carefully tryd at feveral times and 
places, with variety of Circumitances, It 
might alfo be try’d with Cylinders of fe- 
veral Diameters, exquificely fitted with 
Suckers, that we might know what proe 
portion feveral Pillars of the Atmofphere 
bear, to the Weights they are able to fu- 
ftain or lift ups and confequently > W he- 
ther the increale or decrement of the re- 

fiftance of the ambient Air, can be re- 
duc’d to any regular proportion.to the 
Diameters of the Suckers: Thefe , and 
divers other fuch things which may be 
try'd with this Cylinder, might mo of 
them 





(243) 

them be more exactly try’d by the Torri- 
cellian Experiment,if we could get Tubes 
fo accurately blown and drawn, that the 
Cavity were perfectly Cylindrical. 


To dwell upon all the feveral Refle- 
ions , that a {peculative Wit might 
make upon this and the foregoing Expe- 
riment, ( I mean the thirty third and thir- 
ty fecond) would require almofta Vo- 
lume, whereas our occafions will {carce - 
allow us time to touch upon three or 
four of the chief Inferences that feem de. 
ducible from them,and therefore we fhall 
content our felves to point at thofe 
tew, 


And firft, as many other Phenomena 
of our Engine » fo efpecially , the two 
lately mention’d Experiments, feem ve- 
ry much to callin queftion the receiv’d 
Opinion of the Nature or Caufe of Su- 
ction.For ‘tis true indeed,that when men 
fuck, they commonly ule fome manifeft 
endeavour by apeculiar motion of their 
Mouthes,Chefts,and fome other con{pi- 
ring par ts , to convey to them the body 
to be fucke in. And hence perhaps they 
have taken occafion, to think that in all 

Suction 














Se 





(244) 
Suction there muft be fome Endeavour 
or motion inthe fucking to attract the 
fucked Bocy. But in our laft Experi- 

ment it appeares not at all how the up- 
per part of the empty’d Cylinder that re- 

maines movelefs all the while, or any 
part of it, does at all endeavour to draw 
to it the deprefled Sucker and the an- 
nex’d weights. And yet thofe that be- 
hold the afcention of the Sucker, without 
ferioufly confidering the caufe of it, doe 

readily conclude it to be ray{’d by fome- 

thing that powerfully Sucks or attracts 
it, though they fee not what that may 
be or where it lurks. So that it feemes 
not abfolutely neceffary to Sufion, that 
there be in theBody, whichis faid to fuck, 

an endeavor or motion in order thereun- 

to,but rather chat Suction may be at leaft 
for the moft part reduc’dto Pulfion, and 





¿its effects afcrib’d to fuch a preffure of 


therneighboring, air upon thofe Bodies 

(wW hther acrial,or of other Natures ) that 

are contiguous tothe Bodythat is fayd to 
attraG them,as.is flronger than that Sub- 
ftance which pofleffes ‘the cavity of that 
fucking Body is ableto refift, Toob- 
ject here , that it was fome par ticles of 
Air remaining in the empty’d Cylin- 


et 
wa 








| (245) 
der that attracted this weight to obviate 
a Vacuum, Will {carce be fatisfa&ory; sune 


Jefs it can be cleerly made out by what li-, 


tle hooks, or other grappling Inftruments, 
the internal Air could take hold ofthe 
Sucker; how fo litle of it obtain’d the 
force to lift up fo great a weight; and why 
alfo, upon the letting in of alitle more 
Air into one of our evacuated Vef- 
fels, the attraction is, inftead of being 
ftrengthen’d, much weaken’d, though, 
if chere were danger of a Vacuum be- 
fore, it would remain, notwithftanding 
this ingrefs ofa little Air. For that ftill 
there remain’d in the capacity of the ex- 
haufted Cylinder ftore of little rooms, 
or {paces empty or devoid of Air, may 
appear by the great violence Sheo 
the air rufhes in,ifany way be open’d toit, 
And that ‘tis not fo much the decrement 
of the Vacaum within the cavity of the 
veilel that debilicates theattraction, és the 
{pring of the included air (whofe prefence 
makes the decrement) that does it by 
refifting the preflure of the external Air, 
f{eems probable , partly from the Difabi- 
lity of vacuities whether greater or lefler, 
torefift the pi reffure of the Airsan | part- 
ly by fome of the Phenomena ot our Ex- 
periments 










































(246) 
periments, and particularly by: this Cir- 
cumftance of the three and Thirtieth , 
that the Sucker was by the preflure of the 
Ambient Air impell'd upwards , with its 
weight hanging atit, not only when it 
was at the bortome of the Cylinder, and 
confequently left a great Vacuum in the 
cavity of it; but when the Sucker had 
been already impel-d almoft to the top of 
the Cylinder,and conlequently, when the 
Vacuum that remain’d was become very 
litle in comparifon of that which preceded 
the beginning ot the Sucker’s aicention. 

In the next place, thete Experiments 
may teachus, what to judge of the vul- 
gar Axiom receiv’d for fo many ‘Ages 
as an undoubted Truth in the Peripate- 
tick Schools; That Nature abhorres 
and flys a Vacuum, and that to fuch a de- 
Sree, that no humane power (to go no 


i higher ) isable to make onein the = Uni- 
verfe; wherein Heaven and Earth would - 


change places, andallits other Bodyes 
ather act contrary to their own Nature , 
than fufferit. For, ifby aVacuum we 
will underftand a place per fectly devoid 
of all corporeal Subftance, it may be in- 
deed then, as we formerly noted; be plau- 
fibly enough maiatand, that there is 
no 


(247) 

no fuch thing in the worlds but that the 
generality of the Plenifts, ( efpecially till 
of late yeares fome of them grew more 
wary ) didnot take a Vacuum in {o trict 
2 Senfe, may appear by the Experiments 
formerly, and ev’nto this Day imploy’d 
by the Deniers ofa Vacuum, to proveit 
impoffible that there can beany made.: 
For when they alleadge ( for Inftance ) 
that when a man fucks Water through a 
long Pipe, that heavy Liquor, contrary . 
to its Nature, afcends into the Sucker’s 
mouth, only, to fillup that room made 
by the Dilatation of his Breft and 
Lungs , which otherwife will in part be 
empty. And when they tellus, that the 
realon why if a long Pipe exadly 
clos’d at one end be fill’d top-ful 
of Water, and then inverted, no Liquor 
will fall out of the open Orifice, Or ,to 
ufe a more familiar Example, when they 
teach, that the caufe why in a Gardiner’s 
watering Pot fhap'dconically , or like a 
Sugar- Loaf fill’d with Water, no Liquor 
fals down through the numerous holes 
at the bottome,whilft the Gardiner keeps 
his Thumb upon the Orifice of the litle 
hole at the cop; and no longer, muft be 
that it in the cafe propofed the Water 

fhould 




















(248) 
fhould defcend, the Air being unable to 
fucceed it, there would be left at the up- 
per and deferted part of the Veffel a Va- 
cuum , that would be avoided if the hole 
at the top were open'd. When(I fay ) 
they alle eadge fuch Experiments, the 
Tendency of them feems plainl y toim- 
port, that they mean, by a Vacuum, any 
{pace here below that isnot fill’d witha 
vifible body, or at leaft with Air; though 
it be not quite devoy’d of all Body what- 
foever. For ses fhould Nature, out of 
her deteftation of a Vacuum, make Bo- 
dies a& contrary to their own Tendency » 
that a place may be fill'd with Air , ifits 
being fo were not neceflary to the avoi- 
ding of a Vacuum. 

Taking then a Vacuumin this vulgar 
and obvious fencè , the common opinion 
about it feems lyable to feveral Exce- 
ptions, whereof fome of the chief are 
fuggefted to us by our Engine. 

It will not eafily then be intelligibly 
made out, how hatred or averfation, 
which is a pafon of the Soule, can either 
for a Vacuum,or any other object,be fup- 
pos'd to bein Water, or {uch like inani- 
mate Body , which cannot be. prefum’d 
to know when a Vacuum would entue; if 
l they y 








(249) , 
they did not beftirre themfelves to pres 
-yentic, nor to be fo generous as to act 
contrary to what is. moft conducive to 
their own particular prefervation for the 
publique good of the Univerfe, As much 
then of intelligible and probable Truth, 
as is contain’d in this Metaphoricall Ex- — 
preffion, feems to amount but to this s. 
That by the Wife Author of Nature 
( who is justly fayd to have made all 
things in number, weight,and meafure, } 
the Univerfe, and the parts of it, are fo 
contriv’d, chat itis as hard to make a Va- 
cuum init, asif they ftudioufly confpir'd 
to prevent ir. And how far this ic felfe 
may be granted, deferves to be further 
confider’d. 

For in the next place,our Experiments 
feem to teach, that the fuppofed Aver{a- 
tion of Nature toa Vacuum is but acci- 
dencal , or inconfequence partly of the 
Weight and Fluidity, or, at leaft, Fluxi- 
lity of the Bodies here below;and partly, 
and perhaps principally, of the Spring of 
the air, whole reftlefs endeavor to expand 
it {elfe every way , makes it either rufh 
in it felfe, or compel the interpos’d bo- 
dys into all {paces,where it finds no grea- 
ter refiftance than it can furmount, And 

l that 















(250) 
that in thofe motions which are made oë 
fugamV acui(as the common phrafe is)Bo- 
dys aét without fuch generofity & Con- 
fideration, as is wont to be afcrib’d to 
them, is apparent enough in our 324 Exe 
periment, where the torrent of Air, that 
feem’d to ftrive to get into the Empty’d 
Receiver , did plainly prevent its own 
Defigne, by fo impelling the Valve , as 
to make it fhut the only Orifice the Air 
was togetin at. And if afterwards el- 
ther Nature, or the internal Air,had a de- 
figne the external Air.fhould be attra- 
cted , they feem’d to profecute very un- 
wifely by continuing to fuck the Valve 
fo ftrongly, when they found that by 
that Suction the Valve it felfe could not 
be drawnin : Whereas by forbearing to 
fuck, the Valve would by it’s own weight 
have fall’n down , and {uffer'd the exclu- 
ded Air to returne freely , and to fill 
again the exhaufted Veilel, 

And this minds me to take notice of 
another deficiency, pointed at by our Ex- 
periments in the common Dodétrine of 
thofe Plenifts we reafon with; for many 
of thofe unufual motions in Bodies, thas 
are faydto be made to efcape a Vacuum, 
feem rather made to fillis For why, 


TH 
oy 





l (sry 

to inftance in our newly mention’d Ex 
perimént y, affoon as the Valve was des 
prefs'd by the weight we hung at it; 
fhould the Air foimpetuoufly and copi- 
oufly rufh into thecavity of the Receiver ; 
if there were before no vacant room theré 
toreceive it? and if there were,then all the 
while the Valve kept outthe Air, thofe 
litle {paces:in the Receiver, which the 
‘corpufcles of that Air afterwards fill’d, 
may be concluded to have remain’d em- 
pty. So that the feeming violence ; 
imploy:d by Nature on the occafion of 
the evacuating of the Veffel, feems to 
have come too late to hinder the making 
of Vacuities in the Receiver, and only 
to have , afloon as we permitted, fill’d 
up with Air thofe thae were already’ 

made. aie 
And as for the Care of the Publique’ 
Good ofthe Univerfe afcrib’d to dead 
and ftupid Bodies, wee {hall only: de- 
mand, why in our 19° Experiment, upon’ 
the Exfuction of the ambient Air, ‘the: 
Water deferted the upper half of: the’ 
Glafs-Tube ; and did: not afcend to filf 
it up, till the external Air was let inupon 
it: whereas by its ealy and fudden regai-: 
ning that upper part of the Tube,’ ic: 
aed R appear’d 












(252) 
appear’d both that there was there much 
{pace devoid of Air, and that the Water 
might with fmall or no refiftance ‘have 
afcendedintoit, if it could havedone fo 
without the impulfion of thereadmitted 
Air which , itfeems, was neceflary to 
mind the Water of its formerly neglected 
Duty to the Univerfe. 

Nay, for ought appeares, ev’n when 
the excluded Air, afloon as “twas per- 
mitted, rufht violently into our exhau- 
{ted Receiver, that flowing im of the 
Air. proceeded rather from the deter- 
minate Force of the Spring of the 
neighbouring Air, thenfrom any endea- 
vour to fillup, much lefs to prevent vae 
cuity’s. For though when as much Air as 
will, is gotten into.our Receiver our pre- 
fënt Opponents take it for granted that 
it is. full of Airs. yet ifit be remembred 
thar when we made our 17°" Experiment 
we crouded in more Air to our Receiver 
than icufually holds; and ifwe alfo con- 
fider (, which.is much more ) the Air of 
the, fame confiftence with that in our 
Receiver may in wind- guns, asis known, 
and.as we have try’d, be comprefled at 
leaft into halfe its wonted room (I fay at 
Jeaft, becaufe fome affirme , that the Air 





| (253) 

may be thruft into an 8, or ayet fmaller 
part of its ordinary extent ) it feems ne- 
ceflary to admit either a notion of conden- 
fation & rarefaction that is not intelligi+ 
ble, or that in the capacity of our Recei- 
ver when prefum’d to be full of Air,there 
yet remain'd as much of {pace as was ta- 
ken up by all the aérial corpufcles unpof- 
feffed by the Air. Which feemes plainly, 
to infer that the Air that rufh’d into our 
empty’d veflel did not doe it precifely 
to fill up the Vacuities of it,fince it left fo 
many unfill’d but rather was thraft in by 
the preffure of the contiguous Air; which 
as it could not, but be always ready to ex. 
pand it felfe, where it found leaft refi- 
ftance , fo was it unable to fill the Recei- 
ver any more, then until the Air within 
was reduc’d to the fame meafure of Com- 
factnefs with chat without. 

We may alfo from our two already of- 
ten mention'd Experiments further de. 
duce , that, ( fince Natures hatred ofa 
Vacuum is but Metaphorical and Ac- 
cidental , being but a confequence or re- 
{fult of the preflure of the Air and of the 
Gravity, and partly alfo of the Fluxility 
of fome other bodies ) The power fhee 
makes ufe of to hinder a Vacuum , is not 

R 2 (as 


































(254) 
{€ as we have elfe-where alfo noted) any 
fuch boundlefs thing as men have been 
pleas’d to imagine. And the reafon, why 
in the former Experiments, mentioned 
in favour of the Plenifts, Bodies feem to 
forget their own Natures to fhun a Va- 
cuum, feems to be butthis ; That in the 
alleadged. cafes the weight of that Wa- 
ter that was either kept from falling or 
impell'd up, was not great enough to 
furmount the preffure of the contiguous 
Air; which, ifit had been, the Water 
would have fubfided,though noAir could 
have fucceeded. For not to repeat that 
Experiment of Monfieur Pafchal ( for. 
merly mention’d to have beentry’dina 
Glafs exceeding 32 Foot) wherein the 
inverted Pipe being long enough to con- 
taina competent weight of Water, that 
Liquor freely ran out at the lower Orifice: 
Not to mention this (I fay) we faw in 
our nineteenth Experiment, that when 
the preflure of the ambient Air was fuf- 
ciently weaken’d, the Water would fall 
out apace at the Orifice even of a fhort 
Pipe, though. the Air could not fucceed 
into theroom deferted by it. And it were 
not amifs if tryal were made on the tops 
of very high Mountains, to difcover with 

: what 





; (255) 
what eafe 2 Vacuum could be made near 
the confines of the Atmofphere, where 
the Air is probably but light in compari- 
fon of what it is here below, _ Buc our 
prefent (three and thirtieth) Experiment 
feems to manifeft, not onely that the 
power, exercif'd by Nature,to fhun or re- 
plenith a' Vacuum, is limited, but that it 
may be determin’d evento Pounds and 
Ounces: Infomuch that we might fay, 
fuch a weight Nature will fuftain or will 
lift up to refift a Vacuum in our Engines 
but if.an Ounce more be added to that 
weight, it will f{urmount Her fo much 
magnifi'd deteftation of Vacuities, And 
thus, My Lord, our Experiments may 
not onely anfwer thofe of the Plenifts; 
but enable us to retort their Arguments 
againft themfelves : fince, if that be true 
which they alleadge, that, when Water 
falls not down according to Its nature, in 
a Body wherein no Air can {ucceed to fill 
up the place it muft leave, the fufpenfi- 
on of the Liquoris made We detur Vacr- 
um, (as they fpeak) it will follow, that 
if the Water can be brought to fubfide 
in fuchacafe, that deferted {pace may be 
deem’d empty, according to their own 
Dotirine; efpecially, fince Nature (as 
R 3 they 
















(256) 

they would perfwade us) beftirs her felf 
fo mightily to keep it from being de- 
ferted. 


T hope I (hall not need to reminde Your 
Lordfhip, that I have all this while been 
{peaking of a Vacuum, not in the ftrict 
and Philofophical fenfe, but in that more 
obvious and familiar one that has been 
formerly declar d. 


And therefore I fhall now proceed to 
obferve in the laft place, that our 33t Ex- 
periment affords us a notable proof of the 
unheeded ftrength of that preflure which 
is {uftain’d by the Corpulcles of what we 
call the free Air, and prefume to be un- 
compref’d. For, as fluidand yielding a 
Body asit is, our Experiment teaches us, 
‘That ev’n in our Climate, and without 
any other compreffion then what is (at 
leaft here below) Natural, or (to {peak 
more properly ) ordinary to it, it bears fo 
ftrongly upon the Bodies whereunto it is 
contiguous, that a Cylinder of this free 
Air, not exceeding three Inches in Dia- 
meter is able to raife and carry up 2 
weight, amounting to between fixteen 
and feventeen hundred Ounces, T faid, 
even 


(257) ack. 
even in our Climate, becaufe thatis tem? 4° ae 
perate enough; and as far as my obfer- pardinus mo 
vations affift me to conjecture, the Air int verur An- 
many other more Northern Countries is 
may be much thicker, and able to {upport adeo qui- 
a gredter-weight: which is not to be e 

x tumaton 


doubted of, if there be no miftake ‘in quod geige 


what is Recorded concerning the Hollane in Nova 
ders, that were forc’d by the Ice to Win oe 
ter in Nova Zembla, namely, That dibus fnis 
they found there fo condenf'd an Air, thar (vere 
they could not make their Clock goé, nox mom 
evn by avery great addition to the «/faverit 
weights that were wont tomoveit. ` Ke 
dus ei addidiffent quam antea ferre folebat. Varenius Geo: Genevat libs 
111. Propo: 7. pag. 648. i HN 

I {uppofe Your Lordfhip. will readily: 
takenotice, that I might very eafily have 
difcourfed much more fully and accuratly 
then Ihave done, againft the common o~ 
pinion touching Suction,and touching na- 
tures hatred of a Vacuum, But I waswilling 
to keep my {elf to thofe confiderations 
touching thefe matters,that might be ve- 
rif d by ourEngineit felf,efpectally,fince, 
as I faid at firft it would take up too much 
time to infift particularly uponall the Re- 
flections that may be made even upon our 
twolaft Experiments. And therefore, 


R 4 pat. 








Eeperi- 
ment 34. 


| (258) 
paffing to the next, J {hall leaye.izto yous 
Lordfhip to confider how .far.thefe tryals 
of ours will either confirm ; or, disfavor 


= thenew Doétrine of feveral eminent Na- 


turalifts, who teach, That in all motion 
there is neceflarily a Circle of Bodies, as 
they {peak, moving together ; and whe- 
ther the Circles in {uch motion be an Ac- 
cidental or. Confequential thing,or no. 


Isa known thing to thofe that are con- 
=  verlant inthe. Hydroftaticks, That 
two Bodies whichin the Air are of equal: 


"weight, but of unequal bulk, as Gold, 


for inftance and Iron, being afterwards 
weighed in Water, will lofe their -£qui- 
librium upon the change of the ambient 
Body, fo that the Gold will fink lower 
then the Iron; which, by reafon of its 
greater bulk, has more Water to litt 
or difplace, that it may fink. By Analogy 
to this Experiment, it feem’d probable, 
that if two weights did in our Engine 
ballance each other, whenthe Glafs was 
fall of Air; upon the exfuction of a 
great part of that Air, fo notable a change 
in the confiftence of the ambient Body, 
would 









(459) 

would make themlofe their: eAtquili- 
brinm. >. i OF 

` ‘But being defirous at the fame time to 
make-a-tryal, for a-certain Defign: that 
needs not here -be mention’d; : we -took 
for one of our weights a-dry: Bladder, 
ftrongly tyed-at’the Neck, and about 
half fill’d: with Air (that being a weight 
bothedlight, and that: would expand it 
felf inthe evacuated Glafs:) .and-faftning 
that to one part of our formerly menti+ 
on'dexact ballance (which turns with the 
324\part of a Grain) we put aMetalline: 
counter poife into'the oppofite Scale; and: 
fo the two weights being: brought to an 
vEquilibrium, theballance was convey’d 
into the Receiver,and {ulpended from the 
Coverof it, | dd bs 

“But before we proceed further, we tnuft 
note, That prefently after the laying on 
of the Cover, the Bladder appear’d to 
preponderate, whereupon the Scales:being 
taken out,anid reduc’d very neat to an is 
quilibrium, yet fo, that a little advantage: 
remain‘d onthat fide to which the: Metal - 
line weight belong’d:; they were again let 
down into the Receiver,! which was pre- 
fently made faft.with Plaifter, anda hot 
Tron: Soon after which, before the Pump’ 
was 
















(260} 
wasemploy’d, the Bladder feem’d again 
a little to prevonderate. Afterwards 
the A'r inthe. Glafs;being begun tò be 
drawn.our, the Bladder began (according 
to the formerly mention'’d Obfervations) 
to expandit felf, and manifeftly to out- 
weigh the oppofite. weight, drawing 
down’ the ‘Scale to which it was faftned 
very much beneath the others efpecially 
when.the Air had fwell! ‘d: ittoits full ex- 
tent. 

This done, we very leifurely leri in the 
external Airs and-obferv’d, that: upan 
thefla gging of the Bladder, the Scale 
whereto it was faftned, not onely by'de-. 
grees return’d to ancÆquilibrium withthe 
other, but at length was. a little’ out-: 
w eighed byit. 

But becaufe we Afufpected thee 
might have interven’d fome unheeded 


_Circumftance in this laft part of the E x- 


periment, we would: not prefently take 
out the Scales, nor meddle with the .Co- 


ver, but leaving things as they were,. we 


perceiv’d, that after a little .while the 
Bladder began again.to preponderate, and 
by degrees to fink lower and lower for 
divers “hours ; ; wherefore, leaving the 
Veilel clofdup all night, we repair ‘dtoit 
next 





(261) 

next Morning, and found the Bladder 
fallen yet lower. As ifthe very fubftance 
of it, had imbibed fome of the moifture 
wherewith the Air (the Seafon being ve- 
ty rainy) did thenabound: As Lute- 
ftrings, which are made likewife of the: 
Membranous parts of Guts, ftrongly 
wreath’d, are known :to {well fo much, 
Oftentimes as to breakin rainy and wet 
weather. Which conjecture is the more to. 
beregarded, becaufe congruoufly unto it 
one of the company having alittle warm’d 
the Bladder, found it then lighter then 
the oppofite weight, Butthis muft be 
look’d uponasa bare conjecture, till we 
can gain time to make further tryals about 
ite In the mean while we {hall adde, that 
without removing the Scales or the Co- 
ver of the Receiver, we again caufd the 
Airto be drawn out (the. weather conti- 
ing very moift)but found not any manifeft 
alteration in the ballance; whether be- 
caule the -4:quilibrinm was too far loft to 
let afmall change appear, we determine 
not, 

But to make the Experiment with a 
Body lefs apt to be altered by the tempe- 
rature of the Air, then was the Bladder 5 
we brought the Scales again to an eæqut= 

j l librium 












Experi- 
ment 35. 





(262) 
librium with two weights, whereof the 
one was of Lead,the other of Cork. And 
having evacuated the Receiver,we obfer- 
ved,: that both upon the exfudtion, and 
after the return of the Air, the Cork did 
manifeftly preponderate, and much more 
a while after the Air had been let in again, 
then whilft it was keptout. Wherefore, 
in the room of the Cork, we fubfticuted 
a piece of Char-coal, as lefs likely to im- 
bibe any moufture from the Air, but the 
event proved much the fame with that 
newly related: So that this Experiment 
feems more liable to Cafualties then any, 
excepting one we have made in our En- 
gine. And as it is difficult to prevent 
them, foit feems not very eafieto dif- 
cover the caufes of them, whereof we 
{hall therefore at prefent forbear mention- 
ing our Conjectures, i 


Ome Learned Mathematicians have of 
late ingenioufly endeavored to reduce 
Filters to Séphons ; but ftill the true caufe 
of the afcenfionof Water, and other Li- 
quors, both in Séphons andin Filtration, 
needing (for ought we have yet found) a 
clearer Difcovery and Explication, we 
S : were 








(263) 

were defirous to try whether or no the 
preffureof the Air might reafonably be 
fuppofd to have either the principal,or at 
leaft a confiderable Intereft in the raifing 
of thofe Liquors. But becaufe we found 
that we could not yet fo evacuate our Res 
ceiver, but that the remaining Air ; 
though but little in comparifon of the 
exhaufted, would be able to impell the 
the Water to a greater height then is 
ufual in ordinary Filtrations: we refolved,, 
inftead of a Lift of Cotton, or the like 
Filtre, to make ufe of a Siphon of Glafs, 
delineated in the third Figure, confift- 
ing of three pieces, two ftraight, and 
the third crooked to joyn them toge- 
ther; whofe Junctures were diligently 
clofd, that no Air might finde entrance 
at them. One of the Legs of this Si- 
phon was (as it fhould be) fomewhat 
longer then the other, and was pervious 
at the bottom of it onely, by a hole al- 
moft as {lender as a hair, that: the 
Water might but very leafurely drop 
out of it, left it fhould all run out 
before che Experiment. were compleat- 
ed. The other and fhorter Leg of 
the Siphon was quite open at the end, 
and of the fame wideneffe with the 

` { 


reft 















(264) 
reft of the Pipe, whofe bore was about = 
of an Inch. The whole Siphon made 
up of thefe feveral pieces put together, 
was defign’d to be about a Foot and a 
half long , that the remaining Air, when 
the Veffel wasexhaufted after the wont- 
ed manner, might not be able to impell 
the Water to the top of the Siphon ; 
which being inverted, was fill’d with Wa- 
ter , and of which the Shorter leg being 
let down two or three Inches deep into a 
Glafs Veffel fullof Water, and the up- 
per parts of it being faften’d to the infide 
of the Cover of the Receiver, we pro- 
ceeded to clofe firft, and then to empty 
the Veffel. 

The effect of the tryal was this, thag 
till a pretty quantity of Air had been 
drawnout, the Water dropp'd freely out 
at the lower end of the lower legof the 
Siphon , as if the Experiment had been 
performed in the free Air. But afterwards, 
the Bubbles (as had been apprehended) 
began to difclofe themfelves in the Wa- 
ter, and afcending to thetop of the Si- 
phon, imbodyed themfelves there into 
one, which was augmented little by little 
by therifing of other bubbles that from 
time to time broke into it, but much 
more 


(265) 

more by its ‘own dilatation, which:en- 
creafd. proportionably to the exfuétion 
that was made of the Air out of the Ree 
ceiver. Sothat at length the Water in 
the fhorter Leg of the Siphon: was re- 
duc’d partly by the extraction of the ame 
bient Air, and partly by the expanfion 
of the great Bubble at the upper part of 
the Siphon, to be butabout a Foor high, 
if fo much; whereby it came to pafs, 
that the courfe of the Water in the Sz- 
phon was interrupted, and that which res 
main-din the longer Leg of it, continu’d 
fufpended there without dropping any 
longer. But upon tbe turning of the 
Stop-cock, the outward Air (being let 
into the Receiver) got into the S1phor by 
the little hole at which the Wate: formers 
ly dropt outs and traverfing all the in- 
cumbent Cylinder of Water, inthe form 
of Bubbles, joyn’d it felf with chat Air 
that before pofleff'dthe top of ‘the sż- 
phon, 

To prevent the inconveniences arifing 
from thefe Bubbles,two Glafs Pipes, like 
the former, were fo placed, as to termi- 
nate together in the midft of the Belly of 
a Glafs Viol, into whofe Neck they 
Wwerecarefully faftned with Cement; and 

then 


4 
i 
i 
J 
i 


sere dee 


= pei 














(266) 

then both the Viols and the Pipes being 
(which was:not done without difficulty) 
totally fld with Water, the Séphow 
defcrib’d’ in the fifth Figure, was plac’d 
withits fhorter Legin the Glafs of Wa- 
ter; as formerly sand the Experiment be- 
ing profecuted after the fame manner, 


much more Air then formerly was drawn | 


out, ‘before the Bubbles difclofing them- 
felves in the Water were able to difturb 
the Experiment , becaufe that in the ca- 
pacity of the Viol there was room enough 
for them to ftretch themfelves, without 
depreffing the Water below the ends of 
the Pipes; and, during this time, the 
Water continued to drop out of the pro- 
pending Leg of the Siphon, But at 
length the Receiver being very much em- 
pry d, the paflage of the Water through 
the Siphon ceaf'd, the upper ends of the 
Pipes beginning to appear a little above 
the remaining Water in the Viol; whofe 
dilated Air appear’d likewife to prefs 
down the Water in the Pipes, and fill the 
upper part of chem. And hereby the con- 
tinuity of the Water, and fo the Expe- 
riment it felf being interrupted, we were 
invited to let in the Air again, which, ac- 
cording to its various. proportions of 
preflure 





(267) 

prefliire to that of the Air in the Viol 
and the Pipes, did for a good. while exhi» 
bite a pleafing: variety of Phenomena; 
which we have not now the. leifure to re- 
cite. - And though upon the whole mat- 
ter there feem’d little or no caufe to 
doubt, but that, 1f the Bubbles had not 
difturb’d the Experiment, it would manie 
feftly enough have appear’d that the 
courfe of Water through Siphons de- 
pends upon the preffure of the Air: yet 
werefolv’d,. at our next leifure and con- 
veniency, to: try the Experiment again, 
with a quantity of Water before freed 
from Bubbles by the help: of the fame 
Engine. 


~ This occafion I have hadto take notice 
of Szphons, puts me in minde of an odde 
kinde of Siphon that I caufd to be imade 
a pretty while ago; and, which has been 
fince, by an Ingenious Man of Your ac> 
quaintance, Communicated to divers o 
thers. The occafion was this, An emi- 
nent Mathematician told me one day,that 
fome inquifitive French Men (whofe 
Names I know not) had obferv'd, That, 
incafe one end of a flender and perforated 
Pipe of Glafs be diptin Water, the Li- 
S quor 











(268} 

quot will afcend to fome-height in the 
Pipe, though held perpendicular to the 
plain of the- Waters And, to fatisfie me 
that he mil-related not the Experiment; 
he foon after brought” two or three 
{mall Pipes of 'Glafs, which gave me the 
opportunity of trying it: though I had 
the lef reafon to diftruft ity becaule-T:re- 
member I had often in the long and flen- 
der Pipes of fome Weather Glaffes, 
which I-had.caufd tobe made after. a 
fomewhat peculiar fathion, taken notice 
of the like afcenfion of: the . Liquor , 
though (prefyming it might be cafual) I 
had made but little reflection upon it, But 
after this tryal, beginning to fuppofe, that 
though the Water in thefe Pipes that 
were brought me, rife not above a quar- 
ter of an Inch, (it near fo'high) yet, if 
the Pipes were made flender enough, -the 
Water might rife toa very much greater 
height, Icaufd feveralof them to be, by 


a dexterous Hand, drawn out at the fame 


‘of a Lamp, in one of which that was 
Ja}moft incredibly flender, we found that 
~the Water afcended (as it were of it felf) 
fiveinches by meafure, tothe no {mall 
wonder of fome famous Mathematicians, 


who were Spectators of fome of thefe 
Ex- 





| 





(269) 

Experiments. Andthis height the Wa: 
rer reach’d to, though the Pipe were held 
in as erected.a poftureas wecould: For if 
it were inclin’d, the Water would fill a 
greater part of ic, though aot rife higher 
init, Andwealfo found, chat when the 
infide of the Pipe was wetted before. 
hand, the Water would rife much better 
then otherways: But we caufd not all 
our {lender Pipes to be made ftraight, but 
fome of them crooked, like Siphons : And 
having immerfdthe fhorter Leg of one 
of thefe-inco a Glafs that held fome fair 
Water, we found, as we expected, that 
the Water arifing to thetop of the S3- 
phen, though that were high enough, did 
of it felf run down the longer Leg, and 
continue running like an ordinary Siphon. 
The caufe of this afcenfion of the Wa- 
ter, appear’d to all that were prefent fo 
difficulc,chat I muft not ftay to enumerate 
the various Conjectures that were made 
at it, much lefs to examine them; efpe- 
cially, having nothing but bare Conje- 
tures to fubfticute in the room of thofe 
I donot approve, Wetry’dindeed, by 
conveying avery flender Pipe and a fmall 
Veffel of Water into our Engine, whe- 
ther or no the Exfuction of the ambient 

a ae A 





ee a 


i] 
Vig 
WY 
if | 
ae 
i 
i) 
i 
T 
$ 
j 
i 
F| 
‘ 


fi 
t 

l 

| $ i 


ee aA TE EAN , ia 
= ae SS iis 


















(270) 
‘Air would affift us to finde the caufe of 
the afcenfion. we have been {peaking of: 
But though we imploy’d red Wine in- 
ftead of Water, yet we could {carce cere 
tainly perceive thorow fo much Glafs, as 
was interpofd betwixt our Eyes.and “the 
Liquor, whathappen’d ina Pipe fo flen- 
der, that the rednefs of the Wine was 
{carce fenfible in it. But as far.as we could 
difcern, there happen’d no great altera- 
tion tothe ‘Liquor: which feem’d the lefs 
ftrange, becaufe the Spring of that Air 
that might deprefs the Water in the Pipes 
was equally debilitated with-that which 
remain’d to-prefs upon the furface of the 
Water in the little Glafs.’ Wherefore, in 
favor of his Ingenious Conjecture who 
afcrib’d the Phenomenon; under confide- 
ration to the greater preffure made upon 
the Water_by.the Air without the Pipe, 
then by that within it, (where fo much of 
the Water (coniifting perhaps of Corpu- 
{cles more pliant to the internal furfaces of 
the Air) was contiguous to the fides) it 
was fhown, that: in.cafe the little Glafs 
Veffel that heldthe Water,. of .which a 
part afcended into the flender Pipe, were 
fo clofd,thata Man might with his mouth 
fuck the Air out of it, “the Water would 








(271) 

immediately fibfide in- the {mall Pipe. 
And this would indeed infer, that it af- 
cended. before onely by the preffure of 
the incumbent Air: But that it may 
(how juftly.I know not) be objected, 
that peradventure this would not.hape 
pen, in cafe the upper end of the Pipe 
werein a Vacuum: And that tis very 
probable the Water may fubfide, not 
becaute the preffure of the internal Air 
is taken off by Exfuction, but by reafon 
of the Spring of the external Air, 
which impels the Water it findes in. its 
way to the Cavity deferred by the 
other Air, and would as well impell 
the fame Water upwards, as make it 
fubfide, if it were not for the acci; 
dental pofture of the Glaffes. How- 
ever, having not now leifure to exa- 
mine any further this Matter, I fhall 
onely minde Your Lordfhip, that. if 
You will profecute this Speculation, 
it will be pertinent to finde. out likewife, 
Why the furface of Water (as is manifeft 
in Pipes) ufes to be concave, being des 
prefi’d in the middle, -and higher on eve- 
ry fide ? and Why in Quick-filver onthe 
contrary, not onely the furface is wont 

ee + 3 to 




























(272) 
to be very convex, or fwelling, in the 
middle; but if you dip the end of a flen- 
der Pipe in it, the furface of the Li- 
quor (as’tis call’d) will be lower within 
the Pipe, then without- Which Pheno- 
mena, whether, andhow far, they may 
be deduc’d from the Figure of the Mer- 
curial Corpufcles, andthe Shape of the 
Springy Particles of the Air, I willingly 
leave to be confider’d, 


Experi- \ Q Everal ways we have met with pro- 
mest 36.  nofd, partly by the excellent Galileo, 
and partly by other ingenious Writers, 

to: manifeft that the Air is not devoid of 

| weight ; fome of thefe, require the previ- 
i ous abfence of the Air to be weighed; 
K ! \and others, the violent condenfation of it. 
i But if we could lift a pair of Scales above 
Hi the Atmofphere, or place them ina Va- 
cuum, we might there weigh a parcel of 

ae Air it felf, ashere we do other Bodies in 
Me the Air, becaufe it would there be heavi- 
Wa hu er then that which furrounds it, as are 
ie groffer Bodies we commonly weigh, then 
the medium or ambient Air, Where- 
fore, though we have above declin’dto 
affirm, that our Receiver, when empty- 
Edy 





(273) 

ed, defervesthe name of a true Vacuum 
and though we cannot yet perfectly free 
it from Ait it felf, yet we thought fit to 
try how far the Air would m unifeft its 
gravity in fothin a medium, as we could 
make in our Receiver, by evacuating it. 
We caufd then to be blownat the Flame 
of a Lamp, a Glafs-bubble of about 
the bignefs of a{mallHen-egge, and of 
an Oval form, fave that at one end there 
was drawn out anexceeding flender Pipe, 
that the Bubble might be feal’d up, with 
as little reiaton: as might be, of the 
Air includedin the great or ovall Cavi- 
ty of it: /This Glafs being feal’d, was faz 
ftened to one of the Scales of the exact 
pair of Ballances formerly mention’d 5 
and being counterpoifd with a weight of 
Lead, was convey’d into the Receiver, 
and clofdup init. The Beam < appearing 
to continue Horizontal, the Pump was fet 
awork, and there {carce paft above two 
or three Exfuctions of the Air, before 
the Ballance loft its -£quilibrium, and 
began to incline to that fide on which 
the Bubble was; which, as the Air was 
further and further drawn out,. did mani- 
feftly more and more preponderate, cill 
he that pump’d began to grow y yeary of 

S 4 his 















(274) 


Ais Imployment : after which the aire be- 
‘ing leafurely let in againe , the fcales by 
| degrees returned to their former eZqusli- 


brinm.\After that we tooke them out;and 


cafting into that feale to which the lead 


belong’d three’ quarters of agrain, we 
convey’d the ballance into the Recei- 
ver, which being clofed up, and exhau- 
ited as before , we obferv’d, that as the 
aire was drawne out more and more, fo 
the glaffe bubble came neerer and neer- 
er to an equilibrium with the other 
weight, till at length the beame was 
drawne to hang horizontall; which (as 
we had found by another tryall) wee 
could not bring it to do, when a quar- 
ter of a Graine more was added to 
the fcale, to which the lead belong’d: 
though it feem’d queftionleffe, that if 
wee could have perfectly empty’d the 
Receiver of the contain’d aire, that in- 
cluded inthe bubble would have weigh- 
ed above a grain, notwithftanding its 
having been probably fomewhat Rari- 
fy’d by the flame by the help of which, 
the bubble was feald up. Let us adde, 
that on the regreffe of the excluded 
air, the Lead,and the weight caft into the 
fame 





(275) 
fame feale; ‘did againe very much pre- 
ponderatg s: ` ot ; 


We likewife convey’d into the Re- 
ceiver, the fame bubble, open’d.at 
the end of the'flender pipe above men- 
tioned, but having drawne out the aire, 
after the accuftomed manner, we found 
not as before, the bubble to out-weigh: 
the oppofite lead, fo that by thevhelp 
of our Engine, we canweighthe Airey 
as we weigh other Bodies , in its: nå- 
turall or ordinary confiftence, without 
at all condenfing it: Nay , which is ré- 
markable, having convey’d a Lamb’s 
bladder about halfe full of Aire into the 
Receiver, wee oblerved, that though 
upon the drawing out of the ambient 
aire the imprifoned Air fo expanded 
it felf, as todiftend the Bladder fo, as to 
{gem ready to break it, yet this rarified 
„Air did manifeftly deprefs the Scale 
whereunto it was annexed, 


Another thing, we muft not forget to 
mé€cion,that happend to us, whil’f{t we were 
making tryals cõcerning the weight of the 
Air; namely, That having once caufd the 

Pump 
















(276) 

Pump to be fomewhat obftinately ply’d, 
to difcover the better what may be ex- 
pected from the thinnefs of the medium 
in this Experiment the Imprifoa’d Air 
brokeits brittle Prifoa, and throwing the 
greateft partof it againft the fide of the 
Receiver, dath’d ir againit that thick Glafs 
into a multitude of pieces. Which Acci- 
dent I mention, partly that ic may con- 
firm what we deliver’d in our Reflections, 
upon the firft Experiment, where we con- 
fider’d what would probably be done by 
the Spring of the Air Imprifon'd in fuch 
Glafles, in cafe the ballancing preflure of 
the ambient Air were withdrawn; and 
partly, that we may thence difcern of how 
clofe a Texture Glafs is, fince fo very 
thina film of Glafs (if I may fo call it) 
prov’d fo impervious to the Air, that it 
could not get away through the Pores, 
but was forc’d to break the glafs in pieces 


tofreeitfelf; andthis, notwithftanding 


the time and advantage it had to try to 
get out at the Pores. And this I mention, 


thatneither our Experiments, nor thofe 


of divers Learned Men, might receive 
any prejudice from an Experiment which 
I happen’d to make divers years ago, and, 
Which having been fo much taken notice 
OF 


(277) 
of by curious: Men, may be drawn to 
countenance their erroneous Opinion, who 
would fain perfwade us, That Glafs is 
penetrable by Air properly fo called. Our 
Experiment was briefly this: We were 
diftilling a certain f{ubftance, that much a- 
bounded with fubtle Spirits and volatile 
Salt, ina {trong Earthen-veffel of an un- 
ufual fhape, to which was luted a large 
Receiver, made of the courfer fort of 
Glafs, (which the Trades-men are wont 
to call Green-glafs) but in our’ abfence, 
the Fire,though it were to be very ftrong, 
was by the negligence or miftake of thofe 
we appointed to attend it, fo exceflively 
increaf?d, that when we came back to the 
Fornace we found the Spirituous and Sa- 
line Corpufcles pour’d out (if I may fo 
callit} fohot, and fo copioufly into the 
Receiver, that they made it all opacous, 
and more likely to fliein pieces, then fit 
to be touch’d. Yet, being curious to ob- 
ferve the effects of a Diftillation, profe- 
cuted with fo intenfe and unufual degree 
of heat, weventur’d to come near, and 
obferv’d,among other things, that on the 
out-fide of the Receiver, at a great di- 
{tance from the jun@ture, there was fetled 
a round whitifh Spot or two, a a 
r 


3 












(278) 
firft we thought might be fome ftainup- 
on the Glafs; but after, finding it to 
be in divers Qualities like. the Oyl, 
and Salt of: the Concrete we were Di- 
dtilling; we began to fulpect that the 
moft {ubtle and fugitive parts of the im. 
petuoufly, afcending Steams, had pene- 
trated the fubftance (as they {peak) of 
the Glafs, and by. the cold of the am- 
bient Air were condenfd on the fur- 
face. of it. And though we were ve- 
ry backward to credit this fufpition, and 
therefore call’d in an Ingenious Perfon 
or two, both to affift us in the Ob. 
fervation, and have Witnefs of its e- 
vent, we continued a while longer to 
watch the efcape of fuch unctuous Fumes, 
and upon the whole matter unanimoufly 
concluded, That all things confider d, 
the {ubtle parts of the diftill’d matter 
being violently agitated, by the excef- 
five heat had pafl'd through the Pores 
of the Glafs, widen d by the fame heat, 
But this having never happen'’d but 
once in any of the Diftillations we have 
either made or feen, though thefe be 
not a few, it is much more reafonable 
to fuppofe, that the pervioufnels of 
our Receiver to a Body much more 
yo. ee hs fubtle 











(279) 
fabtle then Air, proceeded partly from 
the loofer Texture of that particular 
parcel of Glafs the Receiver was. made 
of (for Experience-has caught us, chat 
all Glafs is notcof: the fame compact- 
nefs and folidityy:and partly -from the 
enormous heat, which, together with 
the vehement ‘agitation of the pene- 
trant: Spirits , open’d the Poresyof the 
Glafs; then to imagine that: ‘fuch a 
fubftance as Air, fhould, beable £o.pers 
nieate the Body of Glafs ‘contrary to 
the teftimony. ofa. thoufand, Chymicak 
and: Mechanical Experiments and .of 


many. of ithofe: made: in. our: Engine, Ge 


fpecially that newly. recitedi: ; May,.b 
our fifth Experimene it appears, that, 
a thin Bladder: will not .ar-its Pores 
give paflage even to rarified Ait. And 
On this occafion we will annex an Ex- 
periment, which has made..fome of 
thofe we. have acquainted. with it’, 
doubt, whether the Corpufcles of ‘the 
Air: be ‘not Jeffe fubtle chen thofe of 
‘Water. 

But without examining.-here the 
reafonableneffe of that doubt, we will 
proceed to recite the Experiment i it felf, 
which {eems co teach, That though Air, 
when 









































(280) 
when fufficiently compreff'd, may per? 
chance get entrance into: narrower holes 
and crannies then Water; yet unlefs the 
Air before’d in.at fuch very little holes, 
it will not get in at them, though ‘they: 
may be big’ enough:to let Water puis 
through: them. 

The Experiment then was this: P Y 
a: fair Glafs Siphon, the lower end of 
whofe'longeft Leg was drawn by degrees 
to fuch aflendernefs, thar the Orifice, at 
which the Water was to fall out, would 
hardly admit a very {mall Pia: This si- 
phon being inverted, the. matter was. fo 
order’d, that alittle Bubble of Air-was 


‘intercepted ‘in the flendereft part of the 


Siphon,betwixt the litte hole newly men- 
tion’d, and the incumbent Water, upon 
which, -it-came to pafs, that the Air be- 
ing-not to'be forc’d through fo narrow a 
palage, by {o light a Cylinder of Water, 
though dinounting to the length of divers 
Inches, ‘as lean`d upon it, hinder’d the 
further Efflux of the Water, as long as I 
pleal'dto let it ftay in that narrow place : : 
whereas, -when by blowing a little at the 
wider end of the Siphon, that little par- 
cel of Air was fore'd out with fome Wa- 
ter, the remaining Water, that before 
con- 





(281), 

continu’d fufpended, began freely to drop 
down again as formerly. And if you 
takea- Glafs Pipe, whether it be inthe 
form of a Siphon, or no, that being for 
the moft part of the thicknefs of a Mans 
Finger; is yet towards oneend fo flen- 
der, as to terminate ina hole almoft as 
{mall as a Horfe-hair ; and if you fill this, 
Pipe with Water, you will finde that Li- 
quor to drop down freely enough tho- 
row the flender Extream : But if you then 
invert the Pipe, you will finde that the 
Air will not eafily get in at the fame hole 
through which the Water paff'd. For ia 
the {harp end of the Pipe, fome Inches 
of Water will remain fufpended, whith 
etis probable would not happen, if ‘the 
Air could getin to fucceedit, fince if the 
hole were a little wider, the Water would 
immediatly fubfide. “And though it be 
true, that if the Pipe be of the length of 
many Inches, a great part of the Wa- 
ter will run downat the wider Orifice, yet 
that feems to happen tor fome other rea- 
fon, then becaufe the Air fucceeds it at 
the upper and narrow Orifice, finceall the 
{lender part. of the Pipe, and perhaps 
{ome Inches more, will continue full of 
Water. 

. And 



















(282) 

And on this occafion I remember, that 
whereas it appears by our fifth Experi- 
ment, That thé Aérial Corpufcles: (ex- 
cept perhaps fome.that are extraordinari- 
ly fine) will not.pafle thorow the Pores 
ofa Lambs Bladder,yet Particles of Wa- 
rer will, as we’ have long fince obferwd, 
and as may be eafily try’d, by very clofe- 
ly tying a little Alcalizate Salt (weul'd 
the Calx of Tartar, made with Nitre) 
ina fine Bladder, and dipping the lower 
end of the Bladder in Water; for if you 
hold it there for a competent.while, , you 
will finde chat there will ftrain thorow the 
Pores of the Bladder Water enough to 
diffolve the Salt into a Liquor. 

=: But I fee Lam flipt into a Digreffion, 
wherefore I will not examine, whether, 
the Experiment I have related, proceed- 
ed from hence,. That the fpringy Texture 
of the Corpufcles of the Air, makes 
them lefs apt to yield and accommodate 
themfelves eafily to the narrow. Pores of 
Bodies, then the more flexible Particles 
of -Water ; or whether it may more pro- 
babiy beafcrib’d to fome other Caufe. 
Nor will I ftay to confider how far we may 
hence be afifted to ghefs atthe caufe of 
the afcenfion of Water in the flender 
l Pipes, 


(283) 

Pipes and Siphons formerly mention‘d, 
but will return to our Bubble; and take 
notice, That we thought fit alfo to en- 
deavor to meafure the capacity of the 
Bubble we had made ufe of, by filling 
it with Water, that we might the better 
know how. much Water anfwered in 
weight to 2 of aGrainof Airs butnot- 
withftanding all the diligence that was 
ufed to preferve fo brittle a Veffel, ic 
broke before we could perfec what we 
were about, and we were not then pro- 
vided of another Bubble fit for our 
turn. 


The hafte I was in, My Lord, when I 
fent away the laft Sheet, made me forget 
to take notice toyouof a Problem that 
occutr'd to my thoughts, upon the oc- 
cafion of the flow breaking of the Glafs 
Bubble in our evacuated Receiver. For 
it may feem ftrange, fince by our fixth 
Experiment it appears,that che Air, when 
permitted, will by ics own internal Spring 
expand it felfe twice as much as Mer- 
fennus was able to expand it , by the 
heat even of a candent eolipile: Yet 
the Elater of the Air was {carce able to 
break avery thin Glafs Bubble, and ut- 

T terly 















(284} 
terly unable to break one fomewhat thic? 
ker; within whole cavity it_was’impri- 
fon’ds whereas Air pent up and agitated 
by heat ts able to perform fo much more 
PATA effects, that (not to mention 
thofe of: Rarefaction that are:more obvi- 
ous) the Learned Jeiuit Cabens (he that 
P: Nil! writ ofthe Load-ftone) relates, That he 
coh ® fovea Marble Pillar (fo vaft, that three 
men together with difplay’d arms ‘could 
not imbraceiit, and tharsooo. Yoke of 
Oxen drawing it feveral:ways with all 
their ftrength > could not-have torn. it 
affunder) quite broken off in the micft; 
by reafon of fome Wood, which hap- 
pening td -be sage juft by the Pi llar; ‘the 
heat proceeding from’ the neighboring 
i | Fire, {okarified fome Air or Spirituous 
ae 3 Matter which was {hat upvin the cavities 
wl of the Marble, thatit broke through the 
folid Body of the Stoneto obtain room 
i to expand it felf, 
Tremémber'I have taken notice: that 
probably the reafon why, cheincluded Air 
eidnot break the her metrically: feal’d Bub- 
bles thatremain’d intire iicour empryed 
Receiver,was, That the Air, being fome- 
what rarefied: by the Flame imploy’d to 
clofe the .Glafs, its Spring, supon the-re- 
ce{s 














(285) 

cefs of the heat, grew weaker then before, 
But though we reject not that ghefs, yet 
it will not in the prefent cafe Terve the 
turn, becaufe that much {maller Glats 
bubbles exactly clofd, will, by the in- 
cluded Air. (though agitated but by the 
heat of avery moderate Fire) be made 
to fly in pieces. Whether we may be 
affifted to falve this Problem, by confi- 
dering that the heat does from within ve- 
hemently agitate the Corpufcles of the 
Air, and adde its affiftance to the Spring 
they had before, I fhall not now examine: 
fince I here but propoféa Probl m, and 
that chiefly that by this memorable Story 
of Cabeus, notice may be takenof the 
prodigious power of Rarefaétion, which 
hereby appears capable of performing 
ftranger things then any cf our Experi. 
ments have hitherto afcrib’d to it. 

We thould hence, My Lord, imme» 
diatly proceed to the next Experiment, 
but that we-think it fit, onthis occafion, 
to acquaint You with what lome former 
tryals (though not made in our Engine) 
have taught us, concerning what we 
would have difcover'd by the newly 
mention’d Bubble that broke. And this 
the rather, becaufe (a great part of this 

T 2 Letter 


oe 


| 
1 

og 
Li 
















(286) 
letter fuppofing the gravity of the Aire} 
it wil not be impertinent to determine 
more particularly then hitherto we have 
done, what gravity we afcribe to it. 
Vetooke then an aig i made of 
copper, weighing fix ounces, five drachms, 
and eight and forty graines : this being 
mace as hot as we durft make it, (for feare 
of melting the mettle, or at leaft the So- 
dar ) was removed from the fire and ime 
mediately ftopped with’ hard wax that no 
Aire at all might get in at the little 
hole wont to be left in e£olipiles for the 
fumes to iflue outat: Then the -#olipile 
being fuffer’d leafurely to coole was again 
weighed together with the wax that ftopt 
it, and was found to weigh ( by reafon of 
the additionall weight of the wax ) fix 
ounces, fixe drachmes, and 39 graines. 
Laftly, the wax being perforatea without 
taking any of it out of the Scale, the 
externall Aire was fuffered to rufh in 
( which it did with fome noyfe )'and then 
the eolipile and wax , being againe 
weighed amounted to fix ounces, fix 
drachmes, and 50. graines. So that the 
e#olipile freed as farre as our fire could 
free it, from it’s Aire,weighedJeffe then 
it 





(287) 

it felfe when replenifhed with Air, full 
eleven graines. That is,the Air contain- 
able within the cavity of the -£olipile a- 
mounted to eleven graines and fomewhat 
more; I fay fomewhat more, becaufe of 
the particles of the Air, that were not 
driven by the fire out of the e€olipile, 
And by theway (if there be no miftake 
in the obfervations of the diligent Mer- 
fenaus )it may feeme ftrange that it fhould 
fo much differ from 2.0r 3. of ours ; in 
none of which we could rarifie the Air in 
our Aolipile(though made red hot almoft 
allover, and fo immediately plung’d into 
cold water ) to halfe that degree which he 
mentions, namely to 70, times it’s natu- 
rallextent, unleffe ic were that the -£0- 
lipile he imploy’d was able to fuftaine 
a more vehement heat then ours (which 
yet we kept in fo great an one , that once 
the foder melting, it fell afunder into the 
two Hemifpheres it confifts of.) 


‘The fore-mentioned wayof weighing 
the Air by the help of an «£olipile feems 
fomewhat more exact then that which 
Merfennus ufed,In that in ours the e£oli- 
pile was not weighed, till it was cold; 
whereas in his, being weighed red hot, it 

a3 is 


ee es 


a 


ST a ain a r, v 


it 
d 
1 


Sabine e 
a ae = g 

































(288 ) 
fubject to loofe of it’s fubftance in the 
cooling,for (as we have elfewhere noted 
on another occafion ) Copper heated red 
hot is wont in the cooling to:throw off 
little thin {cales in fuch plenty,that having 
purpofely watcht a Copper e£olipile du- 
ring its refrigeration, we have feen the 
place round about it almoft cover ed with 
thofe little {cales it had every way feat- 
ter’d : which, however they amount not 
tomuch, ought not to be over-looked, 
when ‘tis "fo light a body as Air, that ts 
to be weighed. We will not examine, 
whether the Alo/ipzie in cooling may not 
receive fome little increment of weight, 
either from the vapid or faline Steames 
that wander up and downe in the Air: But 
we will rather mention,that (for the grea- 
ter exactnefle ) we imployed to weigh our 
e“olipile, both when fill’d onely with Air 
and when replenifht with Water , a paire 
of {cales that would turne (as they {peak} 
with the fourth part of a grain, 

. As to the proportion of weight be- 
twixt Air and Water, fome learned men 
have attempted it by wayes fo unaccurate 
vp hey feeme to have much miftaken 

- For( not to mention the improbable 
a of Kepler and-others.) The er 
ne 





(289) 

ned and diligént Ricctolus , having ‘pure 
pafely, endeavoured to inveftigate this 
proportion by meanes of a thin blad- 
der, eftimates the weight of the Air to 
that of the Water to be as one to ten 

thoufand,or thereabouts. And indeed I re 
methber that having formerly, on a cer- 
tain occafion, w eighed a large bladder full 
of Air, and found it when the Airwas all 
{queefed out, to have contained fourteen 
graines of Air. I found the fame bladder 
afterwards fill’d with water to’containe 
very neer 14. pound of that liquor: accors 
ding to which account, the proportion of 
Airto Water wasalmoft as a graine to a 
pound, that is, as one to 2bove 7600. To 
this we may adde, that on the other fide, 
Galilco himfelfe uling another, but an un- 
accurate Way too, defined the Air to be 
in weight to Water, but as one to 4.hun- 
dred. But the way formerly propofed of 
weighing the Air by an olipile, feemes 
py great oddes more exact, and(as farre 
as we could ghefle ) feemed to agree well 
enough with the ex periment made in our 
Receiver, Wherefore it will be beft to 
cruftour Æolipile inthe enquiry we are a- 
bout, and according to our obfervations 
zhe water it contained amountislg to one 
T A and 






















(290) 
and twenty ounces and an halfe, and as 
much Air as was requifite to fill it ' weigh- 
ing eleven graines, the proportion in gra- 
vity of Air to Water of the fame bulk 
will re as one to 938. And though we 
could not fill the Æolipiie with water , fo 
exaGly as we would, yet in regard we 
could not either as perfectly as we would, 
drivethe Air out of it by heat, we think 
the proportion may well enough hold: 
butthole that are delighted with round 
numbers ( as the phrafeis) will not be 
much miftaken if they reckon water to be 
neere a thouland times heavier than Air. 
And (for further proof that we have made 
the proportion betwixt chefe two bodies 
rather greater then lefler then indeed it iss 
and alfoto confirme our former obferva- 
tion of the weight of theAir)we will adde, 
That, having another time put fome Wa- 
ter into the Æolzpile before we fet it on 
the fire,that the copious vapours of the 
rarefied liquor might the better drive out 
the Air, we found, upon tryall carefully 
made,that when the Æolipile was retrige- 
rated, and the included vapours were by 
the cold turned againe into water ( which 
could not have happen’d to the Air , that 
the precéeding pare expell’d ) the ts 
when 











(291) 
when it was let in, increafd the weight of 
the -£olipile as much as before, namely, 
Eleven Grains ; though there were alrea- 
dy init twelve Drachmes and a half, be- 
fidesa couple of Grains of Water, which 
remain’d of that we had formerly put in- 
to it to drive out the Air. 

aM erfennus indeed tells us, that by his 
account Air isin weight to Water, as 1 to 
1356. Andadds, that we may, without 
any danger, believe that the gravity of 
Water to that of Air of a likebulk, is 
notlefs thenof 1300to-1. And confe- 
quently, that the quantity of Airto a 
quantity of Water equiponderant there- 
to, isas 1300to 1, But why we fhould 
relinquifh our own carefully repeated try- 
als, Ifeenot, Yet Iam unwilling tore- 
ject thofe of fo accurate and ufeful a Wri- 
ter: And therefore fhall propofe a way 
of reconciling our differing Obfervations, 
by prefenting, that the difcrepance be- 
tweenthem may probably arife from the 
differing confiftence of the Air at London 
and at Paris : For our Áir being more cold 
and moift, then that which Your Lord- 
fhip now breaths, may be fuppofd alfo 
to bea fourth or fifth part more heavy. I 
leave it to be confider’d, whether it be of 
any 

































as (2929 

any moment thatour Obfervations were 
made in the midft of Winter, whereas his 
were perhaps made in fome warmer time 
of ithe Year.: But I thinkit were not a- 
mifs that, by, the method formerly pro- 
pofd, the gravity of the Air were ob- 
ferv’d both in feveral Countries, and in 
the fame Countiyy in the feveral Seafons 
of the Year and differing Temperatures of 
the Weather. AndI would give fome- 
thing of value to know the weight of fuch 
an «olipile as ours full of air in the midit 
of: Winterin. Neva Zembla, if that be 
true which we formerly took notice of, 
namely, That the Hollanders, who Win. 
tered there, found that Air fo thick that 
their Clock would not go. 

If Your Lordthip fhould now ask me, 
if T could not by the help of thefe, and 
our other Obfervations, decide the Con- 
troverfies of our Modern Mathematici- 
ans about the height of the Air or Atmo- 
{phere, by determining how high it doth 
indeed reach: I fhould anfwer, That 
thoughit feems eafte enough to fhew that 
divers Famous and Applauded Writers 
have been miftaken in affigning the heigth 
of the Atmofphere: Yet itfeems very 
dificuleprecifely to define of what height 


Ay 


(293 
itis.. And becaufe we have hitherto but 
lightly touch’d upon amatter of fuch im- 
portance,we prefume it wil not bethoughr 
impertinent, uponthis occafion; to annex 
fomething towards the Elucidation of 
It. 

What we have already try'dand newly 
fet down, allows us to take it for granted, 
that (at leaft about. London) the. propor- 
tion of. gravity betwixt Water and Air, 
of equal bulk, is as of a thoufand to 
one, 

The next thing therefore: that weare 
to enquire after, in order to our prefent 
defign, isthe difference in weight betwixe 
Water and Quick-filver: And though 
this hath been defin’dalready by the Il- 
luftrious Verulam, and fome other inqui- 
fitive Perfons, that have compar'd’ the 
weight of feveral Bodies, and caft their 
Obfervations into Tables, yet we fhail 
not {cruple to annex our own tryals about 
it: Partly, becaufe we finde Authors 
confiderably to dif-agree; partly, becaufe 
weul'dexacter Scales, and a fomewhat 
more wary method then others feem to 
have done: And partly alfo, becaufe ha- 
ving profecuted our inquiry by two or 
three feveral ways; the finall a 

2 


EDA 


4 
ii 4 


Oe ee ee 














BA) 

between the events may affure us that we 
were not much miftaken. 

_ We took thena Glafs Pipe, of the 
form of aninverted Siphon, whofe fhape 
is delineated in the fixteenth Figure: And 
pouring into it a quantity of Quick filver, 
weheldit fo, that the iuperficies of the 
Liquor, both in the longer and fhorter 
Jeg, lay ina Horizontal Line, denoted in 
the Scheme by the prick’d Line E F ; then 
pouring Water into the longer Leg of the 
Siphon, till that was daoi. fill’d, we ob- 
ferv’d the furface of the Quick-filver in 
that leg to be, by the weight of the Wa- 
ter, depr eff `d, as from EtoB; and in 
the fhorter leg, to be as much impell’d 
upward as from FtoG: Whereupon ha- 
ving formerly ftuck marks, as well at the 
point B, asat the oppofite point D, we 
meatur d both the diftance D C to have 


the height of the Cylinder of Quick-fil- 


ver, which was raifd above the Point D 
(level with the furface of the Quick- filver 
in the other leg)by the weight of the Wa- 
ter, andthe diftance B A which gave us 
the height of the Cylinder of Water. So 
that the diftance D C amounting to 22 
Inches, and the height of the Water a- 
mounting 308 : Inches 5 and the whole 
num- 


(295) 

numbers on both fides, which the annex- 
ed Fractions being reduc’d to improper 
Fractions of the fame denomination, the 
proportion appear’d to be (the denomi- 
nators beng left out as equal on both fides) 
as 121 to 16655 or by reduction, as one 
to 13%. ; 

Befides this unufual way of determi- 
ning the gravity of fome things, we mea” 
fur'd the proportion betwixt Quick+filver 
and Water, by the help of fo exacta bal- 
lance, as loofes its e£quilibrinm by the 
hundredth part of a Grain. But becaufe 
there is wont to be committed an over- 
fightin weighing Quick-filver and Wa- 
ter, efpecially ifthe Orifice of the Vefel 
wherein they are put be any thing wide, in 
regard that men heed not that the {urface 
of Water in Veflels will be concave, 
but that of Quick-filver, notably. convex 
or protuberant: To avoid this ufual over- 
fight (I fay we made ufe of a glafs bubble, 
blown very thin atthe Flame ofa Lamp, 
that itmight not be too heavy for the 
Ballance,and terminating ina very flender 
neck, wherein the concavity or convexity 
of a Liquor could not be confiderable: 
This Glafs weighing 23+ Grains,we fill'd 

almott 
















(296) 

almoft with Quick-filvet;. and faftning a 
markover againft the middle of the pros 
tuberanc:Superficies:as :near as our Eyes 
could judge, we found that the Quick- 
filvevalone weighed 2992 Grains: Then 
the Quick-filver being: pour’d: out, -and 
the fame Gla(s being fill’d as full of com- 
mon Water, we found the Liquor to 
weigh 214: Grains.:: Whereby it appear’'d 
that the weight of Water to Quick- 
filver,‘is.as one to 13: Though our Il- 
luftrious: Veralam (queftionlefs not tor 
wantof Judgement or Care, but of ex- 
act Inftruments) makes the proportion 
betwixe:‘thofe two Liquors to be greater 
then oforto 17. ‘Andito adde, that up- 
on. the by, fince Quick-filver and welt 
rectified Spirit of Wine, are (how juftly 
I fay not} accounted, the :one the-hea- 
vieft, and ithe otherthe lighteft of Li- 
quors 5 we: thought: to fill in the fame 
Glafs, and: with the fame Scales to ob- 
ferve the difference betwixt them, which 
we found'to be as of “r: toia 6i wheres 
by. iesappear’d; That the difference- be- 
twixt Spirit‘of Wine, that may be made 
to burn all away, (fuch as.was ours} and 
common -Water;is as:betwixe 1 and 14 - 


We 





















(297) 

We might here take occafion toad- 
mire, that though Water (as appear’d:by 
the Experiment formerly. mention’d: of 
the Pewter Veflel) feems not capable of 
any confiderable condenfation, and feems 
not.to have interfperfd in it any ftore of 
Air ; yet Quick-filver, of no greater bulk 
then Water, fhould weigh near fourteen 
times as much. But having onely point- 
ed at this as a thing worthy of confidera-: 
tion, we will proceed in our inquiry after 
the heigth of the Acmofphere: Andto: 
avoid the trouble of Fractions, we wilk 
affume that Quick -filver is fourteen times: 
as heavy as Water, fince it wants folitrlé 
of being fo. : fe ugi 

Wherefore having: now given us the 
proportion of Air to Water, and Water 
- to Quick-filver, it will be very eafie: to: 
finde the proportie betwixt Air and 
Quick-filver, in cafe we will fuppofe the 
Atmofphere to be uniformly. of fuch a 
confiftence as the Air we weighed here 


brium with theexternal Air, that in che 
| Torricellian Experiment keeps the Quicks 
filver from {ubfiding; And fince, by out 
accurate Experiment formerly mention’d; 
it 


below. , For fince our Engine hath fuf- | 
ciently :manifefted that’tis the e£qailis 





poi et aE A A 


Se SS eR 



































(258) 
it appears that a Cylinder of Mercury; 
able to ballance a Cylinder of the whole 
Atmofphere, amounted to near about 
thirty Inches; and fince , confequently 
we may affume the proportion of Quick- 
filver to Air to be as fourteen thoufand to 
one; it will follow, that a Cylinder of 
Air, capable to maintain an «£quilibriam, 
with a Mercurial Cylinder of two Foot 
and an half in height, muft amount to 
35000 Feet of our Englifh Meafure , 
and confequently (reckoning five Foor 
to a Geometrical Pace, and one thoufand 
{fuch Paces to a Mile) to feven full 
Miles. 

But this (as we lately intimated) pro- 
ceeds upon the fuppofition, that the Air 
is every where of the fame confiftence 
that we found it near the furface of the 
Earth; bùt that cannot with any fafety 
be concluded, not onely for the reafon I 
finde to have been taken notice of by the 
Antients , and thus expreft in Seneca: 


Seace:Nat: Omnis Aér (ayshe) quo propior eft terris 


Cap, 10. 


quelt:lib.4. hoc crafsior , quemadmodum in aqua Gy in | 


omni humore fax imac, stain Aére fpif- 
fifima quad, defidunt, but much more, 
becaufe the {pringy Texture of the Aérial 
Corpufcles, makes them capable of a 
yery 





























(299) 
very great compreffion, which the weight 
of the incumbent part of the Atmo- 
{phere is very fufficient to give thofe that 
be undermoft and near the furface of the 
Earth. Andif we recall to minde thofe 
former Experiments, whereby we have 
manifefted, That Air, much rarefied with- 
out heat, may eafily admit a further ra- 
refaction from heat;and that the Air,even 
without being expanded by heat, is capa- 
ble of being rarefied to above one hundred F | 
and fifty times the extent it ufually pof- i, 
fefles here below; How canit be demon- T 
ftrated that the Atmofphere may not, for j 
ought we know, or at leaft for ought cat i | 
be determin’d by our Statical and Mecha- 
nical Experiments, rife to the height of 
Five and twenty German Leagues, itnot 
of fome hundred of common Miles ? 

And this conjecture it felf may appear 
very injurious to the height whereunto 
< Exhalations may afcend, if we will allow Ricciol: 
that there was no miftake in that ftrange 47”. 
Obfervation made at Tolous in a clear 2. lid, 10. 
Night in Auguft, by the diligent Ma-/e4.6.prop. 
thematician Emanuel Magnan, and thus‘; 
Recorded by Ricciolus, (for I have notat J. . Per- 
hand the Authors own Book) Vidis (fays{*4i7# 
he) ab hora nadecima poft meridiem uff, ad yop: 38. 
V ~ mediam 


WES e o t e RS E 









(308) Ai 


mediam notem Luna infra horizontem 
pofita, nubeculam quandam luctdam prope 
Meridianum fere ufque ad Lenith difufam 
gue confideratis omnibus non poterat die a 
fole itluminari ; ideoque altior efe debuit 
tota umbraterras Addit (continues Ricci- 
olus) fimile quid eveniffe Michaeli Angelo 
Riccio apud Sabinos verfantt nempe viro 
in Mathefi eruditifsimo. 

Various Obfervations made at the 
feet, tops, andinterjacent parts of high 
Mountains, might perchance fomewhat 
affift us to make an eftimate in what pro- 
portion, if in any certain one, the higher 
Air is thicker then the lower, and o hels 
at the dif-form confiftence, as to laxity 
and compactnefs of.the Air at feveral 
diftances trom us. And if the difficul- 
ties about the refractions of the Celeftial 
Lights, were fatistactorily determin’d, 
that might alfo much conduce to the pla- 
cing due limits to the Atmo! (phere(whofe 
Dimentions thofe Gintayautons about 
Refractions feem hitherto much to con- 
tract.) But for the prefent we dare not 
pronounce any thing peremptorily con- 
cerning the height of it, but leaveitto 
further inquiry : contenting our {elves to 
have manifefted the miftake of divers 
eminent 


+] 
(301) 

eminent Modern Writers, who will not 
allow the Atmofphere to exceed above 
two or three Miles in height (as the Fa- 
mous Kepler will not the ër refractivus) 
and to have rendred a reafon why in the 
mention we made in the Notes upon the 
firft Experiment, touching the height of 
the Atmofphere,we {crupled not to {peak 
of it, as if it might be many Miles high. 


WY E will now proceed to recite a Experi 
Phenomenon, which, though mime 37 
made amongft the firft, we thought fit 

not to mention till after many others,that 

we might have the opportunity to ob- 
ferveas many Circumftances of it as we 

could, and fo prefent Your Lordfhip ac 

once, moft of what we at feveral times 

have taken notice of concerning fo odde 

a Phenomenon, 





Our Engine had not been long finifh’d, 
when, at the firft leafure we could fteal 
from our occafions to make tryal of it, 
we caufd the Air to be pump’d out of 
the Receiver; and whil’ft Iwas bufied in 
entertaining a Learned Friend that jaft 
thencame to vilit me, an Ingenious By- 

V3 ftander 


















*e 
(302) 

ftander, thought he perceiv’d fome new 
kind of Light in the Receiver, of which 
giving me haftily notice, my Friend and 
Iprefently obferv’d, that when the Suce 
ker was drawn down, immediately upon 
the turning of the Key, there appear’d 
akindeof Light inthe Receiver, almoft 
like a faint flah of Lightening in the 
Day-time, and almoft as fuc ideni ly didit 
appear and vanil. Having, not with- 
out fome amazement, obferv’d divers 


` of thefe Apparitions of Light, we took 


notice that the Day was clear, the hour 
about tenin the Morning, that the onely 
Window in the Room facd the North; 
and alfo, that by interpofing a Cloak, or 
any opacous Body between the Receiver 
and the Window, though thereft of the 
Room were fufficient! y enlightned, yet 
the flathes did not appear as before, un- 
lefs the opacous Body were remov'd. 
But not being able on all thefe Circum- 
{tances to ground any firm Conjecture 
at the caufe of this furprifing Phenome- 

per, as foon as Night was come, we 
made the Room very dark ; and plying 
the Pump, asin the Morning, we could 
not, though we often try’d, find, upon 
the turning of the Key, fo much as ae 
leaft 
















































«% 


303) 

feaft glimmering of Light 5 whence we 
inferr'd, that the flafh appearing in the 
Receiver, did not proceed from any new 
Light generated there, but from lome 
reflections of the light of the Sun, or 
other Luminous Bodies placd without 
it; though whence that Reflection 
fhould proceed, it pofd us to conje- 
cture, 


Wherefore the next Morning , ho- 
ping to inform our felves better, we 
went about to repeat the Experiment, 
but though we could as well as former- 
ly exhauit the Receiver, though the 
place wherein we made the tryal was the 
very fame; and though other Circums. 
ftances were refembling, yet we could 


not difcover the leaft appearance of 


Light all that Day, nor on divers c- 
thers on which tryal was again fruitlef- 
ly mace; norcan we to this very time 
be {ure a Day betore-hand that thefe 
Flathes will be to be feen in our great 
Receiver. Nay, having once found the 
Engine in a good humour (if I may 
fo fpeak) to thew this trick, and fent 
notice of it to our Learned Friend 
Doctor Wallis, who exprefl'd a great 
V3 delire 













(304) 
defire to fee this Phenomenon, though he 
were not then above a Bow.{hoot off, and 
made hafte to fatisfie his Curiofity ; yet 
by that time he was come, the thing he 
came for was no longer to be feen; fo 
that having vainly endeavored to exhibit 
again the Phenomenon in his pretence, I 
began to apprehend what he might think 
of me, when rig eros) the Engine 
prefented us a flafh,and after that a fecond, 
and as many more, as fuffic’d to fatisfie 
him that we might very well confidently 
relate, that we have our felves feen this 
Phenomenon, though not confidently pros 
mife to fhew it others. 

And this unfuccefsfulne(s whereto our 
Experiment is lyable, being fech, that by 
ail our watchfulnefs and tryals, we could 
never reduce it to any certain Rules or 
Obfervations, fince in all conftitutions 
of the Weather, times of the Day, ee. 
it will fometimes anfwer, and fometimes 
dif-appoint our Expectations, We are 
much difcourag’d trom venturing to frame 
an Hypothefis to give an account of it: 
which if the Experiment did conftantly 
fucceed, might the more hopefully be at- 
tempted; by the help of the following 
Phenomena laid together: fomeof them 
pro- 











(305) 
produc’d’ upon tryals purpofely made 
to examine the validity of the conjectures, 
other tryals had fuggefted. 

Firft then we obferv'd, that the Appa- 
rition of Light may be made as well by 
Candle-light, as by Day-light; and in 
whatever pofition the Candle be held, in 
reterence to the Receiver, as on this or 
that hand of it, above it, beneath it, or 
any other way, provided the Beams of 
Light be not hinder’d from falling upon 
the Veffel, 

Next, we noted that the fafh appears 
immediately upon the turning of the 
Key, to let the Air out of the Receiver 
into the empty’d Cylinder, in fo much 
that I remember not that when at any 
time in our great Receiver, the Stop- cock 
was open’d before the Cylinder was ex- 
haufted (whereby it came co pafs that the 
Air did rather defcend, then rufh into the 
bah tae the often mention’d flath ap- 
pear’d to our eyes. 

Yet, we further obfeiv'd, that when in- 
ftead of the great Receiver we made ufe 
of a {mall Glats, noc containing above a 
poundand a half of Water, the Pheno- 
menon might be exhibited though the 
Stop-cock were open, provided the 
V 4 Sucker 















an 


SORE os a gongs 


k MERE RET eres Sn ee r 


ks 






















(306) 
Sucker were drawn nimbly down: 

We noted too, that when we began to 
empty the Receiver, the appearances of 
Light were much more confpicuous 
then towards the latter end, when little 
Aur at a time could pafs out of the Re- 
ceiver. 

Weobferv'd alfo, that when the-Suc- 
ker had not been long before well Oyl’d, 
and inftead of the great Receiver, the 
{maller Veffel above-mention’d was em. 
ploy’d, We obferv’d, I fay, that then, 
upon the opening of the Stop-cock, as 
the Air defcended out of the Glafs in- 
to the empty’d Cylinder, fo at the fame 
time there afcended out of the Cylincer 
into the Veflel a certain Steam, which 
feem’d to confift of very little Bubbles, 
or other minute Corpufcles thrown up 
from the Oyl, rarefied by the attrition it 
fuffered in the Cylinder. For at the 
fame time that thefe Steams afcended 
into the Glafs, fome of the fame kinde 
manifeftly iffued out lıke a little Pillar.of 
Smoke at the Orifice of the Valve, when 
that was occafionally open’d. And thefe 
Steams frequently enough prefenting 
themfelves to our view, we found, by 
expofing the Glafs toa clear Light, that 
. they 











, (307) 
they were wont to play up and down 
init, and fo by their whiteifhnefs, to e- 
mulate in fome meafure the apparition of 
Light. 

For we likewife fometimes found, by 
watchful obfervation, that when the 
Flafh was great, not onely at the very 
inftant the Receiver loft of its tranfpa- 
rency, by appearing full of fome kinde 
of whitifh fubftance; but chat for fome 
fhort time after the fides of the Glafs 
continued fomewhat opacous , and 
feem’d to be darken’d, as if fome 
whitifh Steam adher’d to the infide of 
them. 


He that would render a Reafon of 
the Phenomenon, whereof all thefe are 
not all the Circumftances , muft doe 
two things; whereof the one is diffi- 
cule, and the other little lefs then im- 
poffible: For he muft give an Ac- 
count not onely whence the appearing 
whitenels proceeds, but wherefore that 
whitenefs does fometimes appear and 
fometimes not. 

For our part, we freely confeffe 
our {elves at a loffe about rendering 
a Rea- 

























Smear arent 








(308) 

a Reafon of the lels difficult part of the 
Problem: And though Your Lord- 
fhip fhould ev’n prefs us to declare what 
Conjecture it was, that the above-recited 
Circumftances fuggefted tous, we fhould 
propofe the thoughts we then had; no o- 
therwife then as bare Conjectures. 

In cafe then our Phenomenon had con- 
ftantly and uniformly ap pear’d, we fhould 
have fufpected it to have been produc’d 
atter {ome fuch manner as follows, 


Firft, we obferv'd that, though that 
which we faw in our Receiver feem’d to 
be fome kinde of Light, yet it was indeed 
but a whitenefs which did (as hath alrea- 
dy been noted) opacate (as fome (peak) 
the infide of the Glafs. 

Next. we confider'd, that our com- 
mon Airabounds with Particles or little 
Bodies, capable to reflect the Beams of 
Light. Of this we might eafily give di» 
vers proofs, but we fhall name but two: 
The one, that vulgar obfervation of the 
Mores that appear in Multitudes {wim- 
ming up and downin the Air, when the 
Sun- beams fhooting into a Room, or any 
other fhady Place difcover them, though 
otherwife the eye cannot diftinguith them 

from 








(309) 
from the reft of the Air: The other proof 
we will take from what we (and no doubt 
very many others) have obferv’d, touch- 
ing the Illumination of the Air in the 
Night... And we particularly remember, 
that, being at fome diftance from London 
one Night, that the People, upon a very 
well-come Occafion, teftified their Joy 
by numerous Bon-fires ; though, by rea- 
fon of the Interpofition of the Houfes, 
we could not fee the Fires themfelves, yet 
we could plainly fee the Air all enlighten’d, 
over and near the City; which argu’d, 
that the lucid Beams fhot upwards from 
the Fires, met in the Air with Corpufcles 
opacous enough to reflect them to our 
Eyes. 

A third thing that we confidered, was, 
That white may be produc’d (without 
excluding other ways, or denying invifi- 
ble Pores in the folideft Bodies) when 
the continuity of a Diaphanous Body 
happens to be interrupted by agreat num- 
ber of Surfaces, which, like fo many 
little Looking -glaffes, do confufedly re- 
prefent a multitude of little and feeming- 
ly contiguous Images of the elucid Body. 

. Wefhall not infift on the explanation of 
this, but refer You tor it to what we oe 
aid 




















































(310) 

faid in another Paper (touching Co- 
Jours.) But the Inftances that feem to 
prove it are obvious: For Water or whites 
of Eggs beaten to froth, do lofe their 
tran{parency and appear white. And ha- 
ving out of one of our leffer Receivers 
carefully drawn out the Air,and fo order’d 
it, that the hole by which the Water was 
to get in, was exceeding {mall, that the 
Liquor might be the more broken in its 
pailage thorow it, we obferv’d with plea. 
fure, That, the Neck being held under 
Water, and the little hole newly men- 
tion’d being open’d, the Water that rufh’d 
in was fo broken, and acquired fuch a mul- 
titude of new Surfaces, that the Receiver 
{eem’d to be full rather of Milk then Wa- 
ter, We have likewife foundout, That 
by heating a lump of Cryftal to a certain 
degree, and quenching it in fair Water, it 
would be difcontinu’d by fuch a multi- 
tude of Cracks, (which created new Sur- 
faces within it) that though it would not 
fall afunder, but retain its former fhape, 
yet it would lofe its tran{parency, and ap- 
pear white. 

Upon thefe Confiderations, My Lord, 
and fome others, it feem’d not abfur’d to 
imagine, That upon the rufhing of the Air 
out 


(312) 

out of the Receiver into the empty’d Cy- 
linder, the Air in the Receiver being fud- 
denly and vehemently expanded, the Tex- 
ture of it was as fuddenly alter’d, and the 
parts made fo to fhift places (and perhaps 
fome of them to change poftures) as du- 
ring their new and vehement Motion and 
their varied Scituation, to difturb the 
wonted continuity and. {fo the Diaphas 
neity of the Air; which (as we have alrea- 
dy noted) upon its ceafing to be atran- 
{parent Body, without the interpofition 
of colour’d things, muft eafily degene- 
rate into white. 


Several things there were that made 
this Conjecture feem the lefs improba- 
ble. As firft, That the whitenefs al- 
ways appear’d greater when the Exfucti. 
on beganto be made, whilft there was 
{tore of Air in the Receiver, then when 
the Air was in great part drawn out. And 
next, That, having exhanfted the Re- 
ceiver, and applyd to the hole in the 
Stop- cock alarge bubble of clear Glafs,in 
{uch a manner,chat we could at pleafure let 
the Air pafs out at the {mall Glafs into the 
great one,and eafily fill che {mall one with 
Air again, We obferv’d with pleafure, 
That 













(312) 

That upon the opening the paffage be- 
twixe the two Glaffes, the Air in the 
{maller having fo much room in the great- 
er to receive it, the Diffilition of that 
Air was fo great, that the {mall Viol 
feem’d to be full of Milk ; and this Expe- 
riment we repeated feveral umes. To 
which we may adde, That, having pro- 
vided a {mall Receiver, whofe upper Ori- 
fice was fo narrow that I could ftopic with 
my Thumb, I obferv’d, that when upon 
the Exfuction of the Air the capacity of 
the Glafs appear’d white, if by a fudden 
removal of my Thumb I let inthe out- 
ward Air, that whitenefs would imme- 
diately vanifh. And whereas it may be 
objected, That in the Inftance formerly 
mention’d, Water turning from perfpi- 
cuous to white, there intervenes the Air, 
which isa Body of a Heterogeneous na- 
ture, and muft turn it into Bubbles to 
make it lofe its tranfparency. We may 
borrow an Anfwer from an Experiment 
we deliver inanother Treatife, where we 
teach how to make two very volatile Li- 
quors, which being gently put together 
are clear as Rock-water, and yet will al- 
moft ina moment, without the fub-ingref- 
fion of Air to turnthem into Bubbles, fo 
‘ alter 





(313) 

alter the difpofition of their infenfible 
parts, as to become a white and confiftent 
Body. And this happens not as inche 
precipitation of Besjamin, and fome o- 
ther Refinous Bodies, which being: dif- 
folv’din Spirit of Wine,may, by the effu- 
fion of fair Water, be turn’dinto a feem- 
ingly Milky fubftance. For this‘iwhite- 
nels belongs notto the whole Liquor but 
to the Corputcles of the diflolv’d Gum, 
which after a while fubfiding leave the Li- 
quor tran{parent, themfelves onely re- 
maining white: Whereas inour cafe, “tis 
from the vary’d texture of the whole for 
merly tranfparent fluid Body, and not 
from this or that part chat this whicénefle 
refults : For the Body is white thorowout, 
and will long continue fo; and yet may, 
in procefs of time, without any addition, 
be totally reduc’d into a tranfparent Bo- 

dy as betore. l 
But befides the Comedores infifted on 
all this while, we grounded another upon 
the following Obiers vation, which was, 
That having convey'd fome fmoke into 
our Receiver plac'd againft a Window, we 
obferv’d, that upon the exfudtion of the 
Air, the Corputcles that were fwimming 
in it, did maniteftly enough make the Re- 


ceiver 








aa es 














(314) 
ceiver feem more opacous at the very 
moment of the rufhing out of the Air: 
For confidering that the whitenefs, whofe 
caufe we enquire of, did but fometimes ap- 
pear, it feem’d not impoffible but that.at 
{fuch times the Air in the Receiver might 
abound with Particles, capable of re- 
flecting the Light in the manner requifite 
to exhibit a whitecolour, by their being 
putinto acertain unutual Motion, As 
may be in fome meafure illuftrated by 
this, That the new motion of the frefhly 
mention’d Fumes, made the infide of the 
Receiver appear fomewhat darker then 
before: And partly by the nature of our 
formerly mention'd fmoking Liquor, 
whofe parts though they feem’d tran{pa- 
rent whil’ft they compof’da Liquor, yet 
when the fame Corpufcles, upon the un- 
ftopping of the Glafs, were put into a 
new mction, and difpofd after a new 
manner, they did opacate that part of the 
Air they mov’d in, and exhibited a great- 
er whitenefs then that which fometimes 
appears in our Pneumatical Veffel. Nor 
fhould we content our felves with this fin- 
gle Inftance, to manifeft, That little Bo- 
dies which being rang’d after one manner, 
are Diaphanous and Colourlefs, may, by 
being 





























(315) 
being barely agitated, difperFd, and cone 


fequently otherways rang’d, exhibite a. 


colour, if we were not unwilling to rob 
our Colle&tion of Experiments concerne 
ing Colours. 

But, My Lord, I forefee You may 
make fome Objections againft our pro- 
pofed ghefs, which perhaps I fhall {carce 
be able to anfwer, efpecially, if You in- 


fift upon having me render a Reafon why ` 


our Phenomenon appears not conftant= 
ly. : 
4 I might indeed anfiver, that probably 
it: would do fo, if inftead of our great 
Receiver weufe fuch a {mall Violas we 
havellately mention’d, wherein the Difi- 
lition of the Air being much greater, is 
liketo be the more confpicuous: Since I 
remember not chat we ever made our try- 
al with fuch {mall Veflels, without fiad- 
ing the expected whitenefs to appear. But 
it would remain to be explicaced, why in 
our great Receiver the Phesomenon fhould 
fometimes be feen,and oftentimes not ap- 
pear, And though that Conjecture which 
we laft made fhould not be rejected, yet if 
we were further prefi’d to affigna reafon 
why the Air fhould abound with fuch Pare 
ticles, as we there fuppofe, more at one 
, time 














Smee at 2 








a 








Ba 







‘Foley cpp: A- 
he Nat: 


Mor: 


H feof the 


Indies, Ub, 
3. Cap. 9. 





(316) 
time then another, we are not yet pro 
vided of any better Anfwer, then this 
general one, That the Air about us 5 
and much more that within the Receiver, 
may be much alter’d by fuch caufes as few 
are aware of: For, not to repeat thofe 
probable Arguments. of this Affertion 
which we have occafi ionally mention’d 
here and there in the former part of ‘this 
Epiftle, we will here fet down two or 
three Inftances to verifie the fame Propo- 
fition, Firft, I finde that the Learned 
Ff of phus Acofta, among other Judicious 
Obfervations he made in U4 merica, hath 
this concerning the Effects . of fome 
Winds 5 There are ({ays.he) Winds which 
naturally trouble the Water of the Sea, and 
make it green, and black 5 others, clear as 
Cryftal.. Next, we have obferv’ d, That 
though we conveyd into the Receiver our 
Scales, and.the Pesdula formerly men- 
tion’d,clean and bright 5 yet after the Re- 
ceiver had been empty‘dyand the AirJet in 
again, the glofs or luftre both of the one, 
and of the other, appear'd tarnifh’d by a 
beginning ruft. ” And in the laft place,we 
will fubfoyn an Obfervation’ we made 
fome Years ago, which hath been heard 
of by divers Ingenious Men, and feen 
by 





Gry 

by fome of them: We had, with pure 
Spirit of Wine, drawn a Tindture out of 
acertain Concrete which ules to be rec- 
konedamong Mineral Bodies, And this 
Tin@ture being very pure and tran{parenc, 
we did, becaufe we put a great valueupon 
it, put into a Cry ftal Viot which we care- 
fully ftopp’d, and lock’d up in a Prefs a- 
mong fome other things that we {pecial- 
ly priz’d, This Liquor being a Chy- 
mical Rarity, and befides, very defecate 
and of a pleafing Golden Colours we 
had often occafion to look upon it, and 
fo to take notice, that one time it feem’d 
to be very much troubled, and not clear 
as it was wont to be: Whereupon we ima- 
gined, that though it would be fomething 
{trange, yet it was not impoffible that 
fome Precipitation of the Mineral Cor- 
puicles was then happening, and that 
thence the Liquor was opacated; bur, 
finding after fome days that though the 
expected Precipitation had not been 
made, yet the Liquor, retaining its for- 
mer vivid Colour, was grown clear again 
as before; we fomewhat wondered atit, 
and locking it up again in the fame Prefs, 
we refolved to oblerve, both whether 
the like changes would again appear in 
X a our 

















(318) 
our Tincture 5 and whether in cafe they 
fhouldappear, they would be afcribable 
tothe alterations of the Weather, But 
though,during the greateft part ofa Win- 
ter anda Spring, we took pleafure to ob- 
ferve, how the Liquor would often grow 
turbid, and after a while clear again: Yet 
we could not finde that thefe Mutations 
depended upon any that were manifeft in 
the Air, whieh would be often dark end 
clouded, when the Tincture was clear and 
tran{parent ; as on the other fide,in clear 
Weather the Liquor would appear fome- 
times troubled, and more opacous. So 
that being unable to give an account of 
thefe odde changes in our Tin@ure (which 
we fuppofe we have not yet loft, chough 
we know not whether it have loft its fickle 
Nature) either by thofe of the Air, or 
any thing elfe that occurr’d to our 
thoughts ; we could not but fufpeé that 
there may bein divers Bodies, asit were 
Spontaneous Mutations, that is, fuch 
changes as depend not upon manifeft 
Caufes. But, My Lord, what has been 
all this while faid concerning our Pheno- 
menor, is ofter’d to You, not as contain- 
inga fatisfactory Account of it, but to 
alit You to give Your felf one. 

We 






(319) 


V E took a Glafs Veflel; open E#peri- 
at the top, and into it we put ”?” 


a mixture of Snow and common Salt 
(fuch a mixttire as we have in another 
Treatife largely difcourfed of) and in- 
to the midft of this mixture we fet a 
Glafle, of a Cylindrical form, clofely 
ftoppd at the lower end with Plaifter, 
and open at the upper, at which we 
fill’d it with common Water. Thefe 
things being let down into the Recej- 
ver, and the Pump being fet awork , 
the Snow began to melt fomewhar fae 
fter then we expected; whether upon 
the account of the Exfuction of the 
Air, or becaufe there was but little of 
the Snow, or whether for any other 
Reafon, it appeared coubrfull, But 
however, by that time the Receiver 
had been confiderably exhaufted, which 
was done in lefe then + of an hour, 
we perceived the Water near the bot- 
tom of the Glafs Cylinder to Freeze, 


and the Ice by alittle longer ftay, feem’d’ 


to encreafe, and to rife fomewhat higher 
X 3 then 


t 38, 





































ieee ese Ste 





(320) 
then the furface of the furrounding Li- 
quor, whereinto almoft all the Snow and 
Salt were refolv‘d. The Glafs being ta- 
kenout, it appear’d that the Ice was as’ 
thick as the infide of the Glafs it fill’d, 
though into that Lcould pur. my Thumb. 
The upper furface of the Ice was very 
concave, which whether it were due to 
any unheeded acciaent, or to the exfu- 
gion of the Air, we leave to be deter- 
mind by further tryal. And laftly, the 
Iceheld againft the Light, appear’d not 
deftitute of Bubbles, though tome By- 
{tanders thought they were fewer then 
would have been found if the Water had 
been frozen in the open Air. The like 
Experiment we try’d alfo another time in 
one of our {mall Receivers, with not un- 
like fuccefs. ; 
Andon this occafion, My Lord, give 
me'leave to propofea Problem, which 
fall be this: Whence proceeds that 
ftrange force that we may fometimes ob- 
ferve in frozen Water, to break the Bo- 
dies that Imprifon it, though hard and fo- 
lid ? That there is {uch a force in Wa. 
ter expofd to Congelation, may be ga- 
ther’d not onely from what may be often 
obferv’d in Winter, of the burfting of 
. i Glafles 





(321) 
Glaffes too clofe ftopp’d, fill’d with Wa- 
ter or aqueous Liquors, but by Inftances 
as much more confiderable as lefs obvi- 
ous. For Tremember, that an Ingenious 
Stone-cutter not long fince complain’d to 
me, That fometimes, through the negli- 
gence of Servants, the Rain being fufter- 
ed'to {oak into Marble Stones, the {uper- 
vening violent Frofts would burft the 
Stones, to the Proteffors no {mall dam- 
age. And I remember another Trades- 
man,in whofe Houfe I had Lodgings, was 
laft Winter complaining, that even Im- 
plements made of Bell-metal, being care- 
` lefly expofd to the wet,have been broken 
and {poul’d by the Water, which, having 
gotten intothe little Cavities and Gran- 
nies of the Metal, was there afterwards 
frozen and expanded into Ice. And to 


thefe Relations, we can adde one of the 14%. 4 


formerly mention’d Cabeus’s, whereby 


they not onely may be confirm’d, but are 
furpaffd: For he tells us, That he fawa 
huge Veffel of exceeding hard Marble, 
{plit afunder by congel’d Water, whole 
Rarefaction, fays our Author, prov’d fo 
vehement, that the hardnefs of the Stone 
yielded toit , and foa Veflel was broken, 
which would not have been fo by 100 

X4 Yoke 

















JSC T o SED 


Experi- 
ment 39 
















(322) 
Yoke of Oxen drawing it feveral ways, I 
know, My Lord, that tofolvethis Pro- 
blem, it will be faid, That Congelation 
does not(as is commonly, but erroneoufly 
prefum’d) reduce water into lefs room 
then it poffefl’d before, but rather makes 
it takeup more. And I have elfewhere 
prov'd by particular Experiments, That 
whether or no Ice may be truly faid to be 
Water rarefi’d (for that feems queftion- 
able) it may be faidto take up moreroom 
then the Water did before Glaciation. 
But though we grant that freezing makes 
Water {well, yet, how Cold (which in 
Weather-Glaffes manifeftly condences 
the Air) fhould expand either the Water, 
ortheintercepted Air fo forcibly, as to 
perform fuch things as we have newly re- 
lated, will yetremain a Problem. 


V E took an Oval Glafs, clear and 
l (leaft it fhould break) pretty 
ftrong, with afhort Neck at the obtufer 
end; through this Neck,we thruft almoft 
to the bottom, a Pipe of Glafs, which was 
clofely Cemented to the newly mention’d 
Neck, the upper part of which Pipe, 
was drawn in fome places more flender 
wi 2 then 





(323) 

thena Crows Quill, that the changes of 
the Airinthat Glafs Egge might be the 
more con{picuous ; Then there was con- 
veyd intothe Glafs five or fix Spoon- 
fulls of Water, part of which, by blow- 
ing Air into the Egge, was raif'd into the 
above-mention d {lender part of the Pipe, 
fo that the Water was interpofd between 
the external Air, and. that included in the 
Egge. This Weather-glafs (delineated 
inthe fourteenth Figure) was fo plac’d, 
and clofd up inthe cavity of oneof our - 
{mall Receivers, that onely the {lender 
parcof the Pipe, to the heigth of four 
or five Inches, paffing thorow a hole in 
Ve Cover, temain'd expof’d to the open 
ir. ; 
The Pump being, fet a work, upon 
the Exfuctionof the Air, the Water in 
the Pipe defcended about a quarter of an 
Inch, and this upon two or three reitera- 
ted tryals; which feem’d fufficiently to 
argue that there was no heat produc’d in 
the Receiver upon the Exfuction of the 
Air: For even a little heat would pro- 
bably have been difcover’d by that Wea- 
ther-glafs, fince upon the bare applica- 
tion of my hand to the outfide of the 
Receiver, the warmth having after fome 
| time 












au 
fal 
i. 
K 


ak Se oS Se 


eee eet bers 





(324) 

time been communicated or propagated 
through both the Glaffes, and the inter« 
val betwixt them to the Imprifon’d Air, 
did fo rarifie that, as to inable it, by pref- 
fing upon the fubjacent Water, to impel 
that in the Pipe very many times as far as 
it had fallen downwards upon the Exfucti- 
onof the Air. 

Yet fhall not we conclude, thatin the 
cavity of the Receiver the cold was great- 
er after the Exfuction of the Air then be- 
fore. 

For if it be demanded what then could 
caufe the fore-mention’d fubfiding of the 
Water ? it may beanfwered, That pro- 
bably it was the reaching of the Glafs 
Egge, which, upon the Exfuction of the 
ambient Air, was unable to refift alto- 
gether as much as formerly the preflure of 
the included Air, and of the Atmofphere, 
which, by theintervenfion of the Water, 


‘prefl’d uponits concave furface: Which 


feem d probable, as well by what was a- 
bove deliver’d, in the Experiment about 
the breaking of the Glafs by the force of 
the Atmofphere’s as by this notable Cir- 
cumftance (which we divers times ob- 
ferv d) That when by drawing the Air out 
of the Receiver, the Water in the Pipe 
was 


(325) 
was fubfided, upon the readmiffion of the 
external Air to prefs againft the convex 
furface of the Egge, the Water. was pre- 
fently re-impell’d to its former height : 
Which would perhaps appear lefs ftrange 
to Your Lordfhip, if You had yet feen 
what we have heretofore taught in ano- 
ther Treatife concerning the Spring that 
may be difcover’d in Glafs, as rigid and 
inflexible a Body as it is generally e- 
fteem’d. Andin the mean while it may 
ferve the turn to caufe a Glafs Egge to be- 
blown exceeding thin, and then, having 
brokenit, try how far you can by degrees 
bend fome narrow parts of it ; and how 
readily, upon the removal of what kept 
it bent, it will reftore it felf to its former 
ftate or pofture. But to return to our 
Experiment, From thence it feems pro- 
bable, either that there fucceeds no Bo- 
dy intheroom of the Air drawn out of 
our Receiver, or that it is notevery Mat- 
ter that is fubtle enough readily to pafs 
through the Pores of Glafs, that isal- * 
ways agitated enough to produce Heat 
where ever it is plentifully found. So that 
if no Vacuum be to be admitted, this Ex- 
periment feems to invite us to allow a 
greatdifparity, either as to bulk, oras to 
agitas 














eS TES. z 


Experi- 
ment 40. 





agitation, or as to both, betwixt fome 
parts of the Etherial Subftance,and thofe 
rhat are wont here below to produce Heat 
and Fire. 

We try’d alfo what Operation the 
drawing out of the Air would have. upon 
Camphire, that being a Body, which, 
though not a Liquor, confifts of fuck 
Volatile or Fugitive parts, that without 
any greater agitation then that of the open 
Aur it felt, they will copioufly die away, 
But we found not chat even this loofe 
Body was fenfibly alter’d by the Exfucti- 
onof the antbient Air. 


T may feem well worth trying, whether 
or no in our exhaufted Glafs the want 
of anambient Body, of the wonted thic- 
nefs of Air, would difable even light and 
little Animals, as Bees, and other winged 
Infects, to flie. But though we eafily 
forefaw how difficult it would be to make 
fuch an Experiment; yet not to omit our 
endeavors, we procur’d a large Fleth-fly, 
which we convey'd into a finall Receiver. 
We alfo another time fhut into a great 
Receiver a Humming Bee, that appear’d 
ftrong and lively, though we had oes 
nave 


(327) 

have made the tryal with aButter-fly, if 
the cold Seafon would have permitted us 
FO finde anys i The Fly, af- , Siace the writing of thid 
ter fome Exfuctions of the yrth Erperiment, we pros 
Air, dropp'ddown from the owd a white Butter-Fiy, 
fide of the Glafs whereon fhe ai ielo d it in onr om 
was walking s Burt, that the though at fief he fluttered 
Experiment with the. Bee * ad down, yet prefentiy, 

nas . npon the exfuttion of the 
might be the more inftructive, 4i, be fell down as in a 
we convey ‘din with her a bun- foo 7 retaining no other 
dle of Flowers, which rè- lite of ies sonz 
main’'d fufpended by a ftring ` 
near the upper part of the Receiver: And 
having provok’d the Bee, we excited her 
to flie upand down the capacity of the 
Veffel, till at length, as we defir’d, fhe 
lighted upon the Flowers; whereupon 
we prefently began to draw out the Air, 
and obferv’d, That though for fome time 
the Bee feemd to take no notice of it, yet 
within awhile afrér fhe did not flie, but fall 
down from rhe Flowers, without appear- 
ing to make any ufe ofher Wings to help 
her felt. Buc whether this tall of the Bee, 
and the other In{cét, proceeded trom the 
mediums being too thin for chem to fliein, 
or barely from the weaknefs,and as it were 
{wooning of the Animals chemielves,you 
will eafily gather from the following Ex- 
periment. l To 








Experi- 
pent AT. 













{328} 


TO fatisfie our felves in fome meafure; 

about the account upon which Refpira- 
tion is fo neceflary to the Animals, that 
Nature hath furnifh’d with Lungs , -we 
took (being then unable to procure any 
other lively Bird, {mall enough to be put 
into the Receiver) a Lark, one of whofe 
Wings had been broken by a fhot, of a 
Manthat we had fent to provide us fome 
Birds for our Experiment ; but notwith- 
ftanding this hurt, the Lark was very 
lively, and did, being put into the Receli- 
ver, divers times {pring up in it to a good 
height. The Veffel being haftily, but 
carefully clof'd, the Pump was diligently 
ply’d, and: the Bird for a while appear’d 
lively enough; but upon a greater Ex- 
{uction of the Air, fhe began manifeftly 
to droop and appear fick, and very foon 
after was taken with as violent and irregu- 
lar Convulfions, as are wont to be ob. 
ferv’d in Poultry, when their heads are 
wrung off: For the Bird threw her felf 
over and over two or three times, and dy - 
ed. with her Breaft upward, her Head 
downwards, and her Neckawry, And 
though upon the appearing of thefe Con- 
l vulfions 





(329) 
yulfions, we turn’d the Stop-cock, and 
let inthe Air upon her, yet it came too 
late; whereupon, cafting our eyes upon 
one of thofe accurate Dyals that go with 
a Pendulum, and were of late ingenioufly 
invented by the Noble and Learned Hu- 
genius, we found that the whole Tragedy 
had been concluded within ten Minutes of 
an hour, part of which time had been im- 


ploy’d in cementing the Cover to the Re-. 


ceiver, Soon after we gota Hen-{par- 
row, which being caught with Bird-lime 
was not at all hurt; when we put her into 
the Receiver, almoft to the top of which 
fhe would briskly raife her felf, the Ex - 
periment being try’d with this Bird, asit 
was with the former, fhe feem’d to be 
dead within feven minutes, one of which 
were imploy’d in cementing on the Co- 
ver: But upon the {peedy turning of: the 
Key, the frefh. Air flowing in, began flow. 
ly to revive her, fothat after fome pant- 
ings fhe open’d her eyes, and regain’d her 
feet, and in about a+ of an hour, after 
threatned to make an efcape at: the top of 
the Glafs;:which had beén ‘unftopp‘d to 
Jet in the fref Air upon her : But the Re- 
ceiver being:clofd the fecond time, fhe 

Bezen was 






































eee es 








(330) 
was kill’d ‘with violent Convulfioris } 
within five Minutes from the beginning 
of the Pumping. ; 

A whileafter we put ina Moufe, new- 
ly taken, in fuch a Trap as ‘had rather af- 
frighted then hurthim ; vvhil’ft he vvas 
leaping up very high in the Receiver, vve 
faften’d the Cover to it, expecting that 
an Animal ufed to live in narrow holes 
vvith very little frefh Air, vvould endure 
the vvant of it better then the lately men- 
tion’d Birds: But though, for a vvhile af- 
ter the Pump vvas fet avvork, he conti- 
nued leaping up as before; yet tvvas not 
long erehe began to appear fick and gid- 
dy, and to ftagger, after vvhich he fell 
dovvnas dead, but vvithout fuch violent 
Convulfions as the Birds died vvith: 
Whereupon, haftily turning the Key, we 
let in fome frefh Air upon him, by vvhich 
he recovered, after a vvhile, his fenfes and 
his feet, but feem’d to continue vveek and 
fick: But at length, grovving able to 
skip as formerly, the Pump vvas plyed 
again for eight minutes, about the mid- 
dle of vvhich fpace, if not before, a very 
little Air by a mifchance got in at the 
Stop-cocks and about tvvo minutes after 
that, the Moufe divers times leap’d up 
. lively 


(333) 

lively enough, though afterabout twomi® 
nutes more he fell down quite dead, yet 
with Convulfions far milder then thofe 
wherewith ‘the two Birds expired. This 
alacrity folittle before his death, and his 
not dying fooner then at the end of the 
eighth minute, feem’d afcribableto the 
Air (how little foever) that flipt into the 
Receiver. ’ For the firft time, thofe Gon- 
vulfions (that, if they had not been fud« 
denly remedied, had: immediately dif- 
patch’d him) feifd on him in fix minutes 
after the Pump began to be fet awork. 
Thefe Experiments feem’d the more 
ftrange,inregard ,chatduringa great partof 
thofe few minutes the Engine could but: 
confiderably rarefie the Air (and that too,. 
but by degrees) and atthe end of them 
there remain’d in the Receiver no incon- 
fiderable quantity; as may appear by what 
we have formerly faid of our not being 
able to draw down Water ina Tube,with- 
in much lefs then a Foot of the bottom: 
with which we likewife confider’d, that by 
the exfuction of the Air and inter{per- 
fed Vapors, there was. left in the Recei- 
ver a {pace fome hundreds of times ex- 
ceeding the bignefs of rhe Animal, to re- 
ceive the fuliginous Steams, front which, 

i yY expirati- 




































= 





(332) 
expiration difcharges the Lungs, vand, 
which in the other cafes hitherto known, 
may be fulpected, for want of. room, to 
ftifle thofe Animals that are clofely pent 
up in too narrow Receptacles. 

. I forgot to mention, that having caufd 
thefe three Creatures to be opend, I 
could, in fuch {mall Bodies, difcover lit- 
tle of what we fought for, and what we 
might poffibly have found in larger Ani- 
mals; for though the Lungs of the Birds 
appear’d very red, and as it were inflam’d, 
yet that colour being ufual enough in the 
Lungs of fuch winged Creatures, deferves 
not fo much our notice, as it does, That 
in almoft all the deftructive Experiments 
madein our Engine, the Animals appear’d 
to. die with violently Convulfive Moti- 
ons: From which,whether Phyficians can 
gather any thing towards the Difcovery 
of the Nature of Convullive Diftem- 
pers, I leave to them to confider. 

Having proceeded thus far, though (as 
we have partly intimated alreacy) there 
appear’d not much caufe to doubt, but 
that the death of the fore-mention’d Ani- 
mals proceeded rather from the want of 
Air, then that the Air was over-cloge’d 
by the fteams of their Bodies, Sania 

y 





( 333) 

ly pentup in the Glafs; yet I, thatlove 
not to believe any thing upon Conje» 
ctures, when by anot over-difficult Ex- 
periment Ican. try whether it be True or 
no, thought it the fafeft way to obviate 
Objections,and remove Scruples, by fhut- 
ting up another Moufeas clofe as I could 
in the Receiver, wherein it liv’d above 
three quarters of anhour; and might pro- 
bably have done fo much longer, had not 
a Virtuofo of quality, who in the mean 
while chanc'd ro make mea Vifit, defir’d 
to fee whether or no che Moufe could be 
kill’d by the exfuStion of the ambient Air, 
whereupon-we thought fit to open, for a 
little while, an intercourfe betwixt the 
Airin the Receiver, and that without it, 
that the Moufe might thereby (if it were 
needful for him) berefrefh d, and yet we 
did this without uncementing the Cover 
at the top, thatit might not be objected, 
that perhaps the Veffel was more clofely 
ftopp’d for theexfuction of the Air then 
before. 

The Experiment had this eveng, that 
after the Moufe had liv’d ten Minutes, 
(which we afcrib’d to this, that the Pump, 
for want of having been lately Oyl'd, .. 
could move but flowly, and could not by 

l Xa him 

















(334) 

him that manag’dir, be made to work 2s 
nimbly as itwas wont) at the end of that 
time he dy’d with Gonvulfive Fits, where. 
in he made two or three bounds into the 
Air, before he fell down dead. 

Nor was I content with this, but for 
Your Lordfhips further. fatisfa@tion, and 
my own» I caufd a Moufe, that was very 
hungry, to be fhutin all Night, witha 
Bed of Paper for him to reft upon: And 
to be fure that the Receiver was well 
clof’d, Fcaufd fome Air to be drawn out 
of ir, whereby, perceiving that there 
was no fenfible leak, I prefently re-ad- 
mitted the Airat the Stop-cock, left the 
Want of itfhould harm the little Animal 5 
and then I caufd the Engine to be kept 
all Night by the Fire fide, to keep him 
from being deftroy’d by the immoderate 
cold of theFrofty Night. And this care 
fucceeded fo well, that thenext Morning 
I found thatthe Moufe not onely was a- 
live, buthad devour’dagood part of the 
Cheefe that had been put in with him. And 
having thus’kept him alive full twelve 
hours, or better, we did, ‘by-fucking’ out 
pare of the’ Ait, bring him to droop, and 
to appear fwell’ds and by'letting in the 
‘Air again, we foon redue’d him to his fore 


amer livelineS, + A 





(335) 


A E Dice. containing ine 
eala touching Rfi 


“ration. 


Hear son Lordthip will now. expect; 
«that to thee Experiments I fhould add 
my Reflections on them, and attempt, 
by-their affiftance, to refolve the Diff; 
culties that occur about Refpirations fince 
at the beginning I acknowledg’d a further, 
Eaquiry into the Nature of that, to have 
been my Defign in the related Tryals. 
But I have yet, becaufe of the inconve- « 
nient Seafon of the Year, made fo few 
Experiments, and have been fo little fay 
tisfted by thofe I have been able to make, 
thac they have hitherto made Refpiration 
appear to me’rather a more, then a lefs, 
Myfterious thing, then it did before, But 
yet, fince they have furnifh’d me with 
fome fuch new Confiderations; concern; 
ing the ufeof the Air, as confirms mein 
my Diffidence of the Truth of what is 
commonly believ’d touching that matter; 
That I may not appear fullen or lazy, I 
am content not to decline employing a 
' Y3 few 












2s SY 





(336) 
few hours in fetting down my Doubts, is 
prefenting Your Lordfhip :fome Hints , 
and in confidering whether the Tryals 
made in out Engine, will ac leaft-affutt us 
to difcover wherein the Deficiency lies 
that needs to be fupply'd. 

And this, My Lord, being all my pres 
fent Defign, T fuppofe You will notex. 
pect that (as if You knew not,or had for+ 

gotten what Anatomifts: are wont to 

teach) I fhould entertain You with aneed- 

lefs Difcourfe of the Organs of Refpira- 

tion, and the variety of their Structure in 

feveral Animals; though if it were ne- 

ceflary, and had not been perform’d by o- 

Gzteaus de thers, I fhould think, with Galez, that by 

Wee *™ treating ot the Fabricks of living Bodies; 

. T might compofe Hymns to the wife Au- 

thor of Nature, who,in the excellent con- 

trivance of rhe Lungs, and other parts of 

(thofeadmirable Engines) Animals, ma- 

nifefts himfelf to betndeed what the Elo- 

quent Prophet moft juftly {peaks him, 

[J2-28.29, Wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in 
working. 

Nor hall we any further meddle with 

thofe Controverfies fo much agitated a- 

mong the Moderns, namely, Whether the 

motion of the Lungs in Re[piration be their 

owna 





(437) 

own, or bat confequent tothe motion of thé 
Thorax, Diaphragme, and (as fome Learns 
ed Men would have it)the Abdomen; And, 
Whenceit is that the Air {wells the Lungs 
in Infpiration, any further then they may 
receive light: from our Engine: But that 
it may appear what kinde of fervice itis 
that may be expected from it on this oc- 
cafion, we muft premile a few Words to 
fhew wherein the ftrength of the Obje- 
étion we are to anfwer, lies : In favor then 
of thofe that would have the Lungs ra- 
ther paflive then active in the bufinefs of 
Refpiration, it may againft the common 
opinion be alledg’d, That as the Lungs be- 
ing defticute of Mufcles and of Fibres, 
areunfit to dilate themfelves; foit ap- 
pears, that without the motion of the 
Thorax they would not be fill’d with Air. 
Since as our Learned Friend Dr. High- 
more has well (and congtuoufly, to what 
our felves have purpofely try’d) ob- 
ferv’d, if alive Dog havea great wound 
made in his Cheft, the Lobes of the 
Lungs on that fide of the cafediafti- 
num Will fubfide and lie ftill, the Tho: 
vax and the Lobes on’ the other fide 
of the eMediaftinum, continuing their 
former motion, And if fuddenly at once 

the 














wear cee re a E 





i (338) 
the Mulcles of the Cheft beon both 
fides ditlected; upon the Ingrefs of the 
Air, the whole Lungs, though untouch’d, 
will remain moveleis,at leaft,as to any. ex- 
panfion or contraction of theiriubftance, 
To which we may adde the Obfervati- 
on-of the diligent Bartholinus, who af- 
firms the like of the Draphragme al- 
fo, namely, Thatit being wounded, the 
Lungs will fall together, and the-Refpi- 
ration ceafe, which my Experiments op- 
pofe not, provided the Wound be any 
thing great. And indeed the Drapbragme 
feems the principal Inftrument of ordina- 
ry and gentle Refpiration, although to 
reftrain’d Refpiration (if I may fo call 
it) the intercoftal Mufcles, and perhaps 
fome others may be allowed eminently to 
concur. But the chief of the Contro- 


~ verfies formerly pointed at, is not yet de- 


cided, namely, what it is that conveys the 
Air into the Lungs. For when, to coun- 
terballance all: chat has been alledg’d,thofe 
that plead for the Lungs, demand what it 
is that fhould bring the Air into the 
Lungs, if themfelves do not attract ic, 
their Antagonifts difagree about the Re- 
ply. For when to this queftion fome of 
the beft Modern Philofophers. aniwer, 
that 





339) 
that: by. the dilatation of the Cheft -the 
contiguous. Air is thruft away, and that 
prefling: upon the next Airco it, and fo 
onwards, the Propulfion is continued till 
the Air be driven into the Lungs, and.fo 
dilate them: When this 41 fay)>‘is: ans 
{wered, itis Objected even by Barthaline 
himfelf, as aconvincing Reply, “thar; ac- 
cording to this Doétrine,a Man ould not 
fetch his Breath trom agreat Veftel full of 
Air, witha flender Neck, becaufe, that 
when his Mouth covers the Orifice of the 
Neck, the dilatation of his Thorax could 
not propell the Air inthe Veflel into his 
Lungs, . by reafon of its being feparated 
by the inclofing Veffel from the!ambient 
Airs and yet, fay they, Experience wit- 
neffes that out of fuch a Veffel'a- Man may 
fuck Air, But of this difficulty our Engine 
furnifhes us with an eafte Solutions fince 
many of the former Experiments have ma- 
nifetted, That inthe cafe propofed, there 
needs not be made-any (though ‘ts true 
thatin ordinary RKefpiration there is wont 
to bemade fome)propulfion of the Air by 
the fwelling Thorax or Abdomen into the 
Lungs; finceuponthe bare Dilatation of 
the Thorax, the Spring of ‘thatincernal 
Airy or halicuous:tubftance thatzis wont 
Dit to 








552 PCED POLE PE ETE 








(340) 
to poffefs as much of the Cavity of the 
Cheftas the Lungs fill not up, being much 
weaken’d, the external and contiguous 
Air muft neceflarily prefs in at the open 
Winde- Pipe into the Lungs, as finding 
there lefs refiance then any. where elfe a- 
bourit. : aig 

And hence (by the way)we may derive 
anew affiftance to judge of that famous 
Controverfie difputed among Naturalifts 
and Phyfitians, ever fince Galens time, 
fome maintaining that the Cheft, with the 
contained Lungs, may be refembledtoa 
pair of Bellows, which comes therefore 
to be fill’d becaufe it was dilated : Ando- 
thers pleading to have the comparifon 
made toa Bladder, which is therefore di- 
lated'-becaufe it is fld, For as tothe 
Thorax, it feems evident from what has 
been lately faid, that it, like a pair of Bel- 
lows, happens to be partly fill’d with Aur, 
but becaufe it was dilated: Butas for the 
Lungs themfelves, who want Fibres to 
diftend them, they may fitly enough be 
compar’d to a Bladder s fince they are di- 
lated by being fill’d, namely, by that Air 
which rufhes into them upon the dilatation 
of the Cheft, in whofe increafed Cavity 
it findes: (as we frefhly noted) leis refift- 
ance 


( 341) 
ance to its Spring then elfewhere. And 
this brings into my minde that ftrange 
Obfervation of Nicolaus Fontanus,a Phy- 
fitian at Amfterdam, who teftifies, Thar Forsas 
ina Boyof the fame Town, four years tholin: lib, 
old, there was found, inftead of Lungs; a cap. 9» 
certain Membranous Bladder ; which be- 
ing filld with Wind, and furnifh’d. with 
little Veins, had its origination from the 
Wind- Pipe i it felt; which being fuppof'd 
true, how well it will agree with moft of 
the Opinions touching Refpiration, I leave, 
to be confidered. 


And thus may the grand Objection of 
Bartholine, and others, be anfwered: But 
I leave to Anatomifts to confider what is 
to be faid to fome Obfervations that feem 
to contradié& thofe Anatomical Experi- 
ments already mention’d: Such was par- 
ticularly that which I remember I have 
read in Sesnertus (from the obfervation of 
his Father- in-law Schato) of a Melancho- 
ly Student, who having ftabb’d himfelf, 
and pierced the Diaphragme in the thinner 
or tendonous part (call’d by many the 
Nervous Circle) lived feven Moneths afa 
ter he had fo wounded himfelf, though af 
ter his death (preceded by violent Vomit- 

ings) 









ssa PCS 





(342) 
ings) the Wound (perchance’ dilated by 
thofe {trainings ): appear’d fo great, that 
the whole Stomack was found to have got 
in by it into the left fide of ‘the. Thorax, 
And fuch al fo was: the accident that hap- 
perd to a Noble Man, whom I: remem- 
ber I have feen, and who is yetalive, im 
whofe Cheft there has, for thefe many 
years, remain’d a hole fo great; that the 
motion of his Heart may be perceiv’d by 
it. Thefe (I fay) and fome other Obfer- 
ations, I fhall now forbear: to infit ons 
becaufe I hold it not unfit, ‘before we 
cometo confider the ufeof Refpiration, 
that we acquaint Your Lordfhip with an 
Ingenious Conjecture, that was made at 
‘the caue of: the hafty death of the Ani- 
mals our.Engine-killd: namely, That it 
was not the want of Air chat deftroy’d 
them, but the Preflure of the innate Air 
in the cavity. of the Cheft; as if the 
Spring of this Air being no longer coun. 
terballanc’d by che ambient Air,was there- 
bybecome fo.ftrong, that ic kept the 
Thorax forcibly diftended,and binder'd its 
wonted contraction; and fo-compreff'd 
the Lungs and their Veflels asto obftruc 
the'Circulation of the Blood, : And this 
ezis . a ! Con- 


C343) 
Conjecture, as it is fpecious enough, fot 
might have admitted it for true ; but that 
Yconfider’d, that (not to mention that 
one, efpecially ot the Animals kill’d in 
our Engine, feem’d manifeftly for a pret- 
ty while, and not long before he dy’d, to 
move his Thorax, as it he exercifd Refpi- 
ration) the diligent Walleus relates, That 
he divers times obferv'd, inthe Diflecti- 
on of live Bodies, that-the Membrane 
that invefts the Lungs, had Pores in it 
as big as the larger fort of Peas, which a- 
grees with the Obfervations ‘of Chyrur- 
gions and Phyfitians, viz. That matter 
collected in the Thorax has penetrated in- 
to the Lungs, and been di{charged by 
coughing.And I remember too,that moft 
of the Animals we kill’din our Engine 
were Birds, of whofe Lungs Harvey 
fomewhere informs us, That he ob- 
ferv’d them very manifeftly to open at 
their ‘Extremities into the Abdomen. 
And by fuch Perforations we may well 
fuppofe the paflage free betwixt the exter- 
nal Airand-that in the Abdomen : But this 
Conje@ure imay be further confider'd 
Befides; to fhow ‘thatthe’ Animals thie 
diedimour Glaffes; needndt be fuppofd 
t to 
















( 344) 

to have been kill’d by the want of Air, we 
forefee another Argument that we muft 
deal fo ingenioufly with Your Lordthip, 
as not to conceal, You very well know, 
that befides. the generality of the 
Schools,there are many new Philofophers 
who, though they diffent from the old 
Peripateticks in other things, do, as they, 
deny the poffibility of a Facuum; and 
hold, that thofe {paces which are devoid 
of Air, and other groffer Bodies, are all 
of them exaétly replenifhed with a certain 
Etherial Matter, fo thin and fubtle, chat 
it can freely permeate the Pores of the 
compactedit and clofeft Bodies, and ev'n 
of Glafsit felf. Now fome of thofe Na- 
turalifts that are of this perfwafion may 
obje&t, That the Animals that died in our 
Receivers, did fo, not fo much for lack of 
Air, as by reafon that the Air that was 
pump'd out was neceffarily fucceeded by 
an Etherial Subftance,which confifting of 
parts vehemently agitated, and fo very 
{mall, as without refiftance to pafs in and 
out through the very Pores of Glafs; it 
may well be fuppofd, that 2 confiderable 
quantity of this reftlefs and fubtle Mat- 
ter, Meeting together in the pete 
wit 


(345) 
with the exceffive heat of it, may be 
quickly able to deftroy:a little Animal, or 
at leaft, make the Air too intemperately 
hot to be fit for Refpiration. 

But though this be a Difficulty not fo 
eafily to be refolv’d without the affiftance 
of our Engine, yet I fuppofe we have al- 
ready an{wer'd the Objection by our 38% 
and 39" Experiments 5 which though we 
made partly for other purpofes, yet we 
premifd them onely to clear up the diffi- 
culty propof'd. 

Another {ufpition we fhould have en- 
tertain’d concerning the death of our Ani- 
mals, namely, That upon the fudden re. 
moval of the wonted preflure of the am- 
bient Air, the warm Blood of thofe Ani- 
mals was broughtto an Effervefcence or 
Ebullition, or at leaft fo vehemently ex- 
panded, .asto difturb the Circulation of 
the Blood, and fo diforder the whole Oe- 
conomy of the Body. (This (I fay) I 
fhould have had fome fufpition of) but 
that Animals of ahoc Confticution are 
not the fole ones that cannot in ourex- 
haufted Engine exercife the Fun@ion of 
Life. But I muft. not now dwell upon 
matters of this nature, becaufe I think 
it high time to proceed tothe confiderati- 

On 





Soe were TS 


a 


ste i 


SS 








(346) 
on of the principal fubjec of our Engine, 
namely, ‘The ufe of Refpirations orra- 
ther, ‘Theufe of the Air in Refpiration. 
For whereas of the divers ufes of it men- 
tion’d by Anatomifts the moft, fuch as 
the Production and Modulation. of the 
Voice bythe Elifionof the Air, the Za- 
ryax &c; the expulfton of Excrements 
by Coughing, the conveying in of Odours 
by Infpiration, and fome others, rather 
convenient for the well being of an Ani- 
mal, thenabfolutely neceffary to his Life: 
Whereas (I fay) the other ufes are fuch as 
we have faid, The great. Hippocrates bim- 
{elf gives this notable Teftimony to the 
ufe of the Air, as to Animals endow’d 
with Lungs, Mortalibws (fays he) hic ({pi- 
ritus)t#m vite, tum morborum agrotis cau- 
fact. Tantaque corporibus omnibus fpi- 
ritüs ineft necefitas, ut fiquidem aliis om- 
nibus cy cibis cr potionibus, quis abftineat, 
duos tame aut tres uel plures dies pofiit vi- 
tam ducere: At fiquis [piritus in corpus 
viasintercipiat, vel exigua diei parte, ho- 
mint pereundum fits Adeo neceffarius.eft 
ufus {piritis in corpore. Ad hati quot, 
quum omnibus aliis actionibus homines qus- 
e{cant, quod mutationibus inuumeris vita 
fitexpofita, ab has:tamen fold attroze. nus- 
Lo Aua 


gaam defiftant animantia,quin aut [piritu 
adducant, aut reddant. 

But touching the account upon which 
the Infpiration and Exfpiration of Air 
(both which are comprehended in zvarvoi, 
Refpiration) is fo neceflary to Lite, both 
Naturalifts and Phyfitians do fo difagree, 
that it will be very difficult either to re- "i 
concile their Opinions,or determine their 
Controverfies. 

For firt, Many there are who think 
the chief (if not fole) ufeof Refpiration 
to bethe Cooling and tempering of that 
Heat in the Heart and Blood, which other- 
wife would be immoderate: And this O- 
pinion, not onely feems to be moft recei- 
ved amongft Scholaftick Writers, but di- 
vers of the new Philofophers, Cartefians, 
and others, admitted with fome variations 
teaching, That the Air is neceffary , by its 
coldnefs, to condenfe the Blood that paf- 
fes out of the right Ventricle of the 
Heart into the Lungs, that thereby it may 
obtain fuch a confiftence, as is requifite 
to make it fit Fewel for the vital Fire or 
Flame, inthe lett Ventricle of the heart. 
And this Opinion feems favor'd by this, 
That Fifhes, and other cold Creatures, 
whofe Hearts have but one cavity, are al- 

i ío 


nnr ao eR 


Sic sees oS = m 


if 
at 
Hal 














(348) 

fo unprovided of Lungs, and by fome o- 
ther confiderations. But though it need 
not be deny’d, that the infpir’d Air may 
foinetimes be of ufe by refrigerating the 
Heart; yet(againft the Opinion that makes 
this R efiiger: ation, the moft genuine and 
conftant ule of the Air) it may be Obje- 
&ed, That divers cold Creatures (fome 
of which, .as particularly Frogs, live in 
the Water) have yet need ot Refpiration, 
which feems not likely to be needed for 
Reftigerationby them that are deftitute of 
any fenfible heat, and befides, live in the 
cold Water: That even decrepid old 
Men, whofe natural heat is made very 
languid, and almoft extinguifh’d by rea- 
fon of age, have yet a nec “ceffity of fre- 
quent Refpiration : Thata temperate Air 
is fitteft for the generality ‘of breathing 
Creatures , andas an Air too hot, foal- 
foan Air too.cold, may .be inconvenient 


‘for them (elpecially, if they be troubled 


with an immoderate degree of the fame 
Quality which is predominant in the Air:) 
That in fome Difeafes the natural heat is 
fo weaken’d, that in cafe the ufe of Refpi 
ration were to cool, it would be more 
hurtful then beneficial to breath 5 and the 
fulpend ingvof the Refpiration, may by 


ply 





(349') 

ply the place of thofe very hót Medicines 
that are wont to be employ’d:in fuch Di- 
{tempers : ThatiNacure might much beta 
ter have given the Heart but >å moderate 
heat, then fuchan exceflive one, as needs 
to.be perpetually cool'd,) ‘to keep it froma 
growing deftructive ; which the gentle; 
and noc the burning heat of an Animals 
Heart; feems not intenfe enough fo indi+ 
{penfably to require. .Thefe} and othet 
Objections, -might be oppof'd, and pred 
again{t the recited Opinion: But we hall 
not infift-on.them, but onely adde to 
them, That ivappears not:by our fores 
going Experiments’ (I mean:the 38% and 
39) that. in our: exhiufted:..Receiver , 
where yet Animals die fo fuddenly for 
want of Refpiration, the ambient Body is 
feuifibly hotter then the common Air. 
ic Other Learned Men there are,who will 
have the very ubftance of the Air to get 
in‘ by ‘the Veflels of the: Lungs, to the 
left Ventricle.of ‘the Heart; not onely to 
temper. itsuhear, but to provide for che 
generation of: Spirits. And thefe alledge 
for themfelves the Authority of the An- 
tients, among’whom Hippocrates {eems 
manifeltly to’favor their Opinion; and 
both Aréffotle and Galen do fometimes 

L 2 (for 

















(350) 

(for methinks they {peak doubtfully e3 
nough) appear inclinabletoit. But for 
ought ever I could fee in Diffections, it is 
very difficult to make out, how the Air is 
convey’d into the left Ventricle of the 
Heart, efpecially the Sy/toleand Diaffole 
of the Heart and Lungs, being very far 
from being Synchronical: Befides, that 
the Spirits feeming to be but the moft 
fubtle and unctuous Particles of the 
Blood, appear to be of a very differing 
Nature from that of the lean and incom< 
buftible Corpufcles of Air.. Other Ob. 
jections againft this Optnion have been 
propofd, and preft by that excellent Ana- 
tomift, and my Induftrious Friend, Dr. 
Highmore, to whom I {hall therefore refer 

ou. 

i Another Opinion there is touching Re- 
fpiration, which makes the genuine ufe of 
itto be Ventilation (not of the Heart, 
but) of the Blood, inits paffage thorow | 
the Lungs; in which peffage, it is dif- 
burthened of thofe Excrementitious 
Steams,” proceeding, for the moft part, 
from the fuperfluous Serolities of the 
Blood, (we may adde) and of the Chyle | 
too, which (by thole new Conduits of | 
late very happily detected by the famous | 
Pecquet) | 


3 














(351) 
Pecquet) hath been newly mix’d withit im 
the Heart.) And this Opinion is that of 
the Induftrious «Me@bius, and is faid ta 
have been that of that excellent Philofo- 
pher Gaffendus ; and hath been in part an 
Opinion almoft vulgar: But this Hypo- 
thefis may be explicated two ways: For 
firt, The neceffity of the Air in Refpi- 
ration, may be fuppofdto proceed from 
hence; Thatas a Flame cannot long burn 
ina narrow and clofe place, becaufe the 
Fuliginous Steams it unceflantly throws 
out, cannot be long receiv’d into the am- 
bient Body , which after a while growing 
too full of them, to admit any more, fti- 
fles the flame, fo that the vical Fire in the 
Heart requires an ambient Body, of a 
yielding nature, to receive into it the fu- 
perfluous Serofities and other Recrements 
of the Blood, whofe feafonable Expulfi- 
on is requifite to depurate the Mafs of 
Blood, and make it fit both to Circulate, 
and to maintain the vital heatrefiding in 
the Heart. The other way of explicating 
the above-mentiond Hypothefis, is, by’ 
fuppofing, that the Air does not onely; as. 
a Recepracle,admit into its Pores the Ex- 
crementitious vapors of the Blood, when 
they are expell’d through the Wind-Pipe;: 
i — L3 buc 















(352) 
but does alfo convey them out of the 
Lungs, in regard that the in‘pired Air, 
reaching to all the ends of the 4/pera Ar- 
terta, does there aflociate it felt with the 
Exhalations of the circulating Blood,and 
when ‘tis exploded, carrys them away with 
it felf,as we fee that winds {peedily dry up 
the furfaces of wet Bodies, not to fay any 
thing of what we formerly obfervd touch. 
ing ourLiquor,whofe fumes were ftrange- 
ly elevatedupon the Ingrefs of the Air, 
Now of thefe two ways of ex plicating 
the ufe of Refpiration, our Engine af- 
fords us this Objection againft the firft ; 
That upon the Ex{uction of the Air, the 
Animals die a great deal fooner then if it 
were left in the Veflel, though by that 
Exfuétion the ambient {pace is lett much 
more free to receive the {teams that are ei- 
ther breathed out of the Lungs of the 
Animal, or difcharg’d by infenfible Tran 
fpiration through the Pores of his 
Skin. 
But if the Aypothefis propofd,be taken 
in the other fenle, it feems congruous e- 
nough to that grand obfervation, which 
partly the Phenomena of our Engine, and 
partly che relations of Travellers, have 
fugeefted tous, namely, That thereis.a 
; certain 





( 353) 

certain confiftence of Air requifiteto Re- 
fpiration; fo thatif ic be toothick, and 
already ever- charged with vapors, it will 
be unfit to unite with, and carry off thofe 
of the Blood, as Water will diffolve,and 
affociate to it felf but a certain proportion 
of faline Corpufcles; and if it be tod 
thin or rarefied, the number or fize of the 
Aérial Particles is too {mall to be able to 
affume and carry off the halituous Excre+ 
ments of the Blood, in fuch plenty as is 
requifite, 

Now that Air too much thicken’d(and 
as it werecloge’d) with Steams, is unfit 
for Refpiration, may appear by what is 
wont to happen in the Lead- Mines of De» 
vonfhire, (and, for ought I know, in thofe 
too of other Countrys, though I have 
feen Mines where no fuch thing was coms 
plain’d of) for I have been intorm’d by 
more then one credible Perfon (and parti- 
cularly by an Ingenious Man, that has of 
ten, for curiofiry, digg’d in thofe Mines, 
and been imploy’d about them) that there 
oftenrifes Damps, as retaining the Ger» 
mane Word by which they call them) 
which does fo thicken the Air; that unlefs 
the Work-men fpeedily make figns. to 
them that are above, they would (which 

Lä alfo 


1 
1 
1 
i 
1) 
is 
i 


i 
| 
i 
é 
4 
3 
h 


f 


| 

















(354) 

alfo fometimes happens) be prefently 
ftifled for want of Breath; and though 
their Companions do make hafte to draw 
them up, yet frequently, by that time 
they come to the free Air, they are, as it 
were, in a {woon, and are a good while be- 
fore they cometo them(elves again. And 
that this fwooning feems not to proceed 
from any Arfenical or Poyfonous Exhala- 
tion contain’d inthe Damp, as from its 
over-much condenfing the Air, feems pro- 
bable from hence; That the fame Damps 
oftentimes leifurely extinguith the flames 
of their Candles or Lamps; and from 
hence alfo that it-appears (by many Rela- 
tions of Authentical Authors) that in 
thofe Cellars where great ftore of new 
Wine is fet to work, men have been fuffo- 
cated by the toogreat plenty of the fteams 
exhaling from the Muft, and too much 
thickning the Air: as may be gathered 
from the cuftom that is now ufed in fome 
hot Countrys, where thofe that have oc- 
cafionto gointo fuch Cellars, carry with 
them a quantity of well kindled Coals, 
which they hold near their Faces; where- 
by it comes to pafs, that the Fire difcuf- 
fing the Fumes, andrarefying the Air re- 
duces the ambient Body toa confiftence fir 
forRefpiration — We 





£355) 


Wewill adde. (by way.of confirmati- 
on) the following Experiment: In fucha 
{mall Receiver,as thofe wherein we kill’d 
divers Birds, we carefully clofd up one, 
who, though for aquarter of an hour he 
feem’d not much prejudiced by the clofe- 
nefs of his Prifon, afterwards began firft 
to pant very vehemently,and keep his Bill 
very open, and then to appear very fick 5 
and laft ofall, after fome long and violent 
ftrainings,to caft up fome little matter out 


of his Stomack: which he did feveral . 


times, till growing fo fick, that he ftag- 
ger’dand gafp’d,as being juft ready to dies 
we perceiv’d, that within about three 
quarters of an hour from the time that- he 
was put in, he had fo thickned and tainted 
the Air with the Steams of his Body, that 
it was become altogether unfit for the 
ufe of Refpiration: Which. he will not 
much wonder at, who has taken notice 
in Sanctorins his Statica Medicina, how 
much that pare of our Aliments, which 
goes off by infenfible Tranfpiration, ex- 
ceeds in weightall the vifible and groffer 

Excrements both folid and liquid, 
That(on the other fide)an Air-too much 
dilated isnot ferviceable for the ends of 
doin stated SSANG Al Relpi- 


Sy 


aan mee oS 


Sa a ER 


a eS 












seid aoe ee a Se = 


Se ee a Ea 





{356 ) 


Refpiration, the hafty death of the Ani. . 


mal we kill’dinvour exhaufted Receiver, 
feems fufficiently: to-manifeft; ‘And it may 
not irrationallybe:doubted; whether or 
no, if a Man were raifd to the very top 
of the Acmofphere, he would-be able to 
live many minutes, and would not quick- 
ly dye for want’ of fuch Airi as we are 
wont to breath here below. And that ` 
this Conje&ture may not appear extrava- 
gant, i fall on-this occafion fubjoyn a 


‘memorabd!2 Relation that I have met with 


in the Learned :-fofephus _Acojta, who 
telis us, That when he himfelf: paft the. 
high Mountains of Pers, (which they call 
Pariacaca) to which, he fays; That the 
c/ps themfelves feem’d to them but as 
ordinary Houfés, in regard of high Tow- 
ers, he and his Companions were {urpri- 
fed with fuch extream Pangs of Straining 
and Vomiting, (not without cafting up 
Blood too) and with fo violenta Diftem- 
per, that he concludes he fhould undoubt- 
edly havedyed,. but that this lafted not a- 
bove three or four hours, betore they 
came into a more convenient and natural 
temperature of Air: To whichour Learn- 
ed-Author addes an Inference, which be- 
ing the principal ching I defign’d in men- 

tioning 


(357) 
tioning, the:Narrative I:thall fet down itt 
his own Words: I therefore (fays he) per- 
fwade my felf, That the Element of the Air 
w-there foifubtle and delicate, as it is not - 
proportionable with the breathing of Man, 
which requires more gro{s' and temperate 
Air; and I believe it isthe canfe that doth 
fo much alter the Stomack, and trouble all 
the Difpofition. Thus ’far our Author, 
whofe Words I mention, that we may 
ghefs by what happens fomewhat near the 
Confines of the Atmofphere (though 
probably far from.the furface of it) what 
would happen beyond the Atmofphere. 
That which fome of thofe'that treat of the 
height of Mountains, relate out of Ari- 
fiotle, namely, That thofethat afcend to 
the top of the Mountain Olympus, could 
not keep themfelves alive, without car- 
tying withthem weg Spunges, by whofe 
affiftance they couldrefpirein that Air, o- 
therwife coo thin for Refpiration: - (That 
Relation (I fay) concerning this Moun- 
tain) would much confirm what has been 
newly recited out of Acofta, if we had 
fufficient reafon to belive it: But, I con- 
fels, Lam very diffident of the truth of its 
partly becaufe when I paf?d the alps, I 
took notice of no notible change betwixt 
the 








Epil. 3. 


Frelichins 
apud Va- 
yea: Geo- 
gra: Gener 
üb. 1. cap. 
19. 





(358) 
the confiftence of the Ai atthe top and 
at the bottom of the Mountain; -partly 
becaufe of a very punctual relation made 
by an Englifh Gentleman, of his afcenfi- 
on to the top of the Pike of Tenariff 
(which is by great odds higher then Olym- 
pws) I finde no mention of any fuch dif- 
ficuity of breathing ; and partly alfo be- 
gaule the fame Author tells us out of 4- 
viftotle, That upon the top of olympus 
there is no motion of the Air, infomuch, 
that Letters traced upon the duft, have 
been, after many years, found legible, and 
not difcompofds whereas that Inquifi- 
tive Bufbequius (who was Ambaflador 
from the German to the Turkifh Em- 
peror) in one of his Eloquent Epiftles, 
tellsus, upon his own knowledge, That 
Olympus may be feen from Conftantino- . 
ple, blanch d with perpetual Snow, which 
feems to argue, That the top. of that, as 
well.as of divers other tall Hills, is not a- 
-bovethat Regionof the Air wherein Me- 
teors are formed. Though otherwife, in 
that memorable Narrative which Dawid 
Fralichius, made of his afcentto the top 
of the prodigioufly high Hungarian 
Mountain Carpathus: he tells us, That 
when, having paf'd through very thick 
ee AV Da 


03359) 

Clouds, became tothe very top of the Hill, 
he found the Air focalmand {ubtle, that 
not a hair of his head moved, whereasin the 
lower Stages of the Mountain he felt a ve- 
hement Wind. But this might well be 
cafual, as was his, having a clear. Air 
where he was, though there were 
Clouds, not onely beneath him, but 
above him. 


- Bue (though what ‘has been hither- 
to difcourfd, incline us to lookup- 
on the Ventilation and Depuration’ of 
the Blood; as one of the principal and 
conftant..ufes of Refpiration; yet) 
methinks «it may be fufpected thatthe 
Air does: fomething more then bare- 
ly helpcto carry off what is thrown 
out of the Blood in its paffage through 
the Lungs, from the right Ventricle 
of the Heart to theleft. For we fee, 
in Phlegmatick Conftieutions and Dif- 
eafes, thacthe Blood will circulate to- 
Jerably well, notwithftanding its. being 
exceffively ferous: And in Afthmactical 
Perfons,.we often fee, that though the 
Lungs be'very much ftaff'd with cough 
Phlegm, yet the Patient may live'fome 
Moneths,. if nor fome Years. So-that 
: 1g 








(360) 

it feems fcarce probable, thar either tha 
want of throwing.out the fuperfinous Sea 
rum of the Bloodfor a few: Moments, or: 
the detaining it,.during fo fhort awhile,in 
the Lungs, fhould) be able'to. kill a per- 
feétly found and lively Animal: I fay, for 
afew moments, becaufe, that having dis 
vers times try’d the Experiment of killing 
Birds in a fmall Receiver, we commonly 
found, that within half a minute of an 
hour, or thereabouts, the: Bird would be 
furprifd by mortal Convulfionsjand with: 
in. about a minute more would be ftark 
dead; beyond the Recovery of: the! Ait; 
though -never fo haftily let in. Which 
fort of Experiments feem fo frange; that 
we were oblig’d. to make it-féveral times; 
which gain’d it-:the Advantage: of having 
Perfons -of differing Qualities; Profeifi- 
ons.and Sexes, (as:‘not, ontly. Jeadies and 
Lords, but Doctors and Mathematicians) 
to witne(s it. Andito fatisfie Your Lord- 
fhips:that it was.nog-che narrownefs of the 
Veffel, but the: füdden Exfuétion of the 
Air..that difpatch’d thefe Creatures -fo 
doon; we. will adde,T hat we once inclof'd 
one of thefe Birds in one of thefe {mall 
Receivers, where; for awhile, she was fo 
little fenfible of his Imprifonment, oo 

| he 





(36b)} 

he eat very.:chearfully certain Seeds that 
we convey din with him, and not,onely 
liv dtenminutes, but:had: probably livd 
much longer, had nota great Perfon, that 
was Spectator ‘of fome:of thefe Experi- 
ments, refcu’d him fromthe profecution 
ofthe Tryal. . Another Bird being with- 
in about half-a minute, :caft into violent 
Convulfions, and reducidinto a {prawling 
condition, u upon the Exfudtion of the Airs 
by the pitty. of fome: Fair Lady’s (related 
to Your Lofdthip) who made me-baftly 
lec in fome: Air ac the: Stop-cock , ‘the 
ga{ping Animal was’ prefently. recover’d, 
and inacondition to: ¢ehjoy the benefit of 
the Lady/s:Compaffion..' -And another. 
time alfo, “being refoly’d.not to beinterx 
ruptedimour, Experiment,we did,at aight; 
fhuc up:aBird.in one of sour fmall Riecei- 
vers, and obfery’d, that tor a good white 
he fo litclé felt the alteration of che! Ait, 
that he tell afleep: with his:héad under his 
wing; and though he:afterwards awaked 
fick, yet he continu’d upon his legs ber 
tween forty:minutes and three quarteis-of 
an houriz: after:which,.feeming ready. co 
expire, Wwe took hintout, and foon found 
him able to. make ufeof the liberty. wé 
gave him for a compensation of his ae i 
Ings. 














( 363) 
-~ Tf to the foregoing Inftances of thei 
fudden deftruction of Animals, by the re- 
moval of the ambient Air, we fhould now 
annex fome, that we think fitter to re- 
ferve till anon; perhaps Your Lordfhip 
would fufpect, with me, that thereis fome 
ufe of the Air, which we do not yet fo 
well underftand, that makes it fo conti- 
nually needful to the Life of Animals: 
Paracelfusindeedtells us, That as the Sto- 
mack concocts Meat, and makes part of 
it ufeful to the Body,rejecting the other part, 
fothe Lungs confume part of the Air, and 
profcribes the reff. So that according to 
our Hermetick Philofopher(as his follow- 
ers would have him ftil’d) ic feems we may 
fuppofe, that there is in the Air a little 
vital Quinteffence (if I may fo call ir) 
which ferves to the refrefhment and re- 
ftauration of our vital Spirits, for which 
ufe the grofler and incomparably greater 
part of the Air being. unferviceable, it 
need not feem ftrange thatan Animal 
ftands in need of almoftinceffantly draw- 
ing in frefh Air. ` But though this Opini- 
on is not (as of fome of che fame.Author) 
abfur’d, yet befides chat, it fhouldnot be 
barely afferred, but explicated and prov’ds 
amd befides that, fome Objections may be 
ʻi a tram'd 





(363) 

fiam’d againft it, out of what has been al- 
ready argu’dagainft the Tranfmutation of 
Air into vital Spirits: Befides thefe 
things, it feerns not probable, that the 
bare want of the Generation of the won- 
ted quantity of vital Spirits, for lefs then 
one minute, fhould within that time be 
able to kill a lively Animal, without the 
help of any external violence at all. 

But yet, on occafion of this Opinion 
of Paracelfus, perhaps it will not be im- 
pertinent, if before I proceed, I acquaint 
Your Lordfhip with a Conceit of that de- 
fervedly Famous Mechanician and Chy- 
mitt, Cornelius Drebell, who among o- 
ther ftrange things that he perform’d, is 
affirm d (by more then a few credible Per- 
fons) to have contriv’d for the kate Learn- 
ed King Fames,a Veflel to £0 under Was 
ter; of which, tryal was made in the 
Thames, withadmired fuccefs, the Veffel 
carrying twelve Rowers, befides Paffen- 
gers; one of whichis yetalive, and rela- 
ted it toan excellent Mathematician that 
inform’d me of it. Now that for which 
I mention this Story, is, That having had 
the curiofity and opportunity to make 
particular Enquiries among the Relations 
of Drebell, and efpecially of an Ingenious 

Aa Phy- 














(364) 
fitian that marty’d his daughter, concer- 
ning the grounds upon which he concei- | 
ved it feafible to make men unaccuftom’d 
to continue fo long under water without 
fuffocation , or ( as the laftly mention’d 
Perfon that went in the veffell affirmes ) 
without inconvenience. I was anfwer'’d, | 
that Drebell conceiv'd , that “tis not the 
whole body of the Air, but a certain Quin- 
teflence (as Chymifts fpeake ) or fpiritu- 
ous part of it, that makes it fit for re{pira- 
tion, which being {pent , the remaining 
grofler body, or carcafe ( ifI may fo call 
it ) of the Air, is unable to cherifh the vi- 
tall flame refiding in the heart: So that 
(for ought I could gather) befides the 
Mechanical contrivance of his veffell he 
hada Chymicall liquor, which he accoun- 
` ted the chiefe Secret of his fubmarine Na- 

vigation. For when from time to time he 
perceiv ‘d, that che finer and purer part of 
the Aix was confum’d, or over clogg’d by 
the refpiration , and fteames of thole thet 
wentin his fhip , he would, by unfiopping 
aveflell full of this liquor ,{peedily reftore 
to the troubled Air fuch a. proportion 
of Vitall parts , as would make it againe, 
for 2 good while, fit for Refpiration,whe- 
ther by diffipating ə OF precipitating the 
grofle 


(365) As: 
groffer Exhalations, or by fome other in- 
telligible way, Imuft not now ftay to 
examine: C ontenting my felfe to add, that 
having had the opportunity to do fome 
fervice to thofe of his Relations, that 
were moft Intimate with him, and having 
made it my bufinefs to learne what this 
{trange Liquor might be , they conftantly 
affirm’d that Drebell would never difclofe 
the Liquor unto any , nor fo muchas tell 
the matter whereof he made it, to above 
one Perfon, who himfelfe affur’d me that 
it was, 

This account of Drebell’s performance; 
I mention, not that I any further affent to 
his opinion then I have already intimated, 
but becaufe the man, and the Invention 
being extraordinary, I fuppofe Your 
Lordfhip will not be difpleaf'd to know 
the ucmoft I could learne about it; efpeci- 
ally not having found it mention’d by any 
Writer, Wherefore I have been fome- 
times inclin’d to favourable thoughts of 
their opinion , who would have the Aire 
neceflary to ventilate , and cherifh the vi- 
tall fame, which they do fuppofe to be 
continually burning in the heart. For we 
fee,that in our Engine the fame of aLamp 
will laft almoft as little after the Ex{uci- 

Aa 2 on 


Soe 2 ES. 
N 


aeie 


TUR eyes 


i| 
re 













\ 





(366) 
onof the Air, as the life of an Animal! ; 
Nay I remember , that though I devil'd a 
more promifing way,tomake a fire laft in 
our exhaufted Receiver, yet it would not 
fucceed: We tooke a hard body made in 
the forme ofa Clove, but twice as long, 
and proportionably thick, this body be- 
ing made of {fuch a Compofition, that if it 
be kindl’d at theupper end, it will moft 
certainly burn away to the very bot- 
tome,much better then a Match, we con- 
vey dit diverfe times kind] dat the upper 
end, into one of our {mall Receivers, but 
ftiil found, that though prefently upon 
the Exfuction of the Air, it would leave 
fmoaking, and feeme quite gone out, and 
againe begin to fmoke as foon as the Air 
was let in upon it;yet if the Air were kept 
out but foure or five minutes, the fire 
would be totally, and irrevocably ex- 
tinguifh’d - To which wee will adde, that 
though we convey’d into agreat Re- 
ceiver, a {mall lamp with rectifi’d {pirit of 
Wine, that being {o pureas notto fmut 
the Cotton weeke, or fo muchas a piece 
of white Paper held over it; yet we could 
not by divers tryalls make the flame laft a 
couple of minutes after the Air was begun 
to be drawne out, Bur though our Engine 
thus 








( 367) 
thus fhews us anew kind of refemblance 
betwixt fire and life: yet the opinion we 
have laft mention’d is not free from Dif- 
ficulties. For though in the hearts of ma- 
ny Animall’s Blood be a warm liquor,and 
in fome ev’n a hot one, yetit is not eafie 
to conceive either how the Air( in fub- 
{tance ) can get thither, or how, in cafe it 
could , it were able to encreafe the heat. 
Since , however, the Air may encreafe the 
heat of acoale by blowing off the afhes, 
and making the active Corpufcles pierce 
further into the kindl’d body , and fhatter 
it the more, yet we fee hot liquors have 
their heat allay’d, and not augmented,by 
having Air blownon them. And whereas 
fome Eminent Naturalifts think it not in. 
convenient, to make the heat refiding in 
the heart to be a true flame, provided they 
adde,that ‘tis fuch a temperate,and almoft 
infenfible fire, as the flame of fpirit of 
Wine, which will long burne ‘upon fine 
white Linnen or Paper without confu- 
ming either: give mee leave to wifh that 
they had been more curious to make diffe- 
ring trials with that liquor. Fortas we ob- 
{erve in another Treatife) the reafon why 
a Linnen cloth , dipp'din common Spirit 
of Wine,is not burnt by the flame of it, is 

Aa 3 becaufe 


























(368) 
becaufe the Phlegm of the Liquor de- 
fends the Cloth, And the Flameof Spi- 
rit of Wine is fo far from being too weak 
toburn a pieceof Paper, or of Linnen, 
that I have ufditin Lamps to diftill Li- 
quors out of tall Cucurbits, and found 
that the Spirit burn’d away indeed much 
fafter then Sallet Oyl, but gave arleaft as 
great aheat: Nay, I have, forcuriofity 
fake, melted crude Gold, and that rea- 
dily enough, with the bare Flame of pure 
Spirit of Wine. 

But not to prefs this any further, we 
will, on this occafion, venture to fubjoyn 
an odde Obfervation, which may perhaps 
invite toa further Enquiry into the Opi- 
nion we haye for Difcourfe fake oppof*d. 
Our Englith Democritus, Dr.Harvey,pro- 
pofes this difficult and noble Problem to 
Anatomifts, Why a fetus, even out of the 
Womb, if involv d inthe fecundines, may 
livea good while without Re[piration , but 
in cafe after having once begun to breath, 
its re(piration be ftopp a, it will prefently 
die. Weare far from pretending to folve 
fo hard a Problem, but this we try d inre- 
lation toit, We took a Bitch that was 
faid to be almoft ready to whelp, and ha- 
ving caufd her to be hang’d, we prefently 
i open'd 





(369) 

open’d her Abdomen, and found four Pup= 
peysinher Womb; oneof thefe we took 
out, and having freed him from the Tegu- 
ments that involv’d him, and from the 
Liquor he {wam in, we obferv’d that he 
quickly open’d his Mouth very wide, 
mov uhis Tongue, and exercif’d Refpi- 
ration ; then we open’a both his Abdomen 
and his Cheft, and cut affunder the Dia- 
phragme, notwithftanding which, ‘he 
feem doften to endeavor Refpiring, and 
mov’din 2 notable manner, both the Tn- 
tercoftal Mufcles part of the Diaphragme, 
the Mouth and the Tongue: Bue that 
which we mention this Puppy for, was 
this, That being defirous to try whether 
the other yong ones that had not yet 
breath’d at all, would long furvive this 
or no; we took them alfo out of the 
Womb, and having open’d them, found 
none of them fo much alive, as to have 
any perceptible motion in his heart,where- 
as the heart of that Puppy which had once 
enjoyed the benefit of Refpiration, con- 
tinud bearing fo long, that we our.felves 
obferv’d the Auricle to bear, after five or 
fix hours; and a Servant chat ftaid up and 
watch’d it after we were gone to Bed, af- 
frwd; That he faw the Pulfation conti- 

Aa 4 nue 











(370) 
nue about two hours longer. T fhall leave 
it to others to make Reflections upon this 
Obfervation, compar'd with Dr, Har- 
vey’s Problem. 

It is much doubted, whether Fifhes 
breath under Water, and we fhall not take 
upon us, as yet, to determine the Quefti- 
on either way, becaufe we have not yet 
been able to procure little Fithes. alive to 
make Experimeats upon: That fuch as 
are not Setaceous (for fuch maniteftly 
breath) have not Refpiration, properly 
{o call'd; fuch as is exercif'd by four footed 
Beafts, and Birds, may be argu’d from 
their having but one cavity in their Hearts, 
& from their want of Lungs, whence they 
are obferv’d to be Mute; unlefs we fay, 
what is not altogether abfurd, That their 
Gills feem fomewhat Analogous (as to 
their ule} to Lungs, But that on the other 
fide, Air is neceffary to the Lives even 
of Fifhes, and that cherefore ’tis proba- 
ble they have fome obfcure kinde of Re- 
fpiration, feems maniteft by two or three 
Obfervations and Experiments,mention’d 
by divers Authors, who tell us, That 
Fifhes foon die in Ponds and Glaffes quite 
fldwith Waters if the one be fo frozen 
over, and the other fo clofely ftopp'd, that 
the Fifhes cannot enjoy the benefit of the 

i Air 


l (371) 
‘Air, if weallow themto betrue; But 
becaufe thefe Relations arenot wont to 


be deliver’d by Writersupon their own) 


Knowledge, as I thall not reject them, fo 
I dare not build upon them,till I have op- 
portunity to examine them by experience. 
In the mean time, we will adde, That our 
Engine has taught us two things that may 
illuftrate the matter in hand: The one, 
That there is wont to lurk in Water, ma- 
ny little parcels of interfperfd Air,where- 
of it feems not impoffible chat Fifhes may 
make fome ufe, either by feparating it 
when they ftrain the Water thorow their 
Gills, or by {ome other way: The other, 
what may be collected from the following 
Experiment. 

We took a large Eele (being able to 
procure no other Fifh alive) and removing 
it out of the Veflel of Water, wherein 
it was brought us, into our great Recel- 
ver, we cau(dthe Air to be pump’d out 5 
and obferv’d, That the Eele, after fome 
motion to and froin the Glafs, feem’d 


fomewhat dif-compofd; aad that when: 


we had profecuted the Exfudction of the 
Air fomewhat obftinately, fhe turn’d up 
her Belly, as dying Fifhes are wont to do, 
and from thence-torward lay altogether 

_movelels, 


A REE SS sin = 
Be eho! 


pas eee aeniase 


atoms tg 
a 


SIRE sevet awe 


tees 


He 
a | 
T 


i 













(372 J 
movelefs, juft as if fhe were. ftark dead s 
and though I did not think her fo, yet the 
continuing in that Pofture, even after the 
Cover of the Receiver: was taken off 
(whereby the Air was let in) I fhould have: 
been of the Opinion of the By-ftanders;if 
the Diffidence I am wont'to exercie in 
trying Experiments(e{pecially fuch as are 
not ufual) had norinvited me to take the: 
Fith out of the Receiver, upon which fhe 
fhew’dher felf, by her vivid motions, as 
much alive'as before. : 

> But thatis moft ftrange which we ob-: 
ferv’dot agreat, gray, Houfe Snail. (as 
they.call it) which being-clofd upin one 
of our {mall Receivers, did not ee 


‘ not falldownfrom the fide of the Glafs, 


upon the drawing out of the Air (For 
that may beafcrib’d to. the tenacity ofthe” 
Liquor wherewith Snails ufe co. ftick 
themfelves, even to the {mootheft Bo- 
dies) buc was not fo much as depriv'd.of 
progreffive motion by the recefs of the 
Air: Thoughexcept this Snail, we ne- 
ver put any living Creature into our Re- 
ceiver, whom it didnot either kill, or ac 
leaft reduce to feem ready todye. . But. 
as wefhall not here examine what intereft 
the glutinous, and uneafily-diffipable Na- 
ture 





(373) 

tureof the Juices of Snails, may haveon 
this events fo whether this efcape of our 
Eele be to be afcrib’d to the particular and 
vivacious Nature of this fort of Fifhes ; 
ortothis, That the Air is not indeed ne- 
ceflary to the life of -Fithes; or finally to 
this, That though thefe Animals need 
{fome Air, yet they need fo little, chat 
that which could not be drawn out of the 
Receiver, might (at leaft for a while) fuf- 

fice them, we willnot now determine. 
Nor are we at leifure to examine that 
Paradox of Hippocrates, which fome ` 
Learned Phyfitians, have of late reviv'd, 
namely, That the Fetus refpiresin the 
Womb: For onthe one fide it feems ve- 
ry difficult to conceive, how Air fhould 
traverfe the Body of the Mother, and the 
Teguments of the Childe: And fince 
Nature has, in new-born Babes, contriv’d 
peculiar and temporary Veffels, that che 
Blood may circulate. thorow other Pafla- 
ges, then itis wont to do in the fame In- 
dividuals when they come to have the free 
ufe of their Lungs, it feems unlikely, 
that Infants in the Womb do properly 
refpire, .. But then fince our Experiments 
have manifefted, That almoft all kinde of 
Liquors do,as well as Water, abound with 
in- 















(374) 
iñtetfperfd Corpufcles of Air, it feems 
not altogether abfurd to fay, That when 
the Fetus is grown big, he may (efpecial- 
ly the upper part of the involving Amni- 
os, being deftitute of Liquor, and fill’d 
onely with an halituous Subftance) exer- 
cife fome obfcure Refpiration , efpecially, 
fince’tis not (as many wife Men think it) 
a Fable, That Children have ‘been heard 
to cry inthe Mothers Womb:For though 
it happens exceeding rately, yet fome- 
_times it has been obferv’d,  AndI know 
a young Lady, whofe Friends, when fhe 
was fome Years fince with Childe, come 
plain’d to me, That fhe was feveral times 
much frighted with the Cryes of her In- 
fant, which, till I difabutd Her; ‘She and 
Her Friends look’d’ upon as Portentots. 
And fuch Obfervations are the mote'cre- 
dible, becaufe not onely Houtwives, but 
more judicious Perfons, mention it, asno 
very unfrequent thing to hear the Chick 
Pip or Cry in the Egg, before: the Shell 
be broken. But this I mention’ but as 
a probable, nota cogent Argument, till 
I can difcover whether an Elifion of an 
halituous Subftance’; though ‘noe true 
Air, may not at the top of the Laryax 

»e" pros 





(375) 

produce a Sound, fince I find that the 
Blade of a Knife, held in feverall poftures 
in the ftreame of Vapors (or rarified Wa- 
ter) that iflu’s out ofan e£olipile, willaf- 

ford various and very audible Sounds. 
Thad thoughts of conveying into our 
Receiver young ones , ripped out of the 
wombe of their Dammes , with their in- 
volving Coates intire, but could not pro- 
cure them. AndT have alfo had thoughts 
of trying whether it be not practicable, 
to make a Receiver, though not all of 
glafle , yet with little glafle windows, fo 
placed, that one may freely look into it, 
capacious enoagh to hold a Man,who may 
obferve feverall things, both touching 
Refpiration,and divers other matters;and, 
who in cafe of fainting,may, by giving a 
digne of his weakneffe,be immediately re- 
liev’d by having air let in upon him. Andie 
feems not impoflible, but that by accufto- 
mance , fome Men may bring themfelves 
to fuppore the want of Air a pretty while, 
fince we fee that divers will live fo much 
longer then other Men under Water : that 
thofe that dive for Pearlesin the Weft 
Indies are faid to be able to ftay a whole 
houre under water. And Cardan tels us of 
one Colanus a Diver in Sicily , who was 
able 


ae i: Srey 


rl 
















(376) 


Cardan. de able to continue ( if Cardan neither mi- 


ftake, nor impofe upon us ) three or foure 
times as long. Notto mind Your Lord- 
fhip, that You have Your felfe often feen 
in England, a corpulent Man,who is wont 
to deicend to the bottome of the Thames, 
and bring out of the deep holes at the 
bottome ofthe bankes , large fithes alive 


Gb.3.c. 15.in his hands. And A cofta tels us,he faw 


in Pery thelike manner of fifhing, but 
more difficult, practifed by the Indians. 
I made mention of fome Men, and of 
Accuftomance : becaufe there are but ve- 
ry few, who, though they ufe themfelves 
toit by degrees, are fit to fupport,for ma- 
ny Minutes, the want of Air. Infomuch 
that an ingenious Man of my acquaintance, 


‘who is very famous for the ufefull skill 


of drawing Goods,and ev’n Ordnance out 
of funke Ships, being asked by mee, how 
long he was able to continue at the depth 
of 50. or 60. feet under water, without 
the ufe of Refpiration, confeffed to mee, 
that hee cannot continué above two mi- 
nutes of an houre, without reforting to the 
Air, which hecarries downe with him ina 
certaine Engine (whereof I can {how your 
Lordfhip a Defcription. ) Another thing 
Talfo leara’d of him by enquiry, that was 
not 


(377) 

not defpicable: For askinghim, whether 
he found any ufe of chawing little fpon- 
ges dipt in oyle in his Mouth, when he was 
perfectly under water, and at adiftance 
from his Engine, he told me, that by the 
help of thefe fponges he could much lon- 
ger {upport the want of his wonted Refpi- 
ration, then he was able to do without 
them. The true caufe of which would per- 
haps, ifdifcovered, teach us fome thing 
pertinent to the Probleme touching the 
Refpiration of Fifhes 

But the neceffity of Air tothe moft 
pare of Animals unaccuftom’d to the want 
ofit, may beft be judg’d of by the follow- 
ing Experiments, whichwe try’din ourEn- 
gine, to difcover whether Infects them- 
felves havenot, either Refpiration, or 
fome other ufe of the Air equivalent 
thereunto. 

Wetooke thenan humble- bee, one of 
thole common flyes thatare call’d flefh 
fiyes, and one of thofe hairy wormes that 
refemble caterpillars , and are wont to be 
call’d Palmer-wormes: Thefe three wee 
convey'd into one of our fmall Receivers, 
and obferv’d tothe great wonder of the 
Beholders, that not onely the Bee,and the 
Fly fell downe, and lay wich their bellies 

upwards; 


| 
J 
in 


i 
: 

4 a 
í 
j 

i É 
a 
4 
f 















) (378) 
upwards; but the worme it felfe feem’d to 
be fuddenly ftruck dead: all of them be- 
ing reduc’d to lye without motion, or any 
other difcernable figne of life, within 
fomewhat leffe ( if we miftake not) then 
one minute of an houre. And this,not- 
withftanding the {malnefie of the Animals 
in proportion to the capacity of the vef- 
fels: which circumftance we the rather 
mention, becaufe we found that the veffell 
was not free from leaks. And to {atisfie 
the Spectators, that ‘twas the abfence of 
the Air that cauf'd this great and fudden 
change: we had no fooner re-admitted the 
Air at the ftopcock, than all the three In- 
feéts began to fhew fignes of life,and little 
by little to recover, But when we had a- 
gain drawn out the Air,their motions pre- 
fently ceafed,& they fell down feemingly 
dead as before,cotinuing movelefs,as long 
as,by continuing to pump , the veffell was 
kept exhaufted. This invited us thankful- 
ly to refleét.upon the wife goodnefle 
of the Creator, who by giving the Aira 
{pring,has made it fo very diflicult,as men 
findit, to exclude a thing fo neceflary to 
Animals : and it gaveus alfo occafion to 
fufpect that if Infeéts have no lungs, nor 
any part analogous thereunto, the ambient 
ir 


(379) 

Air affects them, and relieves them at the 
Pores of their Skin, it not being irratio- 
nal to extend,to.thefe Creatures -that of 
Hippocrates, who fays, That a Living 
Body is throughout perfpirable; or to 
ufe his expreffion, ‘eave 3 tzar, difpol’d 
to admit and part with what is Spirituous: 
‘Which may be fomewhat Iluftrated by 
what we have elfewhere noted, That the 
moifter parts of the Air readily infinuate 
themfelves into, and recede.from the 
pores of the Beards of wilde Oates, and 
thofe of divers other wilde Plants ; which 
almoft continually wreath and ufiwreath 
themfelves according to, even, the light 
variations of the temperature of- the am- 
bient Air: 


This Circumftance of our Experiment 
we particularly took notice of, that when 
atany time, upon the Ingrefs.of the Air, 
the Bee began to recover, the firft figna 
of Lite fhe gave, was a vehement pant- 
ing; which appear’d near the Tail: Which 
we therefore mention, becaufe we have 
obferv'd the like in Bees drown'd in Wa- 
ter, when they firt come to. be reviv’d by 
a-convenient heat: As if the Air were in 
the one cafe as proper to fet che Spirits 

Bb and 


aie 














ane EES 





(380) 

and Alimental Juice a moving, as heat is 
inthe other; and this may perchance des 
ferve afarther confideration. 


We may adde, That we fcarce ever faw 
any thing that feem’d fo much as this Ex- 
periment, to manifeft, That even living 
Creatures (Man always excepted) area 
kinde of curious Engines, fram’d and con= 
triv’d-by nature (or rather the Author of 
it) much more skilfully then our grofs 
Tools and unperfe&t Wits can reach to. 
For in our prefent Inftance we fee Ani- 
mals, vividand perfectly found, depriv’d 
immediately of motion, and any difcerns 
able figns of life, and reduc’d to a’condi- 
tion that differs from death, but in that it 
isnot abfolutely irrecoverable. This (1 
fay) we fee perform’d without any,fo much 
as the leaft external violence offered to 
the Engine; unlefs it be fuch as is offer’d 
toa Wind: Mill, when the Wind ceafing 
to blow onthe Sayls, all the feveral parts 
remain movelefs and ufelefs, till a new 
Breath put them into motion again, 

And this was further very notablein 
this Experiment; That whereas tis known, 
that Bees and Flies will not onely walk, 
but flie for a-great while, after their heads 
are 


(381) 

gre offs and fometimes“one half of the 
Body will, for divers hours, walk up and 
down, when it is fever difrom the other s. 
Yet, upon'the Exfudtion of the! Air, not 
onely the progrefive motion: of . the 
whole Body,but the very motions of the 
Limbs do forthwith ceafe; as ifthe pre- 
fence of the Air were more ‘neceffary to 
thefe Animals, ‘then the prefeate of theit 
own Heads. 3 

' But it feems, that in thefe Infeas, that 
fluid Body(whether it bea Juice or Flame) 
wherein’ Life chiefly refides,’ isnothing 
near fo eafily diffipable, as iniperfect Ani- 
mals. For where, as wehave above re- 
cited, that the Birds we conveyed'into our 
fmall Receiver were within two minutes 
brought to be paft Recovery, we were 
unable (though by tyring -him that 
pump’d) to kill our Infeéts by the ex{u- 
tion of the Air: For though, -as long 
as the Pump was kept moving, they con- 
tinued immovable, yet when we defifted 
from pumping, the Air that preff'd in at 
the unperceiv’d Leaks, did (though flow: 
ly.) reftore them to the free exercife of the 
fun@tions of ‘Life, . 

But, My- Lord, I grow troublefome, 

and therefore fhal] pats on to other Expe- 

Bb 2 riments : 


| 
£ 
IA 
i 
|. 



































i 








(382), 
periments” Yet- without: difpairing of 
your pardon for having entertain’d youfo 
long about the ufe of Refpiration, becanfe 
it isa lubjeét of that difficulty: to be ex- 
plain’ds and;yet of that. imporrance=to 
humane Life, that I fhall not regret the 
trouble my Experiments-have coft me, if 
they béfound.in any degree ferviceable to 
the purpofes.to which they. were defign’d. 
And though I defpair not but that here- 
after our Engine may ‘furnifh us with di- 
vers Phenomena ufeful to Iluftrate the 
Dodrineof Refpiration ; yethaving not, 
as yet;-hadthe opportunity to makethe 
other tryals, of various kinds, that I 
judge réquilite for my, Information: I 
muft confefs to Your Lordfhip, that in 
what Lhaye hitherto faid, I pretend: not 
fo much to eftablith, “or over- throw this 
or that Hyparhefis, asito lay together di- 
versiof the Particulars that occur’d to me, 
in order tom future inquiry. I fay, di 
vers of the Particulars, | becaufe:I could 
adde many. others, but thet want time; 
and fear that I {hall need. Y our Lordfhips 
pardon, tor having been fo prolix in Wri- 
tings and that of Phyfitians (which per: 
haps J fhall more eafily obtain) for having 
invaded Anatomy, a. Difcipline which 
they 


(383) 

they challenge to themfelves, and indeed 
have been the almoft fole Improvers of. 
Without denyingthen that the infpir’d 
andexfpir’d Air may be fometimes very 
uleful, by condenfing and cooling the 
Blood that paffes through the Lungs ; I 
hold that the depuration of the Blood in 
that paffage, isnot onely one of the or- 
dinary, but one of the principal ufes of 
Refpiration.’ But I am apralfo to fufpect, 
that the Air does fomething elfe in Refpr 
ration, which has not yet been fufficient- 
ly explain’d; and therefore, till Ihave ex- 
amin’d the matter more deliberately, I 
fhall not {cruple to anfwer the Queftions 
that may be asked me touching the ge- 
nuine ufeof Refpiration, in the excellent 
Words employ'd by the acute St, Auftin, 
to one that ask’d him hard Queftions + 
«Mallem quidem (fays he) corum que à 
me quafivifti, habere fcientiam quam ig- 
norantiam: fed quiaid nondum potui, ma» 
gis cligo cautam ignorantiam confiteri, 
quam falfam [cientiam profiteri, 


Bb3 Having 


Ti a 


ESE 


Se ere 


j| 


i 
i 
| 
ii 
f 





Sa 

















(384) 


- VJ Aving (partly upon the confideration 
of fome of the foregoing Experie 
ments, and partly upon grounds not now 
to be infifted on) entertain’d:a fufpition, 
that the action of Corrofive Liquors in 
the diffolving of Bodies, may be confides 
rably varied by the gravitation or preflure 
of the incumbent Air, and the removal 
of it; I thought fit to examine my Con- 
jeture by the following Experiment, » 

I took whole pieces of red Coral, and 
caft them into as much Spirit of Vinagers 
as fufficed to fwim above an Inch over 
them: Thefe fubftances I made choice of, 
that the Ebullition upon the Solution 
might not be too great, and that the o4 
peration might laft the longer. 

Having then put about half-a-fcore 
Sprigs of Coral, together with the Menz- 
ftrunm,into afomewhat long ñeck’d Viol, 
whereof they feem’d fcarce to fill a third 
part, weconvey'd that Viol into one of 
our {mall Preumatical Glaffes, containing 
by ghefs about a Quart of Waters; and 
having faftned on the Cover, after the 
accuftom’d manner, we fuffered the Li- 
quor 





(385) 
guor to remain unmov’d awhile, to ob- 
ferve whether the Menfrusm would 
work upon the Coral otherwife then be- 
fore, But finding there did onely arife, 
as formerly, a pretty number of {mall 
Bubbles, that made no fenfible froth up- 
onthe furface of the diftill’d Vinager, 
there were made two or three Exfuctions 


of the Air, upon which, there emerg’d - 


from the Corall fuch a multitude of Bub- 
bles, as made the whole Body of the 
«Menftruum appear white; and foon af- 
ter, a Froth, -as big asall the reft of the 
Liquor, was feen to {wim uponit: And 
the Menftrunm plainly appear’d to boil 
in the Glafs, like a feething Pot. And 
though, if we defifted but one minute 
from pumping, the decrement of the 
Froth and Ebullition, upon the getting 
in of alittle Air at fome leak or other, 
feem’d to argue, that the removal of the 
the preflure of the external Air was the 
caufe, or, at leaft, the occafion of this 
effervelcence: Yet to evince this the more 
clearly, we turn’d the Key, and let in the 
external Air at the Stop-cock ; immedi- 
ately upon whofe entrance the Froth va- 


nifh’d, and fo many of the Bubbles with- - 


Bb4 in 


| 
f 
p 
| 
AL 
ir 
Hy 


ee 











(386) 

in the body of the Liquor difappear’d,thati¢ 
loft its whitenefs,& grew tran{parent again: 
The Menftruum alfo working as languidly 
upon the coral, as it did before they were put 
into the Receiver: But when we had again 
drawn out the Air, firft the whicenefs re-ap- 
pear’d then the ebulition was renewd, which, 
the pumping being awhile longer & nimbly 
purfued, grew fo great, that for 3 or 4 times 
one after another, when ever the Air was let 
out of the Receiver into the emptyed Cylin- 
der; the frothy liquor over-flow’d the glafs, 
& ran down by the fides of it: And yet,upon 
the readmitting of the excluded air,the boil, 
ing Liquor grew immediatly as calm and as 
tran(parent as at firft:as ifindeed the operati- 
on of it,upon the Coral,had been facilitated 
by the ex{uction of the incumbent air,wh on 
itsrecefs,leftit more eafie for the more active 
parts of the liquor to fhew themfelves fuch, 
then it was whilft the wonted preffure of the 
Air continued unremoved. It may indeed be 
fufpedted,that thole vaft & numerous Bub- 
bles proceeded, not from the aétion of the 
Menftraum upon the Corall, but from the 
fuddain emerfion of thofe many little parcels 
of air that(as we formerly obfervd)are wont 
to be difperfd in liquors, without excluding 
Spirit of Vinegar; but having had this fufpi- 
tion before we trydthe Experiment,we con- 

| vey'd 


(387) 

vey’d our diftill’d Vinager alone into the Re- 
ceiver,and kept it awhile there,to free it from 
its Bubbles (which were but very {mall) be- 
fore ever we put the Corallintoir. It may 
be fufpected likewife,that the agitation of the 
Liquor, neceffary following upon the fhaking 
of the Glafs,by pumping, might occafion the 
recited Ebullition, but upon tryal made,there 
appear’d not any notable change in theliquor, 
or its operation,though the containing Veflel 
were fhaken, provided no Air were fuck’d out 
ofit. The former Experiment was another 
time trydin another {mall Receiver, with Co- 
ral grofly poudred, and the fuccefs was very 
much alike, fcarce differing in any thing, but 
that che Coral being reduc’d to {maller parts, 
upon the ebullition of the liquor,fo many lit- 
tle lumpsof Coral would be carryed & Boy’d 
up by the emerging Bubbles,as fometimes to 
darken the Viol ; though the fame Coralline 
Corpufcles would be let fall again upon the 
letting in of the Air, 

Something alfo we try`d in our great Receiver, 
concerning che folution of Metals in Aqua forta,and 
other Corrofive Liquors ; but partly the ftink, and 
partly fome accidents, kept us from obferving any 
thing peculiar & remarkable about thofe Solutions. 

One thing we muft not omic,thit when the Spirit 
o! Vinager was boiling upon the Coral, we took off 
the Cover of the Receiver,and took out the Viol but 
could not finde,that notwith{tanding fo very late an 
Ebuilition, the Liquor had any heat great enough to 
be at all fenfible to our hands. We 


EE ceca HS Ze 


3 


| 


4 
| 
+P 
if 

y 

? 


te ta aS, 


pa 















C388} 


Experi- VVE will now fabjoyn an Experi- 


ment, which, if the former did 


win 43+ not leffen, the wonder of it would pro- 


bably appear very ftrange to Your Lord- 
fhip, asic did to the fir& Spectators of 
it. 

The Experiment was this: We cauld 
Water to beboyl’d a pretty while, that 
by the heat it might be freed from thela- 
titant Air, fo often already taken notice 
of in common Water: Then almoft fil- 
ling with ita Glafs Viol, capable of con- 
taining near four Ounces of that Liquor s 
weconvey dit, whil’{t the Water was yet 
hot, into one of our {mall Receivers (big 
enough to hold about a pound of Water) 
and having luted on the Cover, we caufd 
the Air tobe drawn out: Upon the two 
firft Exfuctions, there {carce appear'd any 

“change in the Liquor, nor was there any 
notable alteration made by the third; but 
atthe fourth, and afterwards, the Water 

appear’d to boyl inthe Viol, as if ithad 

{tood over a very quick Fires for the 

Bubbles were much greater then are ufu- 

ally found upon the Ebullition of very 

much 





(389) 

much more ‘Water then was contain’dina 
our Viol; And this Effervefcence was fo 
great in the upper part of the Water, that 
the Liquor boyling over the top of the 
Weck a pretty deal of it ran down into the 
Receiver, and fometimes continued 
(though more languidly) -boyling there. 
Profecuting this Experiment,weobferv’d, 
that fometimes, after the firft Ebullirion, 
we were reduc’d to make.diyers Exfucti- 
ons of the Air, before the Liquor would 
be brought to boy] again.: But at other 
times, as often as the Key was turn’d to 
let the Air pafs from the Receiver into 
the Pump, the Effervefcence would be- 
gin afrefh, though the Pump were ply’d 
fora pretty while together; which feem’d 
to argue, that the boyling of the Water 
proceeded from hence, That upon the 
withdrawing the preflure of the incumbent 
Air, either the Fiery Corpufcles, or ra- 
ther the Vapors agitated by the heat in 
the Water (which laft, what we have for- 
merly noted touching the rarefied Wa- 
ter of an efolipile, manifeft to be capa- 
ble of an Elaftical Power) were permit- 
ted to expand themfelves mightily in the 
evacuated Receiver; and did, in their 

tumul- 


= - —————— 


—s 


REET 


—— 


ae 











ESS 


4 





(390) 

tumultuous Dilation, lift up ‘(as the Air 
is wont to do) the uppermoft part of the 
Water , and tutning ic into’ Bubbles , 
made the Water appear boiling. -This 
conjecture was further confirm’d by thefe 
additional Circumftances: Firft, The 
Effervefcence was confin’d to:-the upper’ 
part of the Water, the lower remain- 
ing quiet, unlefs the Liquor’ were but 
fhailow. Next, although fometimes (as 
isalready noted) the Ebullition began a- 
gain, after it had ceafd a pretty while, 
which feem’d to infer, That {ome concur- 
rent caufe (whatever that were) did a little 
Modifie theoperation of heat ; yet, when 
the water in the Viol could by no pum- 
ping be brought to boil any more, the 
felf-fame Water, being in the very fame 
Viol warm’d again, and reconvey’d into 
the Pneumatical Glafs, was quickly 


brought to boyl afrefh, and that vehe- 


mently and long enough ; not to menti- 
on, that a new parcel, taken out of the 
fame parcel of the boyled Water with 
the former, and put in cold, could by no 
pumping be brought to the leaft fhew 
of Effervefcence. Befides, having try’d 
this Experiment in hot Sallet Oyl, be- 
ing 


— Gary: 
ing atmuch more tenacious Liquor, and 
requiring’a ftronger heat. to make it boil, 
could not +be broughtto an Effer-~ 
vefcence: in: our Reciver; whereas. the, 
Chymical, Qyl of Turpentine, being 
thinner and more volatiles: was prefent- 
ly made to boyl up, till it reach’d four 
or five times its former height in ‘the 
Viol, iniwhofe. bottom it lay, and con- 
tind d bayling: till, it..was almoft reduc’d 
to be \but-huke-warm,)./: Wine alfo be- 
ing ʻa more ahin-and)fpiricuous Liquor 
then; Water, being convey’d in hot in- 
ftead of the Opl, did;asTremember, at 
the very. firftEx(uction begin to boy! fo 
vehemently,: that, in ai-fhore time that 
thée»Pump was: kepr moving, four parts 
‘of fivej, by: our .ghelsy::boyl’d over-out 
of the Miek though iehad.a pretty long 
Neck, (On which occafion we wilbadde, 
that eyen. the: Water ic felf, near one 
half, would fometimes: boyl over into 
the *Reckiver: before, it. became: luke- 
warm, Andit wasalfofemarkable, that 
once, whenithe-Airhad been drawn out, 
the Liqyordidy uponafingle Ex{ncti- 
on, beyhfo long with prodigioufly- vaft 
Bubbles, tiacche Bflervefcencelafted 7 - 
moft 




















(392) 
moft as long as was requifite for the re~ 
hearfing of a. Pater Nofter: Now’ the 
Experiment having been try’d more then 
once,yand found to fucceed as to the main, 
feems much to countenance the conjeQure 
we made at the-beginning of this Letter,’ 
where we toldyour Lordthip, “That per- 
haps the preflure ofthe Air might have an 
intereft in more Phenomena then men 
have hitherto thought. - For-as we had 
not then made this Experiment, fo now 
we have madeit, it feemis:to teach, That 
the Air, by its ftronger-or weaker pref: 
fure, may very much Módifië (as the 
School-men {peak} divers of ‘the O pera: 
tions ‘of that welement and. tumulcuous 
Agitation of the fiall parts: of “Bodies, 
wherein the natureof heat'feems chiefly, if 
not folely, to confift.:: In fomith. that if 
a heated Body were convey d ‘above. the 
‘Atmoiphere, tis probable. that the heat 
may have a differing operation, as’ to'the 
power of diffipating the paroh itfi om 

what.it has here below. «2! 0. 
Toconclude; This Experiment might 
have - been further profecuted, but our 
want of leafure makes us content our 
falves to-adde: at :prefent ;: Thae-perhaps 
it 


C393) 

it would not be loft labor if this wera 
try'd, not onely with other Liquors, bug 
with variety of heated, and efpecially foft 
or melted Bodies: But in fuch cafes the 
Receiver ought to be fo thap’d, as is moft 
proper to preferve the Cement wherewith 
the Cover muft be faftned on, from being 
melted by the heat of the included Mata 
ter; the inconvenience to be hereby a- 
voided; having befallen us in the ufe of a 
Receiver too hallow, though otherwife 
capacious enough. | 3 


wii ttle 


Se Sse 


SES EO. 


Sena 


| 


A 

| 
if 
lé 


L O 


SESLURIAIETE 








( 394) 






EEN. wash St aoe 


Sade rett: E 


The Coney on: 


BE: come af far, My.Dear Tied: 
not without thoughts of proceeding 
further: The unwelcome Importunity Of 
my Occafions becomes fo prevalent, that 
I it quite hinders, for theprefent, my de- 
Er fign’d Progrefs ; and reduces me, not 
bet onely toreferve for another I 
j that kinde of Experiments , which, 
N eae {fome diftance trom the beginning of ne 
; Letter, I call’d: (as: “Your Lordfhip may 
Ls) remember) Experiments of the fecond 
pE] fort; butto leave uneffay’d fome of the 
AAN ERAN firft fort, which I might try inthe En- 
ie Var ee gine, as it now is, wereit not that my 
Me he Avogations are grown fourgent, for my 
remove from the place where the Engine 
was fetup, that I am put to write Your 
Lordthip this-Exeufe,: Weary, andin-an 
l Ine which I takein my way to my Dear: 
j ! € 


Vee 





d 































(395) 
ret Brother Corke: Who -being at 
length arriv’d in England, after I have 
for diverfe Yeares been deprived of His 
Company , and wifh’d for it as long ; 
what ever mv other occafions may be, 
my firt Bufiaefle muft be to wait on 
Him and Your Excellent Mother, in 
whofe gratefull Company I may hope 
to forget a while thole publick calami- 
ties that diftrefle this too defervedly 
unhappy Nation. Since that is indear’d 
to me, both by their perfonall Merits 
by the near Relation which Nature 
gives me to Him, Affinity to Her, ind 
Friendfhip to both; and alfo by their 
many Favours , efpecially that of my 
owing them My Lord of Dungarvan. 
Bur I fufter my felfe to be traniported 
too farre with thefe delightfull thoughts; 
To returne therefore to our Engine. 
Though I find this Letter is beyon: { my 
expectation fwell’d, not only into a 
Book, but almoft into a Volume; yet 
the Experiments already mentioned in 
it, are fo farre from comprifing all thofe 
that may be try’d by the help of our 
Engine, that I have nor yet been able to 
try “all thofe, which, prefently occuring 
c to 





CME. G 


sN 


RE 


















nae ng trier ite amen 





PURE Eg VRE 





(396) 

to my thoughts, upon my firft feeing 
the working of it, I Caus’dto be fer 
down in a Catalogue within leffe then 


halfeanhoure. But I doubt I havebut 


too much caufe to apprehend that the 
Affaires, and other things I complaine 
of, have made it needfull for me to A- 
pologize, as well for the things I have 
fet down, as for thofe [ am neceffitated 
to omit. For as partiall as men ufe to 
be to the children of their own Braines, 
as well as to thofe of their Loines, I 
muft not deny that the foregoing Try- 
als are not altogether free from fuch 
unaccuratenefles, nor the recitall of them 
from fuch imperfections , as I my felfe 
can now difcerne, and could perhaps 
partly mend, if [had the leafure to re- 
peate the Experiments , with the Cir- 
cumftances that have fince offer’d theme 
felves to my thoughts, as things that 
might have been worth Obfervation or 
Enquiry. But the truth is, that I was 
reduc’d to make the fe Experiments, when 
my Thoughts had things that more 
concernd me to imploy them, and the 
ame avocations made me fet them 


down, for the moft part, affoone as T 
| had 





(397) 

had made them, and in the fame order, 
and that fo faft that I had not over-fre- 
quently the opportunity to mind any 
more then the bare Truth of what I 
fet down ; without allowing it any of 
thofe Advantages that Method, Style, 
and decent Embellifhments, are wont to 
conferre on the Compofures they are 
imploy’d do adorne, 

But, my Lord, though to invite and 
encourage You and your learned Friends 
at Paris, to make a further ufe of this 
Engine than I have yet been able to do, 
Iam thus free to acknowledge the im- 
perfections of the foregoing Letter: yer 
if fome Intelligent Petfons miftake not, 


‘by what has been done, fuch as it is, 


there isa way open’d, whereby Sagacious 
Wits will be affifted to make fuch fur- 
ther Difcoveries in fome points of Na- 
turall Philofophy, as are yet f{carce 
dream’d of. And I am the more defirous 
to engage You to that Imployment, be- 
caufe Lam apt to think , that itthe Ma- 
king and Writing of fuch Experiments 
fhall coft You as much trouble as they 
have me, You will be inclin’d to Excute 
me 5 and if the Difcoveries give You 

Ces as 


*— Stare nitrate 


gS 2 eee 


TAN Tieg E, 


| 


| 

bid 
$ 
li 































(398) 
as much pleafure as they gave me, You 
will ‘perhaps) be invited to thank me. 
However, I think (my Lord) I may ju- 
{tly pretend, that the things I have fee 
down have been faithfully Recorded, 
though not elaborately Written; and I 
fuppose my former Papers may have long 
fince fatisfi’d You, that though many 
devife Experiments better than Your Ser- 
vant, none perhcps has related them more 
carefully and more tiuely: And particu- 
larly of Thele; fometimes one, fome- 
times another hath been perform’d in the 
prefence of Perfons , diverfe of them 
eminent for their Writings, and all for 
their Learning. W herefore having in 
the foregoing Narratives made it my 
bufinefle to enoble them with the chiefe 
Requifites of Hiftoricall Compofures, 
Candor, and Truth , I cannot defpair 
that You will either Excufetheir Imper- 
fections, or at leat F orgive them: a 
cially confidering , that this unpolifhtl 
Letter is as weli a Peodndiion of Your 
Lordthip’s Commands and my Obedi- 
ence, asa Teftimony of my Defire to 
make others beholden to my Lord of 
Duze 





ae 
Dungarvan, by the fame way by which 
Tindeavour to exprefle my felfe 


Beern’s-fi ld this 
2oth. of Deceme ide 
ber, 1659. 


His Lordfbips 


Moft obedient Servant, 


and 


Mott affectionate Unckle, 


0 


Jo 
ROBERT BOYLE. 









{ 
it 
M ) ( 
i WOR 
raig 

$ 

| 











te, D chy 


& ch ch de che, ch 
PII hippie pepe EET k 
ERRATA. 


Pag, 4. line. 8.dele that. 10. 11.d. withia and without. 
12. 3.,0M8 atthe. 18,25. devoid. 18. ult imcgirably 
27.00. airs fpringe 28.27, refrattions. 31. 1. Riccivlo 
32.5. de that. 34.16. st beat. 46.22 dienai ar, 47. 
21. made even, by, 48.6. not fiom. 69. 19. into 73. 
26, ¢loath of. 76. 26. wax candle. 102.23 ftaacher.103. 
6. we vaited. 194.1. d. I, 106. 21.17 an. 106.24, thea 
if 115. 16. an other tryall, 150. 22. time, after, bake 96 
it, is. 166. 26. bow evti, 172. 15. EF, 173. 9, Uria. 
S—. Canalis tortuofi ( QR) vitimum Miama. 174. 
18. rarefattion. 182.9. treaty firlt. 184.6. more air. 194. 
19. Wont to. 228. x1. of the Atmofphere. 235 16. the feale, 
246. 27- d. be. 247. 19. admit it. 257. in margine. geogr: 
general, 270.24. the glaffe. 277. 24. a degree. 290.8, not 
neither as.294. 27. F to C. 294. tlt. 30: = 299.24. Toa 
loufe. 300. 15. difforme. 309. 27. mg 325.10. pof- 
Seffor’s. 356.16, Pariacaca. 358. 3. în a punétuall 358. 
26. Frælichius. 362. 14. proj file. 362. 26, as fome of- 

















W. 








wvy 5a 
i <j 





SPRING | 
‘oF THE AIR 


a 


i Bae, LE 


BARRANIN KA AAK ADA 


aptina 











