The  Dihner  Library 
of  the  History  of 
Science  and  Technology 

SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION  LIBRARIES 


*  —  i*  ••  . .,  V 


<5-  .:')  -.,  OU^~<t  feVvt,  -cfv  i-M.J-t>  O'-'-'-’ ■  '■■\  i'£.-e-  V  ‘V- 

$ 


Ail- 


-'CLL^s^ 


it  /  /»  i  '  f  \  I  '<;■  f  ■ 

.4,  3.-rt nAj^sL/Mj"'  -\i 


-A, 


Bb 


Marinas 


Talomcus 


J^ms\|, 


mwassg 


THE  ELEMENTS 

OF  GHOMHTRIH 

of  the  moll  aunci- 
enc  Philolopher 
EFCLIDE 

ofMeaara, 


Strabo 


[jtralus 


Faithfully  ( now firsl  )  tran* 
fated  into  the  Englife  toung ,  by 
H.  BillingWiy  ,Cuiz.en  of  London, 
Whereanto  are  annexed  certaine 

Scholtes ,  Annotations, and  Indenti¬ 
ons,  of  the  ieff  Mathematici¬ 
ans,  both  of  time  paft ,  and 
in  this  our  age , 


cPoltbt 


j  lljfarcfms 


R-tisssssns^^ss 


\  With  a  very  fir  uitf nil  Preface  made  by  M.  I.  Dee, 
;  jpecifying  the  chief  if1! athematicali  Scieces,  Vehat 

\  thej  are, and  vrherunto  commodious -.where, alfo,  are 

s  difclo  fed  certaine  new  Secrets  Mathematicall 

\  and  McchanicallswitiU  theft  our  dates, greatly  miffed. 


Mtronomia 


Geometria 


'u\mi 


Mu  sica 


Anthmctica 


illL  \\yi(  H Y.1‘  l'Yfi  'Y  ,  a v 

Wu  nV/JSAVi 

00  0  ® 

isi 

ywfyf/ 

Imprinted  at  London  by holm  ID  aye. 


5*  The  T ranikior  to  the  Reader. 


Here  is  (gentle  Trader')  nothing 
( the  wordoffod  oncly fet  apart') 
which  fo  much  beautifieth  and  a- 
dorneth  the  foule^  and  minde^  of 
ma.  as  doth  the  knowledge  0 
andfciences:  as  th 
ye  ofnaturalland  moraU'Ttoi- 
ojophie  .  The  onefetteth  before 
our  eyes.  the^  creatures  offfod. 

:  in  which  as 


both  in 

in  o^glafe.  we  beholde  the  exceding  maiefiie  andwifedome  of 
fjod.  in  adorning  and  beautifying  them  as  we fee :  ingeuingyn - 
to  them fuch  wonder  full  and mani folde proprieties .  and  naturall 
workjnges.  and  that  fodiuerflyand  in  fuck  yarietie :  farther  in 
maintaining  and  conferuing  them  continually  .whereby  to praife 
and  adore  him .  as  by  SIPaule  we  are  taugh  t  *  The  other  tea t- 
cheth  ys  rules  and '  preceptes  of  yertue.how yin  common  life'4-j- 
mongef  men u,  we  ought  to  walke  yprightly  :what  dueties per- 
taine  to  our felues.  whatpertaine  to  the  gouernment  or  good  or** 
der  both  of  an  houfholde.  and  alfo  of  a  citie  or  commonwealth. 
The  reading  lihpwife  ofhifiories.conduceth  not  a  htle.to  the  ad¬ 
orning  of  the  foule  &  minde  of  man  .a fiudie  of  all  men  comen¬ 
ded:  by  it  are feene  and  fnowen  the  artes  and  doinges  of  infinite 
wife  men  gone  before  ys .  In  hifiories  are  contained  infinite  ex¬ 
amples  ofheroicall  yertues  to  be  of  ys followed. and  horrible  ex¬ 
amples  offices  to  be  ofys  efchewed  .  oZAdany  other  artes  alfo 
there  are  which  beautifie  the  minde  of  man:  but  of  all  other  none 
do  more garnifhe  &  beautifie  it.  then  thofe  artes  which  are  cal¬ 
led  Ala  t hematic  a  ll .  Unto  the  knowledge  of  which  no  man  can 
attaine  .without  the  perfeBe  knowledge  md  infiruBion  of  the 
principles  .groundes  .and Elementes  cf Geometric  ,  Hut  per- 
y  83s*  H*  feBly 


$&  TheTranflator  to  the  Reader, 

feBly  to  be  injlruBed  in  them,  requireth  diligent  fludie  and  rest * 
dingof  olde  auncient  authors .  fAmongefl  which, none for  a  be¬ 
ginner  is  to  be  preferred  before  the  mofl  auncient  Fhilofopher 
Euclide  o/TVlegara .  For  of  all  others  he  hath  in  a  truc^  me¬ 
thods  and  infle  order,  gathered  together  whatfoeuer  any  before 
himhad  ofthefe  Element  es  written:  inuenting  alfo  and  adding 
mar\y  t  hinges  of  his  owne :  wherby  he  hath  in  due  forme  accom¬ 
pli  fhed  the  artefrfgeuing  definitions  principles,  &  ground es , 
wherofhe  deduceth  his  F  r  op  o fit  ions  or  conclufions fnfuch  won - 
derfullwife,  that  that  which goeth  before  ,  isofnecefitie  requi¬ 
red  to  theprouf-j  t f that  which follow  eth  .  So  thatwithout  the 
diligent fludie  of  Euclides  Element es, it  is  impofiible  to  attaine 
•vnto  the perfette  knowledge  of  Cfcometrie,  and  confequently  of 
any  of  the  other  Math  ematic all  jciences  .  Wherefore  confide - 
ring  the  want  &  lacfe  offuchgood  authors  hitherto  in  our  Eng- 
hfhe  lounge,  lamenting  alfo  the  negligence,  and  lachp  of  ge alts 
to  their  countrey  inthofe  of  our  nation ,  to  whom  Cfod  hath  geuen 
loth  knowledge,  &  alfo  abilitie  to  tranflate  into  our  tounge,and 
to pub  lifhe  abroad  fuch good  authors, and  booses  ( the  chiefe  in- 
flrumentesofalllearninges')  :  feing  moreouer  that  many  good 
wittes  both  of  gentlemen  and  of  others  of  all  degrees,  much  de- 
firousandjludiousofthefe  artes,  and  feeling  for  them  as  much 
as  they  cm, faring  no  games,  andyetfrufirate  of  their  intent, 
by  no  meancs  attaining  to  that  which  they  feekgs :  I haue^>  for 
their fakes, with fome  charge  &  great  trauaile, faithfully  tran- 
Jlated  into  ourtulgare  touge,(yfet  abroad  in  Frint ,  this  booke 
^Euclide.  Whereunto  I haue  added eafie and plaine decla¬ 
rations  and  examples  by  figures,  of  the  definitions  .  In  which 
bookp  alfoye  fhall  in  due  place  finde  manifolde  additions,  Scho- 
lies.  Annotations, and  Inuentions :  which  I  haue  gathered  out  of 
many  of  the  mofl famous  &  chiefe  Mathematics  s ,  both  of old 
time, and  in  our  age:  as  by  diligent  reading  it  in  courfe,ye fhall 

well 

m 


S-i/The  Tranflater  to  the  Reader, 

Well perceaue .  Fhe fruite  and game  which  I  require  for  theft 
my paines  and trauailefeall be  nothing  els,  but  onely  that  thou 
gentle  reader ,  will  gratefully  accept  the  fame^ :  and  that  thou 
may  eft  thereby  receaue  jome profite:and moreouer  to  excite  and 
fir  re  vp  others  learned \  to  do  the  like >  to  take  paines  in  that 

behalfe .  'By  meanes  wherofour  Bnghfhe  tounge fall  no  lejfe  be 
enriched  with  good  Authors  >  then  are  other  jlraunge  tounge s: 
as  the  Butch ,  French  ,  ftalian  ,  and  Spanifhe  :  in  which 
are  red  all  good  authors  in  a  maner, found  amongef  the  (ftrekes 
or  Latines .  Which  is  the  chief ef  caufe ,  that  amongef  the  do  flo-* 
rijhe  fo  many  cunning  and  fkilfull  men ,  in  the  inuentions  of 
fraunge  and  wonderfull  t hinges,  as  in  thefe  ourdaies 
we fee  there  do  .  Which fruite  andgaine  if  I attaine 
Dntoy  itjhall  encourage  me  hereafter,  in  fuch  like 
fort  to  tranfate ,  and fet  abroad  feme  other 
good  authors,  both  pertaining  to  religion 
(  as  partly  I  haue  already  done  )  and 
alfo  pertaining  to  the  <£\d'athe~ 
maticall  Artes .  Thus  gentle 
reader  farewell* 

00  a*4 


■ 


»t  - 


' 


IT?  - 


■  s- 

;,"V-  - 


,  w-  .  ■;■■■■ 

V.  •: 


f  -  ' 

J  -  . 


\ 


.  V  .  .  -  . 


V  ■ 


'ijjs 


■ 

-- 


•>  ■  •  -.V  * 


o 

i  .*  v*.  >  •  *  '  .  ‘  \  - 

.  ;  "  :  \  ;  •  ..  '  ::  ; 


V 


T.'..  : 


i  )  •  ,  .  .  \ 

•  '■  '■  '  .  ,  .  . 

'  -  .  i  .  . 


\  .  T. 


.>r.\ ^ii-y,v3  ■  ■  TMiOVvow;  s  -\\\ovr^  .  \  s ..y ssk  ,  _ .  \\  y\; ■  r . / . 

. i vr,  7;"  .  ,-V-:  %  * i . .  2 &  -  ti  \  .  i  y  '• 


-E  i  \  ■ 


~4  \ 


.  .  -  . 


5  ■  .  -  s  ■  jg  q  &i  :  '  -  ■  ■  ■■■  '■  i  .  .  ■  - 

'  .  -  ,  '  v  ...  .■  '  V  .  \  . 

.  'so mow./,1  -as}. '  •  o,  •. '*Avv\\Va\  \mu>vovi!fv.*  o\  ,1\V \ 

*  '  ■  '  i  o  \  .  ■  "  . 


0;  \  .  \ 


n  c  \w\\  " 


'  %  /.  /  i  V-  ■  .  1  './V.  •  \\ 


. 


^vVvi:l‘  4;  0  , 


o'Ui, 

'  ,  .  ?  S'.'V  . 


*r*\  .f\ ' 

. 

.  :  ■*  ■■■•- 


*  .  w  .  . 

.  -  ■  .  • 


■  ’!■ 


■ 


■  '• 


5**>TO  the  vnfained  lovers 

of  truthe  ,  and  conftant  Studentes  of  Noble 

Sciences  O  H  N  DEE  of  London Jhartilj 
wifheth  grace  from  heauen,  and  moft  profpe- 
rous JucceJJe  in  all  their  honejl  attempt es  emd 
exercifes* 

luine  TlatOy  the  great  M after 
of  many  worthy  Philofophers* 
and  the  conftant  auoucher,  and 
pithy  perfwader  of  Vnurn  *  Bo- 
nttm ,  and  Ens :  in  his  Schole  and 
Academic,  fundry  times  (befides 
his  ordinary  Scholers)  was  vifited 
of  a  certaine  kinde  of  men,  allured 
by  the  noble  fame  of  Plato,  and 
the  great  commendation  of  hys 
profound  and  profitable  doctrine* 
But  when  fuch  Hearers,after  long 
harkening  to  him,  perceaued,  that 
the  drift  of  his  difcourfes  ifftied 
out,  to  conclude ,  this  Vnttm ,  Bo* 
num ,and  Ens-,  to  be  Spirituall,Infi- 
nite,  iEternall ,  Omnipotent ,  &c. 
Nothyngbeyngalledged  or  exprefled,How, worldly  goods:  how,  worldly  digni- 
tie:how,health,Stregth  or  luftines  of bodyrnor  yet  the  meanes,how  a  merueilous 
fenfibleand  bodyly  blyfte  and  felicitie  hereafter,  might  beatteyned:  Straightway* 
the  fantafies  of  thofe  hearers,were  dampt:  their  opinion  ofjP/^t^was  dene  chaun- 
ged:yea  his  dodrine  was  by  them  defpifed:and  his  fchole ,  no  more  of  them  vifi- 
ted.Which  thing,his  S  choler,  Arijlotle,  narrowly  cofictering/ounde  the  caufe  ther- 
of,to  be, For  that  they  had  no  forwarnyng  and  information,in  general! ,  whereto  >t> 
his  dodrine  tended.For,fo,might  they  hauc  had  occafion, either  to  haue  forborne 
his  fchole  hauntyng :  (if  they, then, had  mifliked  his  Scope  and  purpofe  )  or  con- 
ftandy  to  haue  continued  therinrto  their  full  fatiftadion  :  if  fuch  his  finallfcope& 
intent ,  had  ben  to  their  defire .  Wherfore*  Arijlotle, after  that,vfed  in  brief,to 
forewarne  his  owne  Scholers  and  hearers ,  both  of  what  matter  >  and  alfo  to  what 
ende,he  tooke  in  hand  to  fpeake,  or  teach .  While  I  confider  the  diuerfe  trades  of ,j* 
thefe  two  excellent  Philofbphers  (  and  am  moft  fure,both,  that  Plato  right  well,  o- 
therwife  could  teach :  and  that  (^Arijlotle  mought  boldely ,  with  his  hearers ,  haue 
dealt  in  like  forte  as  Plato  did)I  am  in  no  little  pang  of  perplexitie :  Bycaufe ,  that, 
which  I  miflike,is  moft  eafy  forme  to  performe  (and  to  haue  Plato  for  my  exaple.) 
And  that, which  I  know  to  be  moft  commendable:  and  (in  this  firft  bringyng,into 
common  handling, the  <_ Antes  CEtathematicall)  to  be  moft  neceftary :  is  full  of  great 
difficultie  and  fundry  daungers.Y et, neither  do  I  think  it  mete, for  fo  ftraunge  mat- 
ter(as  now  is  ment  to  be  publifhed)and  to  fo  ftraunge  an  audience ,  to  be  bluntly, 
at  firft, put  forth, without  a  peculiar  Preface  :  Nor  (Imitatyng  Arijlotle)  well  cart  I 
hope ,  that  accordyng  to  the  amplenes  and  dignitie  of  the  State  CMathematicall ,  I 
am  able, either  playnly  to  prefcribe  the  materiall  boundes  :  or  precifely  to  expreftc 
the  chief  purpofes,  and  moft  wonderfull  applications  therof.  And  though  lam 
fure ,  that  fuch  as  didfhrinke  from  Plato  his  fchole ,  after  they  had  perceiued  his  ft- 


lolin  D^e  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

ilall  conclufion,  would  in  thefe  thinges  haue  ben  his  moft  diligent  hearers  )  fo  infi¬ 
nitely  mought  their  defires, in  fine  and  at  length  ,  by  our  Artes  Mathematical!  be  fa- 
tifHed)yet,by  this  my  Preface  &  fbrewarnyng ,  Afwell  all fuchgiiay  (to  their  great 
behofe)the  loner,  hither  be  alluredras  alfo  the  Pphagoricalf  and  Platomcall  perfect 
fcholer,and  the  conftant  profound  Philofopher,  with  more  eafeand  fpede,may 
(like  the  Bee,)  gather, hereby,both  wax  and  hony. 

Wherfore, fey  ng  I  finde  great  occafion(for  the  caufes  alleged, and  fafder,  in  re- 
5?  fped  of  my  Art  CMathcmatike  general! )  to  vfe  a  certaine  forewarnyng  and  Preface, 
»  whofe  content  flialbe,that  mighty, moft  plefaunt,and frutefull  Mathematical!,  Tree , 
The  intent  of  with  his  chief  armes  and  fecond(grifted)braunches:  Both, what  euery  one  is ,  and 
this  Preface .  alfo,  what  commodity, in  general!, is  to  be  looked  for,afwelI  of  griff  as  ftockeAnd 
„  forafmuch  as  this  enterprife  is  fo  great,  that, to  this  our  tyme ,  it  neuer  was  (to  my 
,,  knowledge)  by  any  achieued :  And  alfo  it  is  moft  hard ,  in  thefe  our  drefy  dayes, 
to  fuch  rare  and  ftraunge  Artes, to  wyn  due  and  common  credit :  N euertheles ,  if, 
for  my  fincere  endeuour  to  fatiffie  your  honeft  expectation ,  you  will  but  lend  me 
your  thakefull  mynde  a  while:and,to  fuch  matter  as,for  this  time, my  penne  (with 
fpede)is  hable  to  deliuer,  apply  your  eye  or  eare  attentifely  :  perchaunce ,  at  once, 
and  for  the  firft  falutyng,this  Preface  you  will  finde  a  leffon  long  enough.  And  ei¬ 
ther  you  will, for  a  fecond  ( by  this  )  be  made  much  the  apter:  or  fhortly  become, 
well  hable  your  feiucs,  of  the  lyons  claw ,  to  coniedtire  his  royall  fymmetrie ,  and 
farderpropertie  .  Now  then, gentle, my  frendes,  and  coufitrey  men,Turne  your 
eyes, and  bend  your  myndes  to  that  dbdrine ,  which  for  our  prefent  purpofe ,  my 
fimple  talent  is  hable  to  veld  you. 

^11  thinges  which  are,&  haue  beyng,  are  found  vnder  a  triple  diuerfi tie  generall. 

For, either, they  are  demed  Supematurall,Naturall,or,of  a  third  being.Thinges 
Supematurall,  are  immatcriall,  fimple,  indiuifible, incorruptible,  &  vn  changeable. 
Things  Naturall,  are  materiah,compounded,diuifiblc, corruptible,  and  chaungea- 
ble.Thinges  Supernatural], are, of  the  minde  onely,cOmprehended:Things  Natu¬ 
rall, of  the  fenfe  exterior, ar  hable  to  be  perceiued.In  thinges  Naturall, probability 
and  coniedure  hath  place: But  in  things  Supematurall, chief  demoftration,&  mof| 
fure  Science  is  to  be  had.  By  which  properties  &  comparafons  of  thefe  two,  more 
eafilv  may  be  defcribed,the  ftate, condition,  nature  and  property  of  thofe  thinges, 
which, we  before  termed  of  a  third  being:  which, by  a  peculier  name  alfo,are  called 
Thjnges  at  hematic  ail.  F  or,th  efc,bey  ng  (in  a  maner)middle,  betwene  thinges  fu- 

pernaturall  and  naturalharc  not  fo  abfolute  and  excellent, as  thinges  fupernaturah 
Nor  yet  fo  bafe  and  groffe,as  things  naturall: But  are  thinges  immateriall :  and  ne- 
uertheleffc,by  materiall  things  hable  fomewhat  to  be  fignified  .  And  though  their 
particular  Images  ,  by  Art,areaggt  egableand  diuilible :  yet  the  generall  Formes^ 
nouvithftandyng,areconftant,vnchaungeable,vntrafformable,andincorruptible. 
Neither  of  the  fenfe, can  they, at  any  tyme, be  perceiued  or  iudged.Nor  yet, for  all 
that,  in  the  royall  mynde  of  man, firft  conceiued.But,furmountyng  the  imperfedio 
o f c on i edur  e,  weeny  n  g and  opinion:and commyng fhort  ofhigh  teteUcdaall  c5- 
cepti6,are  the  Mercurial  fruite  of  Dianceticall  difcourfe,in  perfect  imagination  fub- 
fiftyng.  Ameruaylousnewtralitiehaue  thefe  thinges  ^Mathematical! .  and  alfo  a 
ftraunge  participate  betwene  thinges  fupematurall,immortall,intelle(5lual,  fimple 
and  indiuifible:and  thynges  naturall, mortall/enfible, compounded  and  diuifible. 
Probabilitie  and  fenfible  profe,may  well  feme  in  thinges  naturall: and  is  commen¬ 
dable:  In  Mathematical!  reafoninges,a  probable  Argument,  is  nothyng  regarded: 
nor  yet  the  teftimony  of  fenfe, any  whit  credited :  But  onely  a  perfed  demonftra- 
tion,  oftruthes  cemine,neceftary,and  inuindbkoWniuerfally  and  neceffaryly  con¬ 
cluded  2 

i  .  ’  •  ,  .  •»  '  031 


John  Dee  his  MatKematicall  Prasfkce* 


eluded:  is  allowed  as  fufficientfor  an  Argumentexa&Iy  and  purely  Mathematical. 

Of  Mathematical!  thingesgre  two  prin  cipall  kindcs :  namely,  Numbagmd Mag- 
nitnde.Tiumberfve  define, to  be, a  eertayne  Mathematical!  Sumc}of  Fnits.  And, an 
Jjfriity  is  that  thing  Mathematical!,  Indiuifible ,  by.  participation  of  fome  likenes  of 
whofe  property , any  thing,which  is  in  deede,oris  counted  O  ne^may  refonabiy  be 
called  One .  We  account  an  Fnit^z.  thing  Mathematicall ,  though  it  be  no  Number, 
and  alfo  indiuifible.'bccaufe^fi^materially^Number  doth  confifi  V  which  9  princi¬ 
pally  ,  is  a  thing  Mathematical l.  Magnitude  is  a  thing  Mathematicall  y  by  participation 
of  fome  likenes  of  whofe  nature  ,  any  thing  is  iudged  long ,  broade,  or  thicke .  A 
thicke  Magnitude  we  call  a  Bolide. ,  m  a  Body . WhazMagmtudefo  euer,i$  Sblide  or. 
Thicke,is  alfo  broade,&  long.  A  broade  magnitude, we  call  a  Superficies  or  a  Plaine, 
Huery  playne  magnitudc,hath  alfo  length.  A  long  magnitude,  wetermea  Line.  A 
Line  is  neither  thicke  nor  broade,  butonely  long :  Euery  ceitayne  Line,  hath  two 
endes;The  endes  of  a  line, are  Pointes  called.  A  Point  f  s  a  thing  Mathematicall ,  indb 
uilible, which  may  haue  a  certavne  determined  fituation .  If  a  Povnt  mouefrom  a 
determined  fituation ,  the  way  wherein  it  moued,  is  alfo  a  Line :  mathematically 
produced,  whereupon, of  th e  auncicn t  Mathematicicn s,a  Line  is  called  the  race  or 
courfe  of  a  Point .  A  Poynt  we  define ,  by  the  name  of  a  thing  Mathematical!} 
though  it  be  no  Magnitude,  and  indiuifible:  becaufeitis  thepropre  ende,  and 
bound  of  a  Line :  which  is  a  true  Magnitude .  And  Magnitude we  may  define  to  be 
that  thing  Mathematical f  which  is  diuifible  for  eucr,in  partes  diuifible, long, broade 
or  thicke .  Therefore  though  a  Poynt  be  no  ^Magnitude,  yetT erminatiuely  weree- 
ken  it  a  thing  Mathematicall  (as  I  layd)by  reafon  it  is  properly  the  end  </  and  bound, 
of  a  line.  . 


*> 

Number. 

Note  the  rt)oricf 
Unit, to  ext  refit 
the  Grel>e  Mo-~ 
not  Vni- 
tie  :  at  tee  kau* 
d/l,  commonly, 
till  nowjvfed. 

Magnitude. 

»> 


A  point, 
oi  Line . 


N either  ‘Number, not  OMagnUtudeJiam  any  Materialitie.  Firft,we  will  confidef 
of  Number,and  of  the  Science  Mathematicall ,  to  it  appropriate, called  Arithmetifoi 
and  afterward  of  Magnitude fmdhis  Science,  cdkdGeometrie.  But  that  name  con* 
tenteth  me  not:  whereofa  wordor  two  hereaftcr  fhall  be  fayd .  How  Immaterial! 
and  free  from  all  matter  , Number  is  y  who  doth  hot  perceaueW  yea,  who  dotbndl 
wonderfully  woder  at  ME or,  neither  pure  Element,  nor  Ariftoteles, Quinta  Ejfcntia, 
jshable  to  feme  for  Number, ashis  propre  matter.  Nor  yet  the  puritie  and  fimple- 
nes  of  Subfiance  Spiritual!  or  Angelicall  ,  will  be  found  propre  enough’  thereto. 
And  therefore  the  great  &  godly  FhilpCofk&i  Anitms  Boetws,  fayd :  Omnia  qu&cimfp 
apriffidua  rerum  natutd  cmfiru£htfmty  Numemrumvidentur  ration? format a.  Hoc  enim 
ftpit principal?  iri  amnio  €  on  dh  oris  Exemplar .  THatfS  ^  thinges  ( 1 t>hich  front 

the  Titery  firft  qrtgtnall  being  of  ihiiigef0 -Mite  bene  framed  and  made) 
do  appear?  to  be  Formed  by  the  reajon  of  jSlumbers  V  For  this  'toas  the 
princi pall  example  or  patterne  in  the  mind?  of  the  Creator  .  O  comfor¬ 
table  allurcmcnr,  O  rauilhing  perlwafion,  to  deale  with  a  Science,  whofe  Subie^ 
is  fo  Auncientdo  pure,fo  exyelienWfc  lurmouii  ting  all  creature5,fb  yfed  of  the  Al¬ 
mighty  and  incomprehenfiblc  wifdomc  of  the  Creator5  in  the  diftimfi  creation  of 
allcreatures: in  all  their  diftinbt  partes,  propertiesAnatures ,  and  vertues,  by  order, 
and  moft  abf0lute  number,brought,from  Npthingyto  the  Formalities their  being 
andfiate.By  Numbos  propertic  therefore, ofvs,by  all  pofiible  meanes,(to  the  per- 
fe#ion  of  the  Science  )  learned, we  may both  winde  and  draw  our  felues  into  th^ 
inward  and  deepe  fearch  and  ve>v0of  all  creatures  diftimfi  vertues, natures,  proper- 
tie^, and  Formes:  And  alfojfarderjarifejcfimejalcend^nd  mount  vp  (  with  Specula. 
tiue  winges  }  in  fpirit,  to  behpld  in  the  Gks  of  Creation,  the  Forme  of  femes  y  the 
Exemplar  Number  ofall  thing!esiiV^^4^/bpdl  vifible  and  inuifible  .•  mortall  and 
,  7  -  -  *♦]..  immortal! 


lohnD  ee  his  Matliematicall  Preface . 

>  immortall,C  orporall  and  SpirituallJPart  ofthis  profound  and  diuine  Science,  had 
Joachim  the  Rrophefier  attey  ned  vnto :  by  ‘Numbers  Formal!., Natural!,,  and  Rational!, 
forfeyng,concludyng,and forfheWyng  great  particular  euents ,  long  before  their 
comming.His  bookes  yet  remainyng, hereof, are  good  profe:  And  the  noble  Earle 
of  Miranduk,(\>&d.zs  thar,)a  fufficient  witnefle:that  loachim,in  his  prophef.es,  proce* 
trim*  1488*  4ed by  no  other  my, then  by  Numbers  Formal!.  And  this  Earle  hym  felfedn  Rome,*fet 

vp -poo. Conduftons,in  all  kinde  of  Sciences, openly  to  be  difputed  of  :and  among 
the  reft,  in  his  Conclufions  CMathematicall,  (in  the  eleuenth  Conclufton  )  hath  in 
Latin,this  Englifh  fenten cc. By  Numbers, a  my  is  had  ,  to  thcfearchyng  out, dud  vnder - 
jlandyng  of euery  thyng ,  hable  to  he  knowen .  For  the 'verifying  of  which  Conclufon ,  I  pro - 
mife  toaurfvere  to  the/  4.  glujtflions^mder  written, by  the  way  of  Numbers  .Which  Co- 
clufions,I  omit  here  to  rehearle:  afwell  auoidyng  fuperfluousprolixitie:as  ,  by- 
caufe  Joannes  Ficus, workes ,  are  commonly  had.  Bht,in  any  cafe, I  would  wifh  that 
thofe  Conclufions  were  red  diligently  ,  and  perceiued  of  fuch,as  are  earn  eft  Ob- 
feruers  and  Confiderers  of  the  conftant  law  of  nubers:  which  is  planted  in  thyngs 
Naturall  andSupernaturalljandis  preferibed  to  all  Creatures, inuiolably  to  be 
kept*For,fo,beftdes  many  other  thinges  ,  in  thofe  Conclufions  to  be  ma'rked,it 
would  apeare,how. fincerely,&  withinmy  boundes,I  difclofe  the  wonderfull my- 
fteries,by  numbers,to  be  atteynedvnto.  ■ 

Of  my  former  wordes,eafyit  is  to  be  gathered,that  Number  hath  a  treble  ftatei 
One, in  the  Creatorum  other  in  euery  Creature(in  refped  of  his  complete  conftb 
tution;)aud  the  third,in  Spiritualland  Angelicall  Myndes,and  in  the  Soule  of  ma. 
In  the  firft  and  third  ^ant,Numher  >  is  termed  N timber  Numbryng.  But  in  all  C  rea- 
tures,otherwife,7V//w^,is  termed  NuberNumbred.  And  in  our  Soule, N  uberbea- 
teth  fuch  a  fwaye^and  hath  fucit  anaftmitie  therwith  .■  that  fome  of  the  old  Philofo - 
pbers  t&npftt,Makr$otde,to  brgaNumbefmouyng  kfitfe:  And  in  dede,in  vs,  though  it 
beu  Yery  Accident:  yet  fuch  aii^ Accident  it is;thait  before  all  Creatures  it  had  per-; 
£b<S?  beyng,  in  thc.C  vcatorfcmpkdma&y.NumberNumbryng  therfore,is  the  difere- 
tion  difccrning,and.  diftincHng  ofthinges*  But  in  God  the  Creator ,  This  dilcre- 
tion,in  thebeginnyng,produ€ed\orderly  anddiftimftly  allthinges.  Eor  his  Num- 
foy^,then,was  his  Creatyngbf  all.thinges.  Aral  his  QontmnaWi Numbryng ,  of  all 
thinges,is  the  Gonfemation  of  them  in  being:  And^where  and  when  he  will  lacke 
an :Fnit:  there  and  thaivthat  particular  thyng ^ftialbejDi/c^fez/ddefe  I  ftay.But  our 
Seumllyng^difti,n'#yng^nd^»i^r)fj^,createth'ii6thyngrbutofMultttudexom 
fidered,raakedi  Gertaine and  diftinCtdetermination  ,  And  albeit  thefe  thynges be 
Whty  and .truces. ofgreat , ,yer  (.b^tbe  infinite  gso^esoftheAl- 
mighty  Zemarie,)  Artmqall  Methods  and  eafyw^yes  are  made ,  by  which  the  ze- 
Philofopher jiifay  wyn  nere  this  fliuerifti  iddltMs  Moiintay  rie  of  Cohtempk- 
tionrand  momthen^Rnitempfatibh.Andallbkhotigh  Number, bed.  thyng  To  I  in- 

iV»  T  i  1 1  f  &  A  frvv-l  4 1 1*  t  rnf'.  Ka  r  rl  IT  v  tT  Vi  m  1 1  A  ft 


KF 


lower, to  thynges  fenftbly  pefeeiuedras  of  a  mbmentiinye  found  e  iterated:  then  td 
the  lcaft  thynges  that  may  bc'fCen,niimerable:Arid  at  length, (moff  groffely,)  to  a 
multitude  of  any  corporall  thynges  feeh,or  felt:  and  fb,of  thefe  grofte  and  fenftble 
thynges, we  are  trayhed  to  leame  a  ce'rtaine  Image  or  likenes  of  numbers :  and  to 
vfe  Arte  in  them  to  our  pleafufe  arid  proffit.So  grofte  is  our  conuerfation,  and  dull 
iSourapprehenfion:  while  mortal!  Senfe,  in  vs,  ruleth  the  common  wealth  of  our 
litle  world.Hereby  we  fay, Three  Lybns,afe  three:  or  a  F ernarie .  Three  Egles^are 
three, or  a  F ernarie  •  Which*  T ernaries ,  are  eche,the  Fnion,  knot, and  Zniformitie,o? 
three  diferete  and  diftimft  Vnit-i* That^ is, we  may  ineche  T ernarie ,  thrife ,  feuerafty 
pointe,and  fhew  a  pan, One, One, and  One.  Where,  in  Numbryng, we  fay  One, two. 


Three. 


John  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

Three .  But  how  farre, thefe  vifible  Ones ,  do  differre  from  our  Indiuifible  Vhits 
(in  pure  Arithmetike, principally  confidered)no  man  is  ignorant  .  Yet  from  thefe 
groife  and  materiall  thynges,may  we  be  led  vp ward, by  degrees, fofinformyng  our 
rude  Imagination,toward  the  coceiuyng  of  Numbers/dbfoluttly ( :N  ot  fuppoling, 
nor  admixtyng  any  thyng  created,Corporall  or  Spiritual!, to  fupport,conteyne,or 
reprefent  thole  Numbers  imagined : )  that  at  length,  we  may  be  hable ,  to  finde  the 
number  of  our  ownc  name ,  glorioully  exemplified  and  regiftred  in  the  booke  of 
the  Trinitk  moft  blelfed  and  asternall. 

But  farder  vnderftand,that  vulgar  PraCtifers,haue  N umbers  otherwife,  in  fun- 
dry  Confiderations:and  extend  their  name  farder, then  to  N umbers ,  whole  leaft 
partis  an  Vnit .F  or  the  common  Logili,R cckenmaftcr,  or  Arithmeticien,  in  hys  v- 
fing  of  N  umbers :  of  an  V  nit,imagineth  lelfe  partes :  an  dcalleth  them  Fractions.  As 
of  an  Vnit ,  he  maketh  an  halfe,and  thus  noteth  it, A.,  and  fo  of  other,  (infinitely  di¬ 
uerfe)  partes  of  an  Vnit.  Yea  and  farder, hath,  Fractions  of  Fractions.  &c .  And,foraf 
much, as,  Addition  >  Subfir  action ,  Multiplication ,  Dim  [ion  and  Extraction  of  Rotes,  are 
the  chief, and  fufficient  partes  of  Ar Ahmet  ike  .*  which  is ,  the  Science  that  demon  fir  a* 
teth  the  properties, of Numbers, and  all  ope  ratios ,  in  numbers  to  be  performed /How  often, 
therfore, thefe  fiue  fundry  fortes  of  Operations,  do ,  for  the  moll  part, of  their  cxc-  „  Note, 
cution,dilfcrre  from  the  fiue  operations  oflike  generall  property  and  namefin  our  ,, 

Whole  numbers  praCtilable,So  often  ,  (for  a  more  difiinCt  doctrine  )  we,  vulgarly  „ 
accountand  name  it, an  other  kynde  of  Anthmetike  .And  by  this  realon.-the  Com 
fideration,dodtrine,and  working, in  whole  numbers  onely:  where,  ofan  Vnit, is  no 
Idle  part  to  be  allowed:  is  named  (as  it  were)an  Arithmetike  by  it  lelfe .  And  fo  of 
the  Arithmetike  of  Fractions. In  lyke  forte, the  neceflary,wonderfull  and  Secret  doc¬ 
trine  of  Proportion ,  and  proportionalytie  hath  purchafed  vnto  it  lelfe  a  peculier  2, 
maner  of  handlyng  and  workyng:and  fo  may  feme  an  other  forme  of  Arithmetike. 
Moreouer,the  Astronomers  for  fpede  and  more  commodious  calculation,haue  de-  2 . 
uifed  a  peculier  maner  of  orderyng  n fibers, about  theyr  circular  motions,  by  Sexa-  3 
genes, and  Sexagefmes.By  Signes, Degrees  and  Minutes  &c .  which  commonly  is 
called  the  Arithmetike  of  Agronomical  or  Phificall  Fr actions.  That,  haue  I  briefly  no¬ 
tedly  the  name  of  Arithmetike  Circular.  Bycaufe  it  is  alfo  vfed  in  circles,nc  t  Afiro- 
wmicall. c. Pradtile  hath  led  Numbers  farder ,  and  hath  framed  them, to  take  vpon  A. . 
them  ,  the  fhew  of  Magnitudes  propertie:  Which  is  Incommenfurabilitie  and  Irratio - 
nalitie.  (For  in  pure  Arithmetike, cm  Vnit, is  the  common  Meafurc  of  all  N  umbers.) 

A nd,here,N fibers  are  become, as  Lynes,Playnes  and  Solides:  fome  tymes  Ratio- 
nail, fome  tymes  Irrationall.  And  haue  propre  and  peculier  characters, (as  c£. 

and  fo  of  other.  Which  is  to  lignifie  Rote  Square ,  Rote  Cubik:and fo  forth:  )& propre 
and  peculier  falhions  in  the  fiue  principall partes:  Wherfore  the  pradifer,e!temeth 
this,a  diuerfe  Arithmetike  from  the  other .  PraCtife  bryngeth  in,here,diuerfe  com- 
poundyngofNumbers:  asfome  tyme, two, three, foure(or more) Radicall  nubers5 
aiuerlly  knit, by  lignes,  ofMore  &  Lelfe:as  thus  12  +  v'ct  i5.0r  thus  ig 
-b  v/cc'i^—bb‘2.  &c.  And  fome  tyme  with  whole  numbers,  orfraCtions  of  whole 
Number,amog  them :  as  20  33-V^  xo.  —  -j-CcCp. 

And  fo,  infinitely ,  may  hap  the  varietie.  After  this  :  Both  the  one  and4 the  other 
hath  fractions  incident:andfo  is  this  Arithmetike  greately  enlarged, by  diuerfe  ex- 
hibityng and  vfe  of  Compofitions  and.mixtyriges .  Confidcr how,  I (beyng  deli- 
rous  to  deliuer  the  ftudentfrom  error  and  Cauillation)do  giue  to  this  PraCtife, the 
name  of  the  Anthmetike  of  Radicall  numbers:  Not, of  Irrationall  or  Surd  Numbers; 
which  otherwhile,  are  Rationall :  though  they  haue  the  Signeofa  Rote  before 
b  *.ij*  them., 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

them,  which,  Arithmetike  of  whole  Numbers  moft  vfuall ,  would  lay  they  had  no 
fuch  Roote:  and  fo  account  them  Surd  Numbers:  which,  generally  (poke,  is  vntrue; 
as  Euclides  tenth  booke  may  teach  you.  Therfore  to  call  them ,  generally ,  Radical! 
Numbers,  (by  reafon  of  the  ligne  / .prefixed,)  is  a  fure  way :  and  a  diffident  generall 
diftinftion  from  ail  other  ordryng  and  vfing  of  N umbers :  And  yet  (  befide  all 
this)Confider :  the  infinite  delire  of  knowledge ,  and  incredible  power  of  mans 
Search  and  Capacitye:  how,  they,  ioyntly  haue  waded  farder  (  by  mixtyng  offpe- 
culation  and  praftife)and  haue  found  out ,  and  atteyned  to  the  very  chief  perfec¬ 
tion  (almoft)  of Numbers  Pradicali  vfe. Which  thing,is  well  to  be  perceiued  in  that 
great  Arithmetical!  Arte  of  Aquation :  commonly  called  the  Rule  of Cojf.  or  ^Alge¬ 
bra.  The  Latines  termed  it,Regulam  Ret  &  Cenfus ,  that  is ,  the  rftile  of the  thyng 
and  his  lvalue*  With  an  apt  name :  comprehendy  ng  the  firft  and  laft  pointes  of  the 
worke .  And  the  vulgar  names  ,  both  in  Italian ,  Frenche  and  Spanilh,depend(in 

namyng  it,)  vpon  the  lignification  of  the  Latin  word,i?«:  A  f/;/wg:vnleaft  they  vfe 
the  name  of  ^Algebra.  And  therm (commonly)is  a  dubble  crror.The  one,of  them, 
which  thinke  it  to  be  of  Geber  his  inuentyng:  the  other  of  fuchascallit  Algebra. 
For, firft, though  Geber  for  his  great  fkill  in  N umbers, Geometry,  Aftronomy ,  and 
other  maruailous  Artes,moughthauefemed  hable  to  haue  firft  deuifedthefayd 
Rule:  and  alfo  the  name  carryeth  with  it  a  very  nere  likenes  of  Geber  his  name :  yet 
true  it  is, that  a  Greke  Philofopher  and  Mathematicien,named  Diophantus,  before 
Geber  his  tyme,wrote  i3.bookes  therof  (  of  which ,  fix  arc  yet  extant :  and  I  had 
*Anno,is^t3,  them  to  *  vfe,of  the  famous  Mathematicien,and  my  great  frende,  Petrus  <j\€ont. au¬ 
reus  : )  And  fecondly,the  very  name, is  Algiebar, and  not  Algebra :  as  by  the  Arabien 
Autcen, may  be  proued:  who  hath  thele  precife  wordes  in  Latine,by  Andreas  Alpa~ 
^tffmoft  perfeft  in  the  Arabik  tung  )  fo  tranflated .  Scientia faciendi  Algiebar  & 
Almacbabel.  i.  Scientia  inueniendi  numerum  ignotum,ptr  additionem  Numeri ,  &  diuifeo . 
nem  &  aquationem. Which  is  to  fay:T he  Science  of^oorhyng  Algiebar  and  yfl* 
machabelfhdzisjhc Science  offindyng an  Imknowen  number  ,  by  Addyng  of a 
Number,  er  Diuijton  aquationMcrc  haue  you  the  name :  and  alfo  the  prin- 
cipall  partes  of  th  e  R  u!e,touched.T  o  name  it0The  rule, or  Art  of  Aquation, doth  fig- 
nifie  the  middle  part  and  the  State  of  the  Rule .  This  Rule,  hath  his  peculier  Cha- 
rafters: and  the  principal  partes  of  Arithmetike, to  it  appertayning,do  differre  from 
the  other  Arithmetical!  operations. This  Arithmetike,  hath  Nubers  Simple, Copound, 
Mixtrand  Fraftions, accordingly.  This  Rule,  and  Arithmetike  of  Algiebar,  is  fo  pro¬ 
found,  fo  generall  and  fo  (in  maner)  conteynedi  thewhole  power  of  Numbers 
Application  prafti call:  that  mans  witt, can  deale  with  nothyng,more  proffitable  a- 
bout  numbers :  nor  match ,  with  a  thyng ,  more  mete  for  the  diuine  force  of  the 
Soule, (in  humane  Studies, affaires, or  exercifesjto  be  tryedin.  Perchaunceyou 
looked  for, (long  ere  now,)  to  haue  had  fome  particular  profe,  or  euident  teftimo- 
ny  of  the  vfe, profit  t  and  C  ommodity  of  Arithmetike  vulgar,  in  the  C  oiftmon  lyfe 
and  trade  of  men.Therto,then,I  will  now  frame  my  felfe :  But  herein  great  care  I 
haue,  leaft  length  of fundryprofes,  might  make  you  deme,  that  eitherl  did  mi£ 
doute  your  zelous  mynde  to  vertues  fcliole :  or  els  miftruftyour  hable  witts ,  by 
fome,to  geffe  much  more.  A  profe  then,foure,fiue,or  fix,  fuch ,  will  I  bryng ,  as 
any  reafonable  man,thenvith  may  be  perfuaded,to  loue  &  honor ,  yea  karne  and 
exercife  the  excellent  Science  of  Arithmetike. 

And  firft:  who, nerer  at  hand,  can  be  a  better  witnefte  of  the  frute  receiued  by 
Arithmetike,  Aon  all  kynde  ofMarchants  i  Though  not  all, alike,  either  nede  it,or 
vfe  it.How  could  they  forbeare  the  vfe  and  helpe  of  the  Rule ,  called  the  Golden 

Rule? 


Iohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

Rulec’Simple  and  Compounde:both  forward  and  backward  <  How  might  they 
miffe  Arithmetkall helpe  in  the  Rules  ofFelowfhyp:  either  without  tyme,  or  with 
tyme'and  betwene  the  Marchant&  his  Fa&or  i  The  Rules  ofBartering  in  wares 
onely:  or  part  in  wares,  and  part  in  money,  would  they  gladly  want  i  Our  Mar- 
chant  venturers,  and  Trauaylersouer  Sea  ,  how  could  they  order  their  doynges 
iuftly  and  without  Ioffe ,  vnlcaft  ccrtainc  and  generall  Rules  for  Exchauge  of  mo¬ 
ney  5and  Rechaunge, Were, for  their  vfe,deuifed  f  TheRuleofAlligation,in  how 
fundry  cafes,doth  it  conclude  for  them,fuch  precife  verities, as  neither  by  natural! 
witt ,  nor  other  experience, they, were  hable,  els, to  know  <  And ( with  the  Mar- 
chant  then  to  make  an  end  )  how  ample  &  wonderfull  is  the  R  ule  of  Falfe  pofiti- 
ons  <  efpecially  as  it  is  now,  by  two  excellent  Mathematiciens  (  of  my  familier  ac- 
quayntance  in  their  life  time ) enlarged  <  I  meane  Gemma  Frifius, and  Simon  Jacob . 
Who  can  either  in  brief  conclude ,  the  generall  and  Capitall  R  ulest  or  who  can  I- 
magine  the  Mvriades  of  fundry  Cafes,and  particular  examples,in  Ad  and  earn  eft, 
continually  wrought, tried  and  concluded  by  the  forenamed  Rules, onely  <  How 
fundry  other  Arithmeticall  praclifes ,  are  commonly  in  Marchantes  handes,and 
knowledge: They  them  felues,can,at large, teftifie. 

The  Mintmafter,and  Goldfinith,in  their  Mixture  of  Metals ,  either  of  diuerfe 
kindes,qr  diuerfe  values.-how  are  they, or  may  they,exadly  be  directed ,  and  mer- 
uailoufly  pleafured,if  Arithmetike  be  their  guided  And  the  honorable  Phificias, 
will  gladly  confeffe  them  felues much  beholding  to  the  Science  of  Arithmetike^ 
and  that  fundry  way es :  But  chiefly  in  their  Art  of  Graduation ,  and  compounde 
Medicines,  And  though  Galenas,  Auerrou,Armldiis ,  Lidias ,  and  other  haue  pu¬ 
blished  their  pofitions ,  afwell  in  the  quantities  of  the  Degrees  aboue  Tempera* 
ment ,  as  in  the  Rules ,  concluding  the  new  Forme  refulting :  yet  a  more  precife, 
commodious, and  eafy  (JMethodf*  extantrby  a  Countreyman  of  ours  ('aboue  200. 
yeares  ago)inuented.  And  forafmuch  as  I  am  vncertaine ,  who  hath  the  fame: 
or  when  that  litle  Latin  treatife,  (as  the  Author  writ  it, )  fhall  come  to  be  Printed: 
(Both  to  declare  the  defire  I  haue  to  pleafure  my  Countrey,wherin  I  may  :  and  al- 
fo,for  very  good  profe  of  Numbers  vfe,in  this  moftfubtile  and  frutefull ,  Philofo- 
phicall  Conclufion, )  I  entend  in  the  meane  while ,  moft  briefly,and  with  my  far- 
der  helpe, to  communicate  the  pith  therof  vnto  you. 

Firft  defcribe  a  circle :  whole  diameter  let  be  an  inch .  Diuide  the  Circumfe¬ 
rence  into  foure  equall  partes.  Fro  the  Center,  by  thofe  4.fedions,extend  fright 
lines  :  eche  of  ^.inches  and  a  halfe  long :  or  of  as  many  as  you  Iifte,aboue  4.  with¬ 
out  the  circumference  of  the  circle :  S  o  that  they  fhall  be  of  4-inches  long  (  at  the 
leaft)  without  the  Circle .  Make  good  euident  markes,at  euery  inches  end.  If  yott 
lift,  you  may  fubdiuide  the  inches  againe  into  10.  or  i2.fmallerpartes,equall.  At 
the  endesofthe  lines,  write  the  names  of  the  4.  principall  elementall  Qualities. 
Hote  and  Colde ,  one  againft  the  other .  And  likewife  CMoyst  and  Dry,  one  againft 
the  other.  And  in  the  Circle  write  Temperate.  Which  T emperature  hath  a  good  La¬ 
titude  :  as  appeareth  by  the  Complexion  of  man .  And  therefore  we  haue  allow¬ 
ed  vnto  it,  the  forefay  d  Circle :  and  not  a  point  Mathematicali  or  Phyficalb 

Now,  when  you  haue  two  thinges  Mifcible  ,  whole  degrees  are  *  truely 
knowen  :  Ofneceflitie,  either  they  are  of  one  Quantitie  and  waight,  or  of  diuerfe. 
If  they  be  of  one  Quantitie  and  waight:  whether  their  formes,be  Contrary  Qua- 
lities,  or  of  one  kinde  (but  of  diuerfe  intentions  and  degrees)  or  a  T emperate,  and  a 
Contrary ,  T be forme  resulting  of  their  Mixture, is  in  the  Middle  hetwene  the  degrees  of 

the 


R» 


*Takefom 
part  of  LuUm 
counptylein 
his  booke  de 
QJEjJentk. 


lohn  Dec  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

the  formes  mixt .  As  for  example, let  o*f,be  Moitt  in  the  firft  degree :  and  B ,  Dry 
in  the  third  degree .  Adde  i.  and  3.  that  maketh  4 :  the  halfe  or  middle  of  4.1s  2. 
*No;e,  T his  2.1s  the  middle,  equally  diftant  from  A  and  B  (  for  the  *  T emper ament  is  coun~ 
ted  none  .  And  for  it,  you  mud  put  a  Ciphre,  if  at  any  time,  it  be  in  mixture). 


HOTE 


Counting  then  from  B,  2.  degrees ,  toward  you  finde  it  to  be  Dry  In  the  firft 
degree :  So  is  the  Form  refulting  of  the  Mixture  of  ^,and  B ,  in  our  example.  I  will 
sreue  you  an  other  example .  Suppofe,  you  haue  two  thinges,as  C,and  D  and  of 
C,  the  Heate  to  be  in  the  4.degree :  and  of  D,  the  Colde,  to  be  remifle,euen  vnto 
the  Temperament .  N  ow,for  C,you  take  4:  and  for  D,you  take  a  Ciphre  h  which, 
added  vnto  4, yeldeth  one!y4.The  middle, or  halfe,  whereof,  is  2.  Wherefore  the 
Forme  refilling  of  C ,  and  D,  is  Hote  in  the  fecond  degree:  for,  2.  degrees,accoun- 
ted  from  C3  toward  D ,  ende  iufte  in  the  2.  degree  of  heate  .  Of  the  third  ma- 
nei‘,1  will  geue  alio  an  example:  which  let  be  this :  I  haue  a  liquid  Medicine  whole 
Nate.  Qualitie  ofheate  is  in  the  4-degree  exalted :  as  was  C,  in  the  example  foregoing: 
and  an  other  liquid  Medicine  I  haue  .•  whofe  Qualitie,  is  heate,  in  the  firft  degree. 
O  f  eche  o  f thefe,  I  mixt  a  like  quantitie  ,*  S  ubtrad  here, the  ldfe  fro  the  more  .•  and 
the  refidue  diuide  into  two  equall  partes  ••  whereof,  the  one  part,  either  added  to 
the  idle, or  fubtrafled  from  the  higher  degree,  doth  produce  the  degree  of  the 

Forme 


I  qIui  Dee  his  M  atliem  aticall  P  rceface. 

Forme  refulting, by  this  mixture  of  C,and  E .  As,iffrom  4.  ye  abate  1. there  rcfteth 
3.thehaifeof3-is  iff  ;  Addeto i.thisiQ-  ,*  youhaue2-L.  »  Orfubtradfromq. ' 
this  1  —  .*  you  haue  like  wife  2--  remayning .  Which  declarefh  5  the  Formereful- 

ting,  to  be  He  ate,  in  the  middle  of the  third  degree. 

But  if  the  Quantities  of  two  thingesCommixt,  be  diuerfe,  and  the  Intend-  M  TheSe- 
ons  (  of  their  Formes  Mifcible  )  be  in  diuerfe  degrees ,  and  heigthes.  (  Whether  C0„J 
thofe  Formes  be  of  one  kinde,or  of  Contrary  kindes,  or  of  a  Temperate  and  a  jtuic 
Contrary ,  What  proportion  is  of  the  lejfe  quant itie  to  the  greater,  the  fame  fall  be  of  the  ?> 
difference  jvhich  is  betwene  the  degree  of  the  F  orme  refulting ,  and  the  degree  of  the  greater  }  f 
quant  itie  ofthethingmifcible,  to  the  difference,  which  is  betwene  the  fame  degree  of  the  }j 
Forme  refulting^and the  degree  of  the  lefe  quantitie .  As  for  example .  Let  two  pound 
of  Liquor  be  geuen,  hote  in  the4.degree:&  one  pound  of  Liquor  be  geued,  bote  „ 
in  the  third  degree .  I  would  gladly  know  the  Forme  refulting,in  the  Mixture  of  }f 
thefe  two  Liquors.  Set  downe  your  nubers  in  order ,  thus. 

Now  by  the  rule  of  Algiebar,  haue  I  deuifed  averyeafie, 
briefe,  and  generall  maner  of  working  in  this  cafe  .  Let  vs 
firft,  fuppofe  that  Middle  Forme  refulting ,  to  be  iff  :  as  that 
Rule  teacheth .  Andbecaufe  (by  our  Rule,  here  geuen)  as 
the  waight  of  i .is  to  2  :  So  is  the  difference  betwene  4.  (the 
degree  of  the  greater  quantitie  )  and  12^  •  to  the  difference  betwene  12^  and  3.“ 

(the  degree  of  the  thing,  in  lefle  quatitie.  And  with  all,  12^,  being  alwayes  in  a  cer- 
taine  middell,  betwene  the  two  heigthes  or  degrees)  ,  For  the  firft  difference,  I  fet 
4 — tfdd  md  for  the  fecond,  I  let  iff — 3  .  And,  now  agaide,  I  fay,  as  i.is  to  2X0  is 
4— 1%6 to lXC~~3-  Wherforc,  ofthefe foure proportional! numbers, the firft and 
the  fourth  Multiplied, one  by  the  other,do  make  as  ‘much,  as  the  fecond  and  the 
third  Multiplied  the  one  by  the  other .  Let  thefe  Multiplications  be  made  accor¬ 
dingly .  And  of  the  firft  and  the  fourth, we  haue  iff — 3.andofthe  fecond  &thc 
third,  8 — 2%^.Whcrfore ,  our  Equation  is  betwene  iff — 3:  :  and  8 — 22^.  Which 
may  be  reduced,according  to  the  Arte  of  Algicbarras, here, adding  3 .to  eche  part, 
geueth  the  iEquation,thus,i2^—i  1—22^.  And  yet  againe,contra<fting,  or  Redm 
cing  it :  Adde  to  eche  part,  22^:  Then  haue  you  gff  squall  to  ii  :  thus  reprefen- 
ted  32^—11.  Wherefore, diuiding  n.by  3:  the  Quotient  is  3—  :  theCa/ovofour 

iff, Cof, or  T hing, firft  ftippofed.  And  that  is  the  heigth,  or  Intention  of  the  Forme 
rejtdting:  which  is,  Heate,  in  two  thirdes  of  the  fourth  degree :  And  here  I  fet  the 
Brew  of  the  workc  in  conclufion,  thus The  proufe  hereof  is  eafie-by  fubtrading 

3  .from  3-^-qefleth  . r 

ff  .Subtrade the 
fame  heigth  of  the 
Forme  refulting, 

(which  is  3—)  fro 
4;:  then  reijeth  W; 

•You  fee,  that 
cfS;  double  to  ff: 

as  2 .  f.  is  double  to  1.  &  So  ihoujd it  be by  the: rule  here  geuen .  H ote .  As  yoU  ad¬ 
ded  to  ech  e  part  of  the  Equation,  3 :  fo  if  ye  firft  added  to  eche  part  2%,  it  would 
hand,  32^— 3— .8 .  And  now.  adding  to  eche  part  3  .•  you  haue  (as  afore)  32^=11. 

And  though  I,  here,fpeake  dnely  of  two  thyngs  Mifcible:  and  moft  common- 
ly,mo  then  th  rec,fourc,fiue  or  iix,f  &c.)are  to  be  Mixed:  (and  in  one  Compound 

*.  iiijf.  to 


l  2. 

Hote.  4. 

f.  I. 

Hote. 

John  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Prseface. 

to  be  reduced.-&  the  Forme  refultyng  of  the  fame,  to  fettle  the  turne)yet  thefe  Ku~ 
Nvte,  les  are  fufficientrduely  repeated  and  iterated.In  procedyng  firft,  with  any  two  rand 
then,  with  the  Forme  Refulting,and  an  other ;&  fo  forth:For,  the  laft  workc,  con¬ 
clude  th  the  Forme  refultyng  of  them  all  .-I  nede  nothing  to  fpeake,  of  the  Mixture 
(here  fuppofed)  what  it  is.Common  Philofophie  hath  defined  it ,  faying,  uw/xtio 
tjl  mifcibilium ,  alter atorum ,  per  minima  coniunclorum,Vnio .  Euery  word  in  the  de-> 
finition,  is  of  great  importance.  I  nede  not  alfo  fpend  any  time,  to  fhew,how,the 
other  manner  of  diftributing  of  degrees, doth  agree  to  thefe  Rules.  N  either  nede  I 
of  the  farder  vfe  belonging  to  the  Croffe  of  Graduation  (before  defcribed)in  this 
place  declare, vnto  fuch  as  are  capable  of  that,which  I  haue  all  ready  fay  d.  N  either 
yet  with  examples  ipecifie  the  Manifold  varieties ,  by  the  forefayd  two  gene- 
rall  Rules,to  be  ordered.  The  witty  and  Studious, here, haue  fufficient:  And  they 
which  are  not  hable  to  atteinc  to  this, without  liuely  teaching ,  and  more  in  parti- ' 
cular:  would  haue  larger  difcourfing,then  is  mete  in  this  place  to  be  dealt  withalh 
And  other(perchaunce)with  a  proude  fhuffe  will  difdaine  this  litlerand  would  be 
vnthankefull  for  much  more .  I,therfore  conclude :  and  wifh  fuch  as  haue  modeft 
and  earneft  Philofophicall  mindes,to  laude  God  highly  for  thisrand  to  Meruayie, 
that  the  profoundeft  and  fubrileft  point,  concerning  Mixture  of  Formes  and  Quali¬ 
ties  Flat urall, is  fo  Matchtand  maryed  with  the  moflfimpIe,eafie,and  fbort  way  of 
the  noble  Rule  of  Algiebar.  Who  can  remaine ,  therfore  vnperfuaded,to  louc,a- 
low,and  honor  the  excellent  Science  of' Arithmetike  *  For, here, you  may  perceiue 
that  the  litle  finger  of  Arithmetike, is  of  more  might  and  contriuing,then  ahun- 
derd  thoufand  mens  wittes,of  the  middle  forte ,  are  hable  to  perfourme,  or  truely 
to  conclude,  with  out helpe  thereof. 

Now  will wefarder,by  the  wife  and  valiant  Capitaine,be  certified,  what  helpe 
he  hath, by  the  Rules  of Arithmetike /in  one  of  the  Artes  to  him  appertaining;  And 
Taxi  ix?.  „  of  the  Grckes  named  TcwlixiThat  is ,  the  Skill  of  Ordring  Souldiers  in  Battell  ray 
5,  after  the  beft  maner  to  all  purpofes.This  Art  fo  much  dependeth  vppon  N  umbers 
vfe,and  the  Mathematicals,  that  J&lianus  ( the  beft  writer  therof, )  in  his  worke,to 
the  Emperour  Hadrianus  ,  by  his  perfection,  in  the  Mathematicals,(beyng  greater, 
then  other  before  him  had,)  thinketh  hisbooke  topafle  all  other  the  excellent 
workes,written  of  that  Art,vnto  his  dayes.For,ofit,  had  written  ALneas :  Cyneas  of 
T hefdy :  Pyrrhus  Epirota:zx\A  Alexander  his  forme:  Clear ebus:  Paufanias :  Euangelus: 
Polybius  fdimlitt  frende  to  Scipio :  Eupolemus:  Iphicrates ,  Poffdonius:  and  very  many 
other  worthy  Capitaines ,  Philofophers  and  Princes  of  Immortall  fame  and  me¬ 
mory :  Whole  fayrefl  floure  of  their  garland  ( in  this  feat)  was  ^Arithmetike ;  and  a 
litle  perceiuerance,in  Geometricall  Figures .  But  in  many  other  cafes  doth  ^Arith- 
metike  (land  the  Capitaine  in  great  ftede.  As  in  proportionyng  ofvittayles ,  for 
the  Army, either  remaining  at  a  Ray  :  or  fuddenly  to  be  encrcafed  with  a  certaine 
number  ofSouldiers.-and  for  a  certain  tyme.Or  by  good  Art  to  diminifh  his  com- 
pany,to  make  the  victuals, longer  to  ferue  the  remanent,  &  for  a  certaine  determi- 
ned  tyme :  if  nede  fo  require.  And  fo  in  fundry'  his  other  accounted,  Recke- 
ninges,Meafurynges,and  proportionynges,the  wife, expert, and  CircumfpeCt  Ca¬ 
pitaine  will  affirme  the  Science  of  Arithmetike ,  to  be  one  of  his  chief  Counfaylors, 
direCtersand  aiders*  Which  thing(by  good  meanes)was  euident  to  the  Noble, 
the  Couragious ,  the  Ioyall ,  and  Curteous  John ,  late  Earle  ofWarwickc.  Who 
was  a  yong  G  entlernan ,  throughly  knowne  to  very  few .  Albeit  his  lufty  valiant- 
nes,force,and  Skill  in  Chiualrous  feates  and  exercifes:his  humblenes,andfrende- 
lynes  to  all  men,  were  thinges,  openly ,  of  the  world  perceiued.  But  what  rotes 
(otherwife,)vertue  had  faftenedin  his  breft,  what  Rules  of  godly  and  honorable 
k.'  hfe 


John  Dee  his  Mathematical!  P r^face . 

life  he  had  framed  to  him  felfe:  what  vices,  (in  fome  then  liuitig)  notable,  he  tooke 
great  care  to  efchew:  what  manly  vertues ,  in  other  noble  men ,  (  floriihing  before 
his  eyes,) he  Sythingly  afpired  after  :  what  prowefles  he  purpofed  and  menttoa*- 
chieue :  with  what  feats  and  Artes,he  began  to  furnifh  and  fraught  him  felfe ,  for 
the  better  feruice  of  his  Kyng  and  Countrey sboth  in  peace  &  warrc.  Thefe(I  fay) 
his  Heroicall  Meditations  ,  forecaftinges  and  determinations ,  no  twayne ,  (I 
thinke )befide  my  felfe, can  fo  perfe&ly,and  truely  report.  And  therforedn  Con¬ 
fidence,!  count  it  my  part, for  the  honor, preferment,  &  procuring  of  vertue  (thus* 
briefly)  to  haue  put  his  Name ,  in  the  Rcgifter  of  Fame  ImmortalL 

T  o  our  purpofe.  This  lohn,  by  one  of  his  a&es  (bdides  many  other  .'both  in  En¬ 
gland  and  Fraunce,by  me, in  him  noted.  )  did  difclofe  his  harty  loue  to  vertuous 
Scien'ces:and  his  noble intent,to  excell  in  Martiall  proweffe:  When  he,with  hum¬ 
ble  requeft, and  inflantSollicitingrgot  the  bed  Rules  (either  in  time  paft  by  Greke 
or  Romaine,or  in  our  time  vfed:and  new  Stratagemes  therin  deuifed)  for  ordring 
of  all  Companies/ummes  and  N  umbers  of  me, (Many, or  Few)  with  one  kinde  of 
weaponeer  mo,  appointed:with  Artiliery,or  without:on  horfebacke,  or  on  fote: 
to  glue,  or  take  onfet :  to  feem  many,  being  few  :  to  feem  few ,  being  many.  T o 
marche  in  battaile  orlornay :  with  many  fuch  feates,to  Foughten  field,Skarmoufb* 
or  Ambufhe  appartaining:  And  of  all  thefe,liuely  deiignementes  ( moft  curioufly) 
to  be  i n  velame  parchement  deferibed :  with  N otes  &  peculier  markes,as  the  Arte  T{.  M 

requireth :  and  all  thefe  Rules.and  deferiptions  Arithmetical! ,  inclofedina  riche  Earlej'dyed 
Cafe  of  Gold ,  he  vfed  to  weare  about  his  necke :  as  his  Iuell  moft  precious ,  and  Anno.  /  y  y 
Counfaylour  moft  trufty .  Thus,o/r^«z^/^,ofhim,was  ihryned  in  gold :  Of  fkar^e 
Numbers frute , he  had  good  hope.  N ow , N umbers  therfore innumerable , in  l!;”0!?? 
'NumbersytzyfefviS  fhryne  ihall  finde.  fueHhis 

What  nede  I,(forfarder  profe  to  you)  of  the  Scholemafters  of!uftice,to  wife=  Daugh" 
require  teftimony  :how  nedefuil,  how  frutefull ,  how  fkillfull  a  thing  ^Arithmetike  ^ 
is?I  meane,the  Lawyers  ofall fortes.  Vndoubtedly,the  Ciuilians,can  meruaylouf-  merfet. 
ly  declare ; how,neither  the  Auncien;  Romaine  lawes ,  without  good  knowledge 
of  Numbers  art ,cm  be  perceiued :  Nor  (Iuftice  in  Infinite  Cafes)  without  due  pro¬ 
portion,  (narrowly  confidered ,) is  hable  to  be  executed.  How  luftly,  &  with  great 
knowledge  of  Arte, did  PapirJanus  inftitute  a  law  of  partition. ,  and  allowance ,  be- 
twene  man  and  wife  after  a  diuorcec’But  how  Accurfms,  Baldus,Bartalus,Iafon,Alex - 
under ^ and  finally  Alciatus, (being  otherwife,notab!y  Well  learned)do  iumble,geflTe, 
and  erre,from  the  equity, art  and  Intent  of  the  lawmaker :  Arithmetike  can  dete<ft, 
and  conuince:  and  clerely,  make  the  truth  to  fhine.  Good  Bartolus ,  tyred  in  the 
examining  &  proportioning  of  the  matterrand  with  Accurfms  Gloffe,  much  cum- 
bredrburft  o,ut,and  faydiNu/la  ejiin  teto  libro , hacglojfa  diffcilior :  Cuius  computation 
nem nec  Scholafiici nec  Doctor  es intclUgunt.  &c .  Thatis:  Jn  the Svhole  booke ,  there 

is  no  Glojje  harder  then  this :  Whofe  accoumpt  or  reckenyng  3  neither  the  Scho* 
lerspior  the  fdociours  'bnderftand.&c.  What  can  they  fay  of  lulianus  law ,  Si 
ita  Scriptum . efr . O f  th e  Teftators  will  iuftly  performing,  betwene  the  wife ,  Sonne 
and  daughter  <  How  can  they  perceiue  the  aquitie  of  Ayhricanus ,  Arithmetic  all 
Reckening, where  he  treateth  of  LexFaicidiai  How  can  they  deliuer  him, from  his 
Reprouers :  and  their  maintained :  as  Ioannes ,  Accurfms  Hypclitus  and  alciatus? 

How  luftly  and  artificially,  was  Africantis  reckening  madec'Proportionating  to  the 
Sommes  bequeathed, the  C  on  trib  u  tio ns  ofeche  part  Namely, for  the  hundred 
prefently  receiued,i7  ~ .  And  for  the  hundred,  receiued  after  ten  monethes,i2 
A-;  which  make  the  30:  which  were  to  be  cotributed  by  the  legataries  to  the  heire» 

a.j.  For, 


Inflict . 


ST 


j 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

For,what  proportion^  oo  hath  to  75  :  the  fame  hath  17  JL  to  12  d_ :  Which  is  Sef- 

quitertia:  that  is,as  4, to  3  .which  id&key.  Wonderfull  many  places,  in  theCiuile 
law, require  an  expert  Arithmetics, to  vnderftand  the  deepe  Iudgemet,&  Iuft  de¬ 
terminate  of  the  Auncient  Romaine  Lawmakers .  But  much  more  expert  ought 
he  to  be,  who  iliouid  be  hable  ,  to  deride  with  tequitie, the  infinite  varietie  of 
Cafes, which  do, or  may  happen ,  vnder  euery  one  of  thole  lawes  and  ordinances 
Guile.  Hereby,eafely,ye  may  now  conietiure:  thatin  the  Canon  law:  and  in  the 
lawes  of  the  Realme  (which  with  vs ,  beare  the  chief  Authoritte  ) ,  Tuftice  and  e- 
quity  might  be  greately  preferred,and  fkilfully  executed,  through  due  fkill  of  A- 
rithmetike,and  proportions  appertainy-ng.  The  worthy  Philofbphers ,  and  pru¬ 
dent  Iawmakers(who  haue  written  many  bookes  De  Republica:  How  the  belt  ftate 
of  Common  wealthes  might  be  procured  and  mainteined, )  haue  very  well  deter¬ 
mined  ofluftice :  (which,  not  onely,  is  the  Bale  and  foundation  of  Common 
weales  :but  alfo  the  totall  perfection  of  all  our  workes,  words,  and  thoughtes :  jde- 
fining  it, to  be  that  vertue,by  which, to  euery  onc,is  rendred,  that  to  him  appertai¬ 
ned!.  God  challengeth  this  at  our  handes,to  be  honored  as  God:  tobeloued,as 
a  father :  to  be  feared  asaLord  &  mafter.  O  ur  neighbours  proportions1  alfo  prcf- 
cribed  of  the  Almighty  lawmaker:  which  is  >  to  do  to  other ,  euen  as  we  would  be 
done  vnto.  Thefe  proportions,  are  in  Iuflice  neceflary  :in  duety, commendable: 
and  of  C  ommon  wealthes,  the  life,ftrength ,  flay  and  florilhing.  ^AnjlotL  in  his 
Ethikes  (to  fitch  the  fede  of  Iuflice, and  light  of  diretiion,  to  vfe  and  execute  the 
fame)  was  fayne  to  fly  to  the  perfection,  and  power  of  Numbers :  for  proportions 
Arithmetical!  and  Geometricall.  Plato  in  his  booke  called  Epinomis  ( which  boke, 
is  the  Threafury  ofall  his  dotin' nc)  where, his  purpofe  is, to  feke  a  Science,  which, 
when  a  man  had  it, perfectly  :he  might  feme, and  fo  be, in  d cde JYife .  He, briefly, of 
other  Sciences  difcourfing,findeth  them,  not  hable  to  bring  it  to  paffe :  Butofthe 
Science  of  Numbers, he  fayrh.  lUaypu  numerum  mortalium  generi  dedit,id profeflo  ef 
fciet .  Dxum  atitem  aliquem ,  magi*  quamfortunam ,  ad falutem  no  fir  am,  hoc  munus  nobis 
arbitror  contuhjfe  .  &c .  Nam  ipfum  bonorum  omnium  Author em,  cur  non  maximi  boni, 
PrudcntiA  dico ,  caufam  arbitramuri  T hat  Science pioerely ,K>htch  hath  taught  man* 
kynde  number  ,Jh all  he  able  to  bryng  it  to  paffe.  And }1  thinke}a  certaine  God , 
rather  then fortune pto  hauegiuen  hs  this gft, for  our  blijfe .  Forptohy Jhould 
~tye  not  hedge  him/cho  is  the  Author  of  all  good  things  }to  be  alfo  the  caufe  of the 
greatejlgo'o4t'bjng,name!yJVjfedome ?  There, at  length,he  proueth  Wifedome 
to  be  atteyned ,  by  good  Skill  of  Numbers .  With  which  great  T  eftimony,  and  the 
manifold  profes ,  and  reafons ,  before  exprefled ,  you  may  be  fufficiently  and  fully 
perfiiaded :  of  the  perfect  Science  of  Arithmetike, to  make  this  accounte ;  That  of 
all  Sciences,next  to  Thsolcgie,it  is  mofl  diuine,moft  pure, mofl  ampleand  generall, 
moft  profour.de ,  moft  1  ubtile  ,moft  commodious  and  mofl:  neceflary .  Whole 
nextSifter,is  the  Abfolute  Science  of  Magnitudes:  of  which  (by  the  Diretiion  and 
aide  of  him, whole  (jMagmtude  is  Infinite,and  ofvs  Incomprehenlible  )  I  now  en- 
tend ,  fo  to  write ,  that  both  with  the  ^Multitude, and  alfo  with  the  c Magnitude  of 
MeruaylouS  and  frutefull  verities ,  you  (  my  frendes  and  Countreymen  )  may  be 
ftird  vp,  and  awaked,  to  behold  what  certaine  Artes  and  Sciences,  (to  our  vn~ 
Ipeakabic  behofe)our  heauenly  father,  hath  for  vs  prepared,  and  reuealed,by  liin* 
dry  Philo [others  and  c Mathematiciens . 

ffdth^Number  and  c_ Magnitude ,  haue  a  certaine  Originall  fede,  ( as  it  were  )  of  an 
incredible  property:  and  of  man,  neuer  hable.  Fully,  to  be  declared  .  Of 
Number ,  an  Y nit, and  of  ^Magnitude, a  Poynte,doo  feeme  to  be  much  like  Origi- 
s  Y  nail 


/ 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematicall  Preface* 

nallcaufes :  But  the  diuerfitie  ncuerthelefle,is  great .  We  defined  an  Vnit ,  to 
be  a  thing  Mathematicall  Indiuifible:  A  Point,  like  wife,  we  layd  to  be  a  Ma¬ 
thematical!  thing  Indiuifible.  Andfarder  ,  that  a  Point  may  haue  a  certaine  de^ 
termined  Situation:  that  is,  that  we  may  afligne,and  prefcribe  a  Point, to  be  here, 
there ,  yonder.  &c.  Herein ,  (behold)  our  Vnit  is  free, and  canabyde  no  bon¬ 
dage,  or  to  be  tyed  to  any  place,or  feat:  diuifible  or  indiuifible .  Agayne ,  by  rea- 
fon,a  Point  may  haue  a  Situation  limited  to  him.-  a  certaine  motion, therfore  (to  a 
place, and  from  a  place)  is  to  a  Point  inciden  t  and  appertainyng.  But  an  Vnit,c an 
not  be  imagined  to  haue  any  motion .  A  Point, by  his  motion,  produceth ,  Ma¬ 
thematically^  line:  (as  we  layd  before)which  is  the  firft  kinde  of  Magnitudes,and 
mod  fimple:  An  Vnit,cm  not  produce  any  number .  A  Line,  though  it  be  produ¬ 
ced  of  a  Point  moued,yet,it  doth  not  confift  of  pointes  :  N  umber ,  though  it  be 
not  produced  of  an  Vnit ,  yet  doth  it  Confift  of vnits ,  as  a  materiall  caufe .  But 
formally,N umber, is  the  Vnion,  and  VnitieofVnits  .  Which  vnyting  and  knit-  Numbed 
ting, is  the  workemanlhip  of  our  minde:  which,of  diftinift  and  difcrete  Vnits ,  ma- 
keth  a  N  umber:  by  vniformitie,refulting  of  a  certaine  multitude  of  Vnits.  And  fo, 
euery  number, may  haue  his  leaft  part,giuem-  namely,  an  Vnit:  But  not  of  a  Magni¬ 
tude,  (no,  not  of  a  Lyne,)the  leaft  part  can  be  giue:bycaufe,infinitly,  diuifion  ther- 
of,may  be  concerned.  All  Magnitude,is  either  a  Line, a  Plaine,  or  a  Solid.  Which 
Line, Plaine, or  Solid, of  no  Senfe,can  be  perceiued,  nor  exactly  by  had  (any  way ) 
reprefented:nor  ofNature  produced:  But,  as  (  by  degrees )  Number  did  come  to 
our  perceiuerance:  So,by  vifible  formes, we  are  holpen  to  imagine,  what  our  Line 
Mathematicall,  is.  What  our  Point,  is.So  precile,.are  our  Magnitudes ,  that  one 
Line  is  no  broader  then  an  other:  for  they  haue  no  bredth  :  Nor  our  Plaines  haue 
any  thicknes.Nor  yet  our  Bodies,any  weight.-be  they  neuer  fo  large  of  dimenfio. 

Our  Body  es,  we  can  haue  Smaller,  then  either  Arte  or  Nature  can  produce  a- 
ny  :  and  Greater  alfo ,  then  all  the  world  can  comprehend .  Our  leaft  Mag¬ 
nitudes,  can  be  diuided  into  fo  many  partes ,  as  the  greateft .  As,  a  Line  of  an 
inch  long,  (with  vs)  may  be  diuided  into  as  many  partes,  as  may  the  diame¬ 
ter  ofthe  whole  world ,  from  Eaft  to  Weft  .-  or  any  way  extended :  What  priui- 
ledges,  aboue  all  manual  Arte,  and  Natures  might,  haue  our  two  Sciences  Ma¬ 
thematically  to  exhibite,afid  to  deale'  with  thinges  offuch  power,  liberty,  fimplici- 
ty,puritie,and  perfe&ionc'  And  in  them,fo  certainly,fo  orderly ,fo  ptecifeiy  to  pro- 
:cede:as,excellentis  that  workema  Mechanical!  Iudged ,  who  nereftcanapproche 
to  the  reprelenting  of workes,  Mathematically  demonftrated  i  And  our  two  Sci¬ 
ences, remaining  pure, and  abfolute,in  their  proper  termes,and  in  their  owne  Mat- 
ter:  to  haue, and  allowe,onely  fuch  Demonftrations ,  as  are  plaine ,  certaine ,  vni- 
tierlall,  and  of  an  seternall  Veritye'This  Science  of  ^Magnitude,  his  properties,con-  Geometric  • 
ditions,and  appertenances :  commonly ,now  is,and  from  the  beginnyng ,  hath  of  * 

all  Philofophers ,  ben  called  Geometric .  But,veryly,with  a  name  to  bafe  andfcant, 
for  a  Science  of fuch  dignitie  and  amplenes.  And,perchaunce ,  that  name, by  co- 
mon  and  fecret  confent,of all  wifemen,  hitherto  hath  ben  fuffred  to  remayne.-that 
it  might  carry  with  it  a  perpetuall  memorye,  ofthe  firft  and  notableft  benefite,  by 
that  Science,  to  common  people  file  wed :  Which  was ,  when  Boundes  and  meres 
of  land  and  ground  were  loft,  and  confoundedfas  in  %y/tf>yearely,with  the  ouer- 
flowyng  of Nilas, the  greateft  and  longeft  riuer  in  the  world  )  or ,  that  ground  be¬ 
queathed,  were  to  be  a(figned:or,  ground  fold,  were  to  be  layd  out :  on  (when  dis¬ 
order  preuailed)that  Commos  were  diftributed  into  feueral  ties.  For,  where,  vpon 
thefe  &  fuch  like  occafios,Some.by  ignorace,  fome  by  negligece,  Some  by  fraude, 
and  fome  by  violence,  did  wrongfully  limite,meafure,  encroach, or  challenge  (  By 

a.ij.  pretence 


lohn  Dec  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

pretence  ofiuft  content,  and  meafure)  thole  Iandes  and  groundes :  great  lofle4dif- 
quictnes, murder, and  warredidffull  oft)enfue:Till,by  Gods  mercy,and  mans  In- 
duflrie,The  perfect  Science  of  Lines, Plaines,  and  Solides  (like  a  diuine  Iufticicr,) 
gaue  vnto  eiiery  man,  his  owne.  The  people  then,by  this  art  pleaTured,and  great¬ 
ly  relieuedjin  their  Iandes  iuft  mearuring:&  other  Philofophers,  writing  Rules  for 
land  meafuring.  betwene  them  both, thus, confirmed  the  name  of  Geometria, that  is, 
(according  to  the  very  etimologie  of  the  word)Land  meafuring.Wherin,the  peo¬ 
ple  knew  no  farder, of  Magnitudes  vfe,but  in  Plaines:  and  thePbilofophers,ofthe, 
had  no  feet  hearers,  or  Scholers.-farder  to  difclofe  vnto ,  then  of  flat ,  plaine  Geome¬ 
tric.  And  though, thefe  Philofophers,knew  offardervfe,and  bed  vnderflode  the 
etymologye  of  the  worde,yet  this  name  Gcmetria, was  of  them  applyed  generally 
to  all  fortes  of  Magnitudes ;  vnleaft,  otherwhile,  of  Plato ,  and  Pythagoras  .*  When 
KPlatt.  7.  dt  tliey  would  precifely  declare  their  owne  dodrine.  Then, was  *  Geometria ,  with 
"Kip'  xhemftudiumquod circa  planum  verfatur.  But,  well  you  may  perceiue  by  Eudides 

Elementes ,  that  more  ample  is  our  Science ,  then  to  meafure  Plaines:and  nothyng 
lefle  therin  is  toughtf of  purpolejthen  how  to  meafure  Land.  An  other  namc,ther- 
fore,muft  nedes  be  had,  for  our  Mathematical!  Science  of  Magnitudes :  which  re¬ 
garded!  neither  clod, nor  turff:  neither  hill, nor  dale.  neither  earth  nor  heauen;  but 
is  abfolute  CM* egethologia .-not  creping  on  ground ,  and  daffeling  the  eye,  with  pole 
55  perche,rod  or  lyne.-butliftyng  the  hart  aboue  the  heauens,by  inuifibie  lines ,  and 
O*  immortall  beames  meteth  with  the  reflexions, of  the  light  incomprehenfible:  and 
r>  fo  procureth  Ioye,and  perfedion  vnfpeakable.  Of  which  true  vfe  of  our  c Me%e- 
thica,ov  tJl-f egethologia,  Diuine  Plato  feemed  to  haue  good  tafte,and  iudgement.-and 
(by  the  name  ol Geometric  )  fo  noted  it -and  warned  his  Scholers  therof:  as,in  hys 
feuenth  Dialog ,  of  the  Common  wealth,may  euidently  be  fene.  Where  (in  La- 
tin)thus  it  is :  right  well  mandated :  P  r  of eclo, nobis  hoe  non  hegabunt ,  Quicmfy  vclpau. 
litlum  quid  Geometria gufiarunt,  quin  bac  Scientia ,  contra,  omnino fe  habeat ,  quamde  ea 
loquuntur ,  qui  in  ipfa  verfantur .  In  Englifh, thus.  Verely(f ay th  Plato foohofoeuer 

bauef  hut  euen  "Very  litle  flailed  of Geometric, will  not  denye  Tmto  Vs ,  this :  but 
that  this  Science ,is  of  an  other  condicion, quite  contrary  to  thatftohich  they  that 
are  exercifed  in  it ,  do  fpeake  of  it.  And  there  it  followeth,  of  our  Gecmetrie, 
gupd quaritur  cognofcendi  illtus gratia, quod  femper  eft, non  dr  eius  quod  oritur  quandotf 
dr  interit.  Geometria,  eius  quod  eft  femper,  Cognitio  efl.^ttolletigitur{o  Generofe  vir)  ad 
Veritatem^anmum-atfyita^ad  Philofophandum  preparabit  cogitationemjvt  adfopera  con - 
uertamus -quajiuncyontra  quam  decetyid  inferior  a  deijeimus.  dre .  Quam  maximeigitur 
pracipiendum  efL'vt  qui  praclarifsimam  banc  habitat  Civitatem,nullo  modo,Geometriam 
fernant .  Nam  dr  quee  prater ipfms propofitum,quodam  modo  effe  videnturfhaud  exigua 
font.  drc.It  inuft  nedes  be  confdfed  (faith  Plato )  That  £  Geometric}  is  learned  ,  for 

the  knowyng  of  that ,  mhich  is  euer.and not  of  that,  *0 vhicb,in  tymejboth  is  bred 
and  is  brought  to  an  ende.iyc. Geometric  is  the  knowledge  of  that  which  is  euer * 
lajlyng.  It  mill  lift  Vp  therfore( 0  Gentle  Syr  )  ourmynde  to  the  Veritie :  and  by 
that  meanest  mill  prepare  the  T  bought, to  the  Thtlofophicall  loue  ofmifdome: 
that  me  may  turne  or  conuert , toward  heauenly  t  hinges  iSett  mjnde  a*d  thouShf\  mhich 
now ,otherwife  then  becommeth  V>s,me  call  down  on  bafe  or  inferior  things. <zsrc. 
Chiefly,  therfore,  Commaundement  mufl  be  giuen ,  that  ftich  as  do  inhabit  this 
mofl  honorable  Qtie,by  no  meanes,  delpife  Geometric.  For  euen  thofe  thinges 
&>»*  tj  itymhkhjn  manner,  feame  to  be  ,  befide  the purpofe  of  Geometric :  are  of 

m 


iohn  Dee  h  is  Adatfiematfcail  Preface. 

no  frriall  importance .  ^c.  And  befides  the  manifold  vfes  of  Geometrie,  in  matters 
appertainyng  to  warre,he  addeth  more,offecond  vnpurpofed  frute,  and  commo* 
ditye,arrifing  by  Geometrie :  fay  in  g :  Seim  us  quin  etiamyid  Difciplinas  omnes  faciliusper 
difcendas ,1'Mereffe  ommno,atpgerit  ne  G eometriam  altquis,an  non .  &c.  Hanc  ergo  D  o- 
clrinam^fectmdo  loco  difeendam  Imenibus Jlatmmus .  That  is.  (But >alfo  3loe  kno"%>} 

that  for  the  more  eafy  learnyng  ofallyfrtesft  importeth  much ,  whether  one 
haue  any  knowledge  in  Geometrie  }or  no.  <£rc.  Let  las  therfore  make  an  ordi* 
nance  or  decree ,  that  this  Science ,  of  young  men J. hall  be  learned  in  the fecond 
place.  This  was  Diuine  Plato  his  Iudgement,both  of  the  purpofed ,  chief,  and 
perfect  vfe  of  Geometrie:  and  ofhis  fecond, dependyng  ,  deriuatiue  commodities. 

And  for  vs,Chriften  men, a  thoufand  thoufand  mo  occafions  are,  to  haue  nede  of 
the  helpe  of*  CMegethologicall  Contemplations ;  wherby,to  tray  ne  our  Imagina-  *  f  . 
tions  and  Myndes ,by  litle  and  litle,to  forfake  and  abandon,the  groffe  and  cortup- 
tible  Obiedcs,of our  vtward  fenfes.-and  to  apprehend  ,  by  fure  dodrine  demon- 
ftratiue,Things  Mathematical!.  And  by  them ,  readily  to  be  holpen  and  con- ' earthly  name. t 
duCtcd  to  conceiue ,  difeourfe  ,  and  conclude  of  things  Intellectual  ,  Spiritual!,  of  Geometrie* 
£temall,and  fuch  as  concerneour  Bliffe  euerlafting ;  which,  otherwise  (  without 
Special!  priuiledge  of  Illumination,  or  Reuelation  fro  heauen  )  No  mortall  mans 
wyt( naturally)  is  hable  to  reach  vnto,or  to  Compare.  And,veryly,by  my  fmall 
T aient(from  aboue)I  am  hable  to  proue  and  teftifie,that  the  litterall  T ext,and  or¬ 
der  of  our  diuine  Law,Oracles,ana  Myfteries,require  more  fkill  in  Numbers, and 
Magnitudes  .•  then  (commonly)  the  expofitors  haue  vttered :  but  rather  onely  (at 
the  moftjfo  warned  :  &  (hewed  their  own  want  therin. (To  name  any,  is  nedeles: 
and  to  note  the  places, is, here, no  place:  But  if  I  be  duelyafked,my  anfwere  is  rea¬ 
dy.)  x^nd  without  the  litterall,Grammaticall,Mathematicall  or  Naturali  verities  of 
fuch  places  ,  by  good  and  certaine  Arte,perceiued,no  Spirituall  fenfe  ( propre  to 
thofe  places, by  Abfolute  T heologie) will  thereon  depend.  N o  man, therfore,  can  ^ 

doute  3  but  toward  the  atteyning  of  knowledge  incomparable  ,  andHeauenly 
Wifedome.*  Mathematicall  Speculations, both  ofNumbers  and  Magnitudes:  are  ” 
meanes, .aydes,  and  guides: ready,  certaine  , and  neceflary.  From  henceforth,in 
this  my  Preface, will  I  frame  my  talke,to  Plato  his  fugitiue  Scholers:  or,  rather  ,  to 
fuch,  who  well  can,( and  alfo  wil,)vfe  their  vtward  fenfes,to  the  glory  of  God,the 
benerite  of  their  Coun  trey, and  their  ownefecretcontentation,  or  honeft  prefer¬ 
ment,  on  this  earthly  Scaffold.  T o  them,I  will  orderly  recite,  deferibe  &  declare 
a  great  Number  of  Artes ,  from  our  two  Mathematicall  fountaines ,  deriued  into 
the  fieldes  of  Nature.  Wherby ,  fuch  Sedes ,  and  Rotes ,  as  lye  depe  hyd  in'the 
groud  of  ‘Nature, are  refrefhed, quickened, and  prouoked  to  grow,  (bote  vp,  fioure, 
and  giue  frute, infinite,and  incredible.  And  thefe  Artes,fhalbe  fuch ,  as  vpon  Mag¬ 
nitudes  properties  do  depen de,more,then  vpon  N umber.  And  by  good  reafon 
we  may  call  them  Artes,and  Artes  Mathematicall  Deriuatiue :  for  (  at  this  tyme)I  *AnArtu 
Define  An  Arte, to  be  a  Methodicall  coplete  Dodfrine, hailing  abun- 
dancy  of  fufhcient,and  pearlier  matter  to  deale  with, by  the  allow¬ 
ance  of  the  Metaphificall  Philofopher  :  the  knowledge  whereof,  to 
humaine  ftate  is  neceflarye.  And  that  I  account,  An  Art  Mathemati-  °*rt  Math** 
call deriuatiue,  which  by  Mathematicall  demonftratiue  Method,  TuTtiue^ 
in  Nubers ,  or  Magnitudes, ordiah  and  confirmeth  his  dodtrine,  as 
much  &  as  perfedtly ,  as  the  matter  fubiedt  will  admit .  And  for  that, 

a.iij,  I  emend 


A  Mechani- 
tietu 


I. 


Geometric 
vulgar . 


z. 


1 . 


i. 


Note, 


Note, 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface, 

I  entend  to  vfe  the  name  and  propertie  of  a  Mechanicien,  o  therwife,th  en  (hi  th  er  to) 
it  hath  ben  vfedj  thinke  it  good,  (for  diftin&ion  fake)  to  giue  you  alfo  a  brief det 
cription,  what  I  meane  therby.  A  Mechanicien,or  a  Mechanicali  work¬ 
man  is  he ,  whofe  f  kill  is ,  without  knowledge  of  Mathematical! 
demonftration ,  perfectly  to  worke  and  finifhe  any  fenfible  worke, 
by  thd  Mathematicien  principall  or  deriuatiue,  demonflrated  or  de- 

monilrabie.  Full  well  I  know, that  he  which  inucnteth,  or  maketh  thefe  de- 
monftrations,is  generally  called  ffeculatiue  CMechanicien :  which  differreth  no- 
thyng  from  a  Mechanicali  'jMatkematicicn .  So, in  refpcd  of  diuerfe adtions,one 
man  may  haue  the  name  offundry  artes:as,fome  tyme,ofa  Logicien ,  fome  tymes 
(in  the  fame  matter  otherwife  handled)  of  a  Rethoricien .  Of  thefe  trifles,I  make, 
(asnow,in  refped  of  my  Preface, )fmall  account:  to  fyle  the  for  the  fine  handlyng 
offubtile  curious  difputers .  In  other  places ,  they  may  commaunde  me, to  giue 
good  reafon :  and  yet, here, I  will  not  be  vnreafonable. 

Firft, then, from  the  puritie,abfolutenes,and  Immaterialitie  of  Principall  Geo¬ 
metric,  is  that  kindc  of  Geometric  deriued ,  which  vulgarly  is  counted  Geometric  : 
and  is  the  Arte  of  Meafuring  fenfible  magnitudes,  their  i'ufft  quatities 
and  contentes  .  This,  teacheth  to  meafure,either  at  hand:  and  the  praftifer,  to 
be  by  the  thing  Meafured.*  and  fo,by  due  applying  of  Cumpafe,  Rule,  Squire, 
Yarde,Ell,Perch,Pole,Line,Gagingrod,(or  filch  like  inftrument) to  the  Length, 
Plaine,or  Solide  meafured,  '‘to  be  certified,  either  of  the  length,  perimetry,  or  di- 
fiance  lineall :  and  this  is  called, UMecometrie .  Or*  to  be  certified  of  the  content  of 
any  plaine  Superficies :  whether  it  be  in  ground  Surueyed,  Borde,  or  Glafle  mea- 
fiired,or  fuch  like  thing :  which  meafuring,is  named  Embadometrie .  *Or  els  to  vn- 
derfland  the  Soliditie,and  content  of  any  bodily  thing :  as  ofTymber  and  Stone, 
or  the  content  ofPits,Pondes,Wells,Veffels,fmaU&  great,of  all  fafhions.Where, 
ofWine,Oyle,Beere,or  Ale  veffells,&c,the  Meafuring-commanly,  hath  a  pecu- 
lier  name.-and  is  called  Gaging .  And  the  generallname  ofthefe  Solide  meafures, 
is  Stereometric .  Or  els, this  vulgar  Geometric ,  hath  confideration  to  teach  the  prac- 
tifer ,  how  to  meafure  things, with  good  diflance  betwene  him  and  the  thing  mea¬ 
fured  :  and  to  vnderfland  thereby,either  *how  Farre,athingfeene(on  land  or  wa¬ 
ter)  is  from  the  meafurer:  and  this  may  be  called  Jfornecometrie:  Or,how  High  or 
depe,aboue  or  vnder  theieuel  of  the  meafurers  ftading,any  thing  is, which  is  fene 
on  land  or  water,  called  Hypfometrie.*Qi it  informeth  the  meafurer ,  how  Broad 
any  thing  is, which  is  in  the  meafurers  vew:fo‘itbc  on  Land  or  Water,fituated:and 
may  be  called  Plat ometrie .  Though  I  vfe  here  to  condition,the  thing  meafured,  to. 
be  on  Land,  or  Water  Situated :  yet,  know  for  ceitaine,  that  the  fundry  heigthe  of 
Cloudes,  blafing  Starres,  and  of  the  Mone  ,may(by  thefe  meanes)haue  their  di- 
flances  from  the  earth  :  and,  of  the  blafing  Starresand  Mone,the  Soliditie  (afwell 
as  difiances) to  be  meafured:But  becaufe, neither  thefe  things  are  vulgarly  taught: 
nor  of  a  common  praftifer  fo  ready  to  be  executed  V  I,rather,let  fuch  meafures  be 
reckened  incident  to  fome  of  our  other  Artes,  dealing  with  thinges  on  high,more 
purpofely,  then  this  vulgar  Land  meafuring  Geometrie  doth :  as  in  Perjpetfiue  and 
t^AUronomie,  &c .  f 

QF  . thefe  feates  (  Farther  applied  )  is  Sprongthe  feateof  Geodejie  ,  or  Land 
Meafuring:  more  cunningly  to  meafure  &  Suruey  Land,  Woods,  and  Waters, 
a  farre  of.  More  cunningly, I  fay :'  But  God  knoweth  (hitherto)  in  thefe  Realmes 
of  England  and  Ireland  (  whether  through  ignorance  or  fraude ,  I  can  not  tell ,  in 
e,uery  particular )  how  great  wrong  and  iniurie  hath  (in  my  timejbene  committed 


lohn  Dee  His  Mathematical!  Preface, 

by  vntrue  meafuring  and  furueying  ofLand  or  Woods, any  way  .  And,  this  I  art! 
fure:  that  die  Value  of  the  difference,  bet  wene  the  truth  and  fuch  Suru  eyes, would 
haue  bene  hable  to  haue  loud  (for  euer)  in  eche  of  our  wo  Vniuerfitics,an  excel¬ 
lent  Mathematicall  Reader:  to  eche,allowing  (yearly)  a  hundred  Markes  oflawfull 
money  of  this  realme:  which, in  dede,would  feme  requifit,here,to  be  had  (though 
by  other  wayes  prouided  for)  as  well,as,the  famous  Vniuerfitie  of  Paris,  hath  two 
Mathematicall  Readers  :  and  eche, two  hundreth  French  Crownes  yearly,  of  the 
French  Kinges  magnificent liberalitie  onely »  Now,againe,  to  our  purpofe  retur¬ 
ning  :  Moreouer,  of  the  former  knowledge  Geometricall,aregrowen  the  Skills  of 
Geographic  ,  Chorographie  ,  Hydrographic  ,  and  Stratarithmetrie . 

Geographic  teacheth  wayes, by  which,  in  fudry  formes, (as  Sph<zrike,Vlaine  n 
or  other)  ,the  Situation  of  Cities,  Townes,Villages,  Fortes,CaftelIs,Mountaines,  „ 
Woods,Hauens,Riuers,Crekes,&  fuch  other  things,vpo  the  outface  of  the  earth-  „ 
ly  Globe  (either  in  the  whole,or  in  lome  principall  meter  and  portion  therofco-  „ 
tayned)may  be  defcribed  anddefigned, in  comenlurations  Analogicall  to  Nature 
and  veritierand  moft  aptly  to  our  vew,may  be  reprefented.Of  this  Arte  how  great  7f 
pleafure,and  how  manifolde  commodities  do  come  vnto  vs,daily  and  hourely :  of 
moft  men,  is  perceaued .  While, fome,  to  beatitifie  their  Halls,Parlers,  Chambers, 
Galeries,Studies,or  Libraries  with:  other  fome,for  thinges  paft,  as  battels  fought, 
earthquakes, heauenly  fyringes,&fuch  occurentes,in  hiftories  mentioned:  therby 
liuely  ,as  it  were, to  vew  e  the  place,the  region  adioyning,the  diftance  from  vs :  and 
fuch  other  circumftances .  Some  other, prefently  to  vewe  the  large  dominion  of 
theTurke  :  the  wide  Empire  of  the  Mofchouite:  and  thelitle  morfell  of  ground, 
where  Chriftendome(by  profeffion)is  certainly  knowcn.  Litle,Ifay,in  rclpe&e  of 
the  reft,  &c.  Some, either  for  their  owne  iorneyes  direding  into  farre  landcs: 
or  to  vnderftand  of  other  mens  trauailes .  To  conclude,  fome,  for  one  purpofe ; 
and  fome, for  an  other,  liketh,loueth,getteth,and  vfeth,  Mappes,  Chartes,&  Geo* 
graphical!  Globes .  Ofwhofe  vie,  to  fpeake  fuff  ciently,  would  require  a booke 
peculier. 

Chorographie  feemeth  to  be  art  vnderling,  and  a  twig,  of  Geographic: 
and  y  et  neuerthelefte,  is  in  pradile  manifolde,  and  in  vfe  very  ample .  This  tea-  ,5 
cheth  Analogically  to  defcribe  a  fmall  portion  or  circuite  of  ground,  with  the  con-  „ 
rentes  :  not  regarding  what  commenfuration  it  hath  to  the  wholes,  or  any  parcell,  „ 
without  it,  contained .  Butin  the  territory  or  parcell  of  ground  which  it  taketh  in  » 
hand  to  make  defcription  of,  itleaueth  out  (orvndefcnbed)  no  notable ,  or  odde  „ 
thing,  aboue  the  ground  vifible  .Yea  and  fometimes ,  of  thinges  vnder  ground,  ,, 
geueth  fome  peculier  marke  .*  or  warning :  as  ofMettall  mines,  Cole  pittes,  Stone  „ 
quarries.  &c.  Thus,  a  Dukedome,a  Shiere,a  Lordfliip,  or  Idle,  may  be  defcribed  „ 
diftindly .  But  marueilous  pleafant,  and  profitable  it  is ,  in  the  exhibiting  to  our 
eye, and  comhienfuration,  the  plat  of  a  Citie,  Towne,  Forte,  or  Pallace,  in  true 
Symmetry :  notapproching  to  any  of  them :  and  out  of  Gunne  fhot.&c.  Hereby, 
the  K^frchitett  may  furnifhe  him  felfe, with  ftore  of  what  patterns  he  liketh  :  to  his 
great  inftrudion:  euen  in  thofe  thinges  which  outwardly  are  proportioned: either 
limply  in  them  felues :  or  refpediuely,to  Hilles,Riuers,  Hauens,  and  Woods  ad- 
ioyning .  Some  alfo,  terme  this  particular  defcription  of  places ,  Topographic . 

HydrOgraphlC,deliuereth  to  our  knowledge ,  on  Globe  or  inPlaine,  „ 
the  peifed  Analogicall  defcription  of  the  Ocean  Sea  coaftes,  through  the  whole 
world  :  or  in  the  chiefe  and  principall  partes  thereof :  with  the  lies  and  chiefe  sj 

adfij*  paticular 


*Nate', 

Thedijfe-  ,, 
rence  be-  „ 
ttyene  Stra-  „ 
tarithme -  ,, 
trie  and.  3J 
Tafiicie, 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

particular  places  ofdaungers,  conteyned  within  the  boundes.,and  Sea coafteS  de- 
icribed :  as,  of  Quicldandes,Bankes-,Pittes,Rockes,Races,CountertideSiWhorle» 
pooles.  &C.  This,  dealeth  with  the  Element  of  the  water  chiefly ;  as  Geographic, 
did  principally  take  the  Element  of  the  Earthes  defcription  (  with  his  apperte- 
nances  )  to  taske  .  And  befides  thys  ,  Hyd.rographie  ,  requireth  a  particular 
Regifter  of  certaine  Landmarkes  (where  markes  may  be  had)  from  the  fea,well  lia¬ 
ble  to  be  fkried,  in  what  point  of  the  Seacumpafe  they  appeare,and  what  apparent 
form  e,S.ituation,  and  bignes  they  haue,  in  refpe&e  of  any  daungerous  place  in  the 
fea,or  nere  vnto  it,  affigned:  And  in  all  Coaftes,  what Morte,maketh  full  Sea.-and 
what  way,  the  Tides  and  Ebbes,  come  and  go, the  Hydrographer  oughtto  recorde. 
The  Saundinges  likewife :  and  the  Chanels  wayes:  their  number, and  depthes  or¬ 
dinarily,  at  ebbe  and  flud,  ought  the  Hydrographer ,  by  obferuation  and  diligence 
of  Measuring,  to  haue  certainly  knowen .  And  many  other  pointes,are  belonging 
to  perfede  Hydrographies  and  for  to  make  a  Rutter,  by :  of  which,I  nede  not  here 
fpeake  :  as  of  the  defcribing,in  any  place,  vpon  Globe  or  Plaine,  the  ^a.poin’tes  of 
the  Compafe,truely :  (wherof,  fcarflyfoure, in  England ,  haue  right  knowledge: 
bycaufe,  the  lines  thcrof,  are  no  (iraight  lines ,  nor  Circles . )  Of  making  due  pro- 
iedion  of  a  Sphere  in  plaine.Of  the  Variacion  of the  Compas ,  from  true  N  orthe: 
And  fuch  like  matters  (of  great  importance ,  all )  I  leaue  to  fpeake  of  in  this  place: 
bycaufe, I  may  feame(al  ready)to  haue  enlarged  the  boundes,and  duety  of  an  Hy- 
dographer,  much  more,then  any  man  (to  this  day)hath  noted, or  preferibed .  Yet 
am  I  well  hable  to  proue,all  thefe  thinges ,  to  appertaine ,  and  alfo  to  be  proper  to 
the  Hydrographer.  The  chief  vfe  and  ende  of  this  Art,  is  the  Art  ofNauigation: 
butit  hath  other  diuerfe  vies :  euen  by  them  to  be  enioyed ,  that  neuerlacke  fight 
of  land. 

Stratanthmetrie,  is  the  Skill,  (appertainyng  to  the  warre , )  by  which  a 
.man  can  fee  in  figure,analogicall  to  any  Geometrical  figure  appointed,  any  certaine 
number  orfumme  of  men:  offuch  a  figure  capable:  (by  reafon  ofthe  vfuall  (paces 
betwene  Souldiers  allowed :  and  for  that ,  of  men,can  be  made  no  Fradions.  Yet, 
neuertheles,he  can  order  the  giuen  fumme  of  men  ,  for  the  greateftfuch  figure, 
that  of  them,  cabe  ordred)and  certifie,of  the  ouerplus:  (if  any  be)  and  of  the  next 
certaine  fumme, which, with  the  ouerplus,will  admitafigureexadly  proportionail 
to  the  figure  affigned.  By  which  Skill,alfo,ofany  army  or  company  of  men :  (the 
figure  &  fides  of  whole  orderly  (landing, or  array, is  knowen)he  is  able  tp  exprefle 
the  iufl  number  of  men,  within  that  figure  coriteined:  or(orderly  )  able  to  be  con- 
teined.  *  And  this  figure, and  (ides  therof,  he  is  hable  to  know :  either  beyngby, 
and  at  hand:  or  a  farre  of.  Thus  farre, ftretcheth  the  defcription  and  property  of 
Stratarithmetrie :  furficienr  for  this  ty me  and  place .  It  difterreth  from  the  Feate 
Ta£licall,De  dciebus  injlruendd.  bycaufe,  there,  is  neceffary  the  wifedome  and  fore¬ 
fight, to  what  purpofe  he  fo  ordreth  the  men ;  and  Skillfull  liability ,  alfo ,  for  any 
occafion,or  purpofe ,  to  deuife  and v(e  the  apteft  and  mod  neceflary  order',  array 
and  figure  of  his  Company  and  Summe  of  men  .  By  figured  meane.-  as,either  ofa 
Perfect  Square,  Triangle ,  Circle ,  Ouale ,  longfquarc ,  (of  die  Grekes  it  is  called  Eiero - 
rmkes  )  Rhombe,  Rhomboid,  Lunular ,  Ryng,  Serpentine,  and  fuch  other  Geometricall 
figures:  Which,inwarrcs, haue  ben,  and  are  to  be  vfed  :  for  commodioufhes ,  ne- 
ceflity,and  auauntage  &c.  And  no  (mail  f kill  ought  he  to  haue ,  that  lhould  make 
true  reporter  nere  the  truth,of  the  numbers  and  Summes,offootemen  or  horfe- 
men ,  in  the  Enemyes  ordring .  A  farre  of,  to  make  an  eftimate ,  betwene  nere 
termes  of  More  and  Leffe,is  not  a  thyng  very  rife ,  among  thofe  that  gladly  would 


John  Dee  his  Mathematical  Preface. 

do  it.  Great  pollicy  may  be  vfed  of  the  Capitaines,(ar  tymes  fete, and  in  places  t.fil 

conuenientjas  to  vfe  Figures ,  which  make greateft  fhew ,  offo  many  as  hehath:  ou  ^fn‘ie 
an  d  vfing  the  aduauntage  of  the  three  kindes  of  vfuall  fpaces  r  (  betwene  footemen  it  hard, to  perforin 
or  horfemen)to  take  the  largefbor  when  he  would  feme  to  haue  few,  (beyng  ma- 
ny.-  )  contrary  wife, in  Figure, and  Ipace.  The  Herald, Purfeuant,  Sergeant  Royally  ^Zheyl^ifi 
Capitaine ,  or  who  foeuer  is  carefull  to  come  nere  the  truth  herein  ,  befides  the 
Iudgement  ofhis  expert  eye,his  fkill  of  Ordering  TacUcall,  the  helpe  of  his  Geo-  Sides  {ink  Angles J 
metricall  inuru men t : Ring,  or  Staffe  Aftronomicall :  (  commodioufly  framed  for  •And  where.  Refold 
cariage  and  vfe)  He  may  wonderfully  helpe  him  ftlfe*  byperfpediue  Glaffts.In 
which,  (I  truft )  our  pofterity  will  proue  more  fkillfull  and  expert ,  and  to  greater  ^ITg^utdaL. 
purpofes,  then  in  thefe  dayes,  can  (almoft  )be  credited  to  be  poflible.  generally  with  *A- 

Thus  haue  I  lightly  pafied  otter  the  Artificiall  Feates,chiefly  dependyng  Vpoil  and.thatfor  Bat - 
vulgar  Geometric :  &  commonly  and  generally  reckencd  vnder  the  name  of  Geome- 
trie.  But  there  are  other(very  many)  AMethodicall  Artes  j  which,  declyning  from 
the  purity ,  •implicitie,and  Immateriality, of  our  Principall  Science  of Magnitudes:  CA  ' 

do  yet  neuertheles  vfe  the  great  ayde  ,  direction  ,  and  Method  of  the  fayd 
principall  Science ,  and  haue  propre  names ,  and  diftind :  both  from  the  Science 
of  Geometric,  (from  which  they  are  deriued)and  one  from  the  other.  As  Per- 

fpeediue,  Aftronomie ,  Muhke,  Cofmographie,  Aftrologie,Statike, 
Antbropographie^rochilike;,  Helicofophie,  Pneumatithmie,  Me- 
nadrie,  Hypogeiodie,  Hydragogie,  Horometrie,  Zographie,  Archi¬ 
tecture,  Nauigation ,  Thaumaturgike  and  Archemaftrie.  I  thinke  it 
neceflaiy ,  orderly ,  of  thefe  to  giue  fome  peculier  deferiptions  :  andwithall,  to 
touch  fome  of  their  commodious  vfes ,  and  fo  to  make  this  Preface ,  to  be  a  litde 
fwete,pleafant  N ofegaye  for  you.-to  comfort  your  Spirites ,  beyng  almoft  out  of 
courage,  andindefpayre,  ( through  brutifh  brute  )  Weenyng  that  Geometric ,had 
but  ferued  for  buildyng  of  an  houfe,or  a  curious  bridge, or  the  roufe  of  Weftmin- 
fter  hall ,  or  fome  witty  pretty  deuife ,  dr  engyn  ,  appropriate  to  a  Carpenter,or  a 
loyner  &c.That  the  thing  is  farre  otherwife ,  then  the  world ,  (commonly) to  this 
day, hath  demed,by  worde  and  worke ,  good  profe  wilbe  made. 

Among  theft  Artes,  by  good  reafon,P  erlpectiuc  oughtto  be  had ,  ere 
of  l. Aftronomicall  Apparences ,  perfed  knowledge  can  be  atteyned.  And  bycaufe 
of  the  prerogatiue  of  Light ,  beyng  the  firftof  Gods  Creatures:  and  the  eye,  the  light 
of  our  body,  and  hisSenfe  moft  mighty, and  his  organ  moft  Artificiall  and  Geome- 
tricall: At  Pe'rpffiue, we  will  begyn  therfore.  Perfpediue,is  an  Art  Mathe¬ 
matical!, which  demonftrateth  the  maner^and  properties,  of  all  Ra¬ 
diations  DireCt, Broken, and  Reflected. This  Defcription,or Notation ,  is 
briefbut  it  reacheth  fo  farre,as  the  world  is  wyde.  It  concerneth  all  Creatures, 
all  Adions ,  and  palfions,  by  Emanation  of  bearnes  perfourmed .  Beames,or  na- 
turalllines ,  (here)  I  meane ,  notoflight  onely,or  of  colour  (though  they,to  eye, 
giue  fhew, witnes, and  profe ,  wherby  to  ground  the  Arte  vpon  )but  alfo  of  other 
F ormes, both Subjlantiall,  and  Accidentally  the  certain e  and  determined  adiue  Ra« 
diall  emanations.  By  this  Art(omitting  to  fpeake  ofthehigheft  pointes)  we  may 
vfe  our  eyes, and  the  light,with  greater  pleafure:and  perfeder  Iudgementrboth  of 
things, in  light  feen,&  of  other:  which  by  like  order  of  Lightes  Radiations,  worke 
and  produce  their  effedes .  We  may  be  afhamed  to  be  ignorant  of  the  caufe,why 
fo  fundry  wayes  our  eye  is  deceiued,and  abufedras,  while  the  eye  weeneth  a  roud 
Globe  or  Sphere(beyng  farre  of)  to  be  a  flat  and  plain e  Circle,and  fo  likewife  iud- 

b.j.  geth 


<sV*T* 

■.iWwr 


•v.t,  -- 


A  maruciloHs 
Clap.  (TJ3 


s.mp. 


John  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

geth  a  plaine  Square,  to  be  roud : fuppofeth  walles  parallels,to  approche,a  farre  of*: 
rofe  and  floure  parallels,the  one  to  bend  downward  ,  the  other  to  rife  vpward,at  a 
little  diftance  from  you.  Againe ,  of  thinges  being  in  like  fwiftnes  of  mouing ,  to 
thinke  the  nerer,ta  moue  faftenand  the  farder,much  flower.Nay,  of  two  thinges, 
wherof the  one  (incomparably)  doth  moue  fwifter  then  the  other  ,  to  deme  the 
flower  to  moue  very  fwift,&  the  other  to  ftand:  what  an  error  is  this,ofour  eye?  Or 
the  Raynbow,  both  of  his  Colours, of  the  order  of  the  colours, of  the  bignes  of  it, 
the  place  and  heith  ofit,(&c)to  know  the  caufes  demonflratiue,is  it  not  pleafant, 
is  it  not  necdlaryc'of  two  or  three  Sonnes  appearing:  ofBlafing  Sterres :  and  fuch 
like  thinges  :  by  naturall  caufes ,  brought  to  paffe ,  (and  yet  ncuertheles ,  offarder 
matter,  Significatiue  )  is  it  not  commodious  for  man  to  know  the  veiy  true  caufe, 
&  occafion  Natural!  i  Yea,rather,is  it  not, greatly,  againft  the  Souerainty  of  Mans 
nature ,  to  be  fo  ouerfhot  and  abufed ,  with  thinges  (  at  hand  )  before  his  eyes  { 
as  with  a  Pecockes  tayle ,  and  a  Doues  necke  :  or  a  whole  ore,  in  water,  hob 
den, to  feme  broken  .  *  Thynges, farre  of, to  feeme  nere :  and  nere,  to  feme 
farre  of  .  Small  thinges  ,  to  feme  great  :  and  great ,  to  feme  final!  .  One 
man,  to  feme  an  Army  .  Or  a  man  to  be  curftly  affrayed  of  his  owne  (had- 
do  w  .  Yea  ,fo  much, to  feare,that,if  you,being(alone )  nere  a  certaine  glaffe ,  and 
proifer,with  dagger  or  fword,to  foyne  at  the  glafle ,  you  fhall  fuddenly  be  irioued 
to  gitiebacke(inmaner)  by  reafon  of  an  Image,  appearing  in  the  ayre,betwene 
you  &  the  glafle,  with  like  hand,  /word  or  dagger,&  with  like  quicknes ,  foyningat 
your  very  eye,  likewife  as  you  do  at  the  Glafle.  Straunge,this  is, to  heare  of:  but 
more  meruailous  to  behold,  then  thefe  my  wordes  can  fignifie.  And  neuerthe- 
lefle  by  demonfiration  Opticall,  the  order  and  caufe  therof,  is  certified:  euen  fo,as 
the  effe<fl  is  confequent.  Y ea,thus  much  more, dare  I  take  vpon  me, toward  the  fa- 
tiilying  of  the  noble  courrage,  that  longeth  ardently  for  the  wifedome  of  Caufes 
Naturalhas  to  let  him  vnderfiand,  that, in  London ,  he  may  with  his  owne  eyes, 
haue  profe  of that,  which  I  haue  layd  herein .  A  Gen  deman,  (which,for  his  good 
feruice,  doneto  his  Countrey,is  famous  and  honorable :  andforfkill  in  the  Ma¬ 
thematical!  Sciences,  and  Languages, is  the  Od  man  of  this  land.  &c. )  euen  he,is 
hable:and(I  am  furc)will,  very  willingly, let  the  Glafle,  and  profe  be  fene.-andfo  I 
(here)  requeft  him  :  for  the  encreafe  of  wifedome ,  in  the  honorable  :  and  for  the 
flopping  of  the  mouthes  malicious :  and  reprdfing  the  arrogancy  of  the  ignorant. 
Y  e  may  eafily  gefle ,  what  I  mcane.  This  Art  of  Perjpmm r,  is  of  that  excellency, 
and  may  be  led, to  the  certifying, and  executingoffuch  thinges ,  as  no  man  would 
eafily  beleue:  without  Adtuall  profe  perceiued.  I  fpeake  nothing  of  Naturall  Phi- 
tefopbie, which,' without  Perjj’cctive,  can  not  be  fully  vnderftanded ,  nor  perfectly  at- 
teined  vnto.  N  or,  of  Jjlronomie:  which, without  P  erjpecHue  ^czn  not  well  be  groun¬ 
ded  :  N  or  '^Afirdogic ,  naturally  Verified,  and  auouched.  That  part  hereof,which 
dealeth  with  Glaflcs(which  name,Glafle,is  a  generall  name,  in  this  Arte ,  for  any 
thing, from  which, a  Beame  reboundeth)  is  called  Catoptrike  >  and  hath  fo  many  v- 
fes,both  merueiloiis,and  proffitable:  that, both, it  would  hold  me  to  long ,  to  note 
therin  the  principall  conclufions,all  ready  knowne:  And  alfo(perchaunce)  fome 
thinges,mightlackedue  credite  with  you :  And  I,  therby,  to  leefe  my  labor:and 
g^.  you, to  flip  into  light Iudgement*, Before  you  haue  learned  fufficiently  thepowre 
of  N ature  and  Arte. 

IMow ,  to  procede:  «AftronoiTllC,is  an  Arte  Mathematical!, which 
demonftrateth  the  difbmce ,  magnitudes ,  and  all  naturall  motions, 
apparences,and  pafsions  propre  to  the  Planets  and  fixed  Sterres :  for 

" 1  any 


IohnDee  his  Mathematical  Preface** 

^any  time  paft, prefen  t  and  to  come:in  relpecf  of  a  certaine  Horizon  i 

or  without  reipect  of  any  Horizon.  By  this  Arte  we  are  certified  of  the  di- 
ftance  of  the  Starry  Skye,and  of  eche  Planete  from  the  Centre  of  the  Earth.-  and  of 
the  greatnes  of  any  Fixed  ftarre  fene,  or  Planete, i  n  reiped  of  the  Earthes  greatnes. 
As ,  we  are  lure  (  by  this  Arte )  that  the  Solidity ,  Mailines  and  Body  of  the  Sonne, 
conteineth  the  quantitieofthe  whole  Earth  arid  Sea, a  hundred  threfcoreand 
two  times ,  leffe  by  ~  one  eight  parte  of  the  earth.  But  the  Body  of  the  whole 
earthly  globe  and  Sea, is  bigger  then  the  body  of  the  Mone  ,  three  and  forty  times 
lefie  by  --  of  the  Mone.  Wherfore  the  Sonne  is  bigger  then  the  CVtone  ,  7000 
times,  idle,  by  55?  C-  that  is ,  precifely  69 40  11  bigger  then  the  CMone.  And  yet 

the  vnfkillfuli  man, Would  iudge  them  a  like  bigge .  Wherfore,of  Necefsity,the 
one  is  much  farder  from  vs, then  the  other.  The  Sonne ,  when  he  is  fardeft  from 
the  earth  (which, now, in  our  age, is, when  he  is  in  the  8  .degree,of  Cancer)is ,  1179 
Semidiameters  of  the  Earth, diftante .  And  the  c M one  when  file  is  fardeft  from  the 
earth, is  68  Semidiameters  ofthe  earth  and  —  The  nereft ,  that  the  CMone  com- 
meth  to  the  earth, is  Semidiameters  52  ~~  The  didance  ofthe  Starry  Skye  is  ,fro 
vs, in  Semidiameters  of  the  earth  20081  ~C'  Twenty  thoufand  fourefcore ,  one, 

andalmoftahaifc.  Subtract  from  this, the  CM  ones  nereft  diftance,from  the  Earth: 
and  therof  remaineth  Semidiameters  of  the  earth  200.29  _l  Twenty  thoufand 

nine  and  twenty  and  a  quarter.  So  thicke  is  the  heauenly  Palace  ,  that  the  Pla~ 
netes  haue  all  their  exercife  in, and  moft  meruailoufly  perfourme  the  Commaude- 
inent  and  Charge  to  them  giuen  by  the  omnipotent  Maieftie  of  the  king  of  kings. 
This  is  that,  which  in  Genefis  is  called  Ha  Rakia .  Confident  well.  The  Semidia- 
meterof  the  earth,  coteineth  of  our  common  miles  3436-1.  three  thoufand, foure 

hundred  thirty  fix  and  foure  eleuenth  partes  of  one  myle.-Such  as  the  whole  earth 
and  Sea,  round  about,  is  21600.  Oneand  twenty  thoufand  fix  hundred  of  our 
myles.  Allowyng  for  euery  degree  of thegreateft  circle, thre  fcore  myles.  Now  if 
you  way  well  with  your  felfe  butthislitleparcell  offrute  ^flronomcall,  as  con¬ 
cerning  the  bignefte,Diftances  of  Sonne, Mone,  Sterry  Sky, and  the  huge  maffinesof 
Ha  Rakia ,  will  you  not  finde  your  Confciences  moued ,  with  the  kingly  Prophet, 
to  fingthe  confeffion  of  Gods  Glory, and  fay,  TheHeauens  declare  the  gW* 

ry  ofGodydncl  the  Firmament  R«ki«\ Jbeweth  forth  the  1 vork.es  of  his  handes. 
And  fo  forth, for  thofe  fiue  firft  ftaues,of  that  kingly  Pfalme.  Well,well,It  is  time 
for  fome  to  lay  hold  on  wifedome, and  to  Iudge  truly  of  thinges:  and  notfo  to  ex¬ 
pound  the  Holy  word,all  by  Allegories  :  as  to  Negleft  the  wifedome,  powre  and 
Goodnes  ofGodpn,  and  by  his  Creatures ,  and  Creation  to  be  feen  andleamed. 
By  parables  and  Analogies  of  whofe  natures  and  properties,the  courfe  ofthe  Ho¬ 
ly  Scripture,  alfo,  declareth  to  vs  very  many  Myfteries.The  whole  Frame  of  Gods 
Creatures, (which  is  the  whole  world, )is  to  vs, a  bright  glafie:  from  which,  by  re¬ 
flexion,  reboundeth  to  our  knowledge  and  perceiuerance,  Beames ,  and  Radiati¬ 
on  s.-reprefenting  the  Image  of  his  Infinite  goodnes, Omnipotecy,and  wifedome. 
And  wc  therby ,  are  taughtand  perfuaded  to  Glorifie  our  Creator,as  God.-and  be 
thankefull  therfore  .  Could  the  Heatheniftes  finde  thefe  vfes,of  thefe  moft  pure, 
beawtifulLand  Mighty  Corporall  Creaturesrand  fliall  vve, after  that  thetrue  Sonne 
ofrightwifenefie  is  rifen  aboue  the  Horizon, of  our  temporall  Hemijjharieyiod.  hath 
fo  abundantly  ftreamed  into  our  hartes,the  direft:  beames  ofhis  goodnes ,  mercy, 
and  grace:  Whofe  heat  All  Creatures  feele :  Spirituall  and  Corpora)].-  Vifible  and 

b.ij.  Inui- 


lohn  D ee  his  Mathematical!  Preface » 

Inuifible.-S  hall  we (I  fay)looke  vpon  the  Heauen, Stems, and  Planets,^  an  Oxe  and 
an  AlTe  doth:  no  furder  carefull  or  inquifitiue, what  they  are.-  why  were  they  Cre¬ 
ated, How  do  they  execute  that  they  were  Created  forc'SeingJAll  Creatures,were 
for  our  lake  created  :  and  both  we,  and  they, Created,  chiefly  toglorifie  the  Al¬ 
mighty  Creator:  and  that,  by  all  meanes,to  vs  poffible.  Noliteignorare{i aith  Plate 
in  Epnomis )  Aftronomiam,  Sapientiftimu  quiddam  ejfe.  Be ye  not  ignorant jjfJlro* 

notnie  to  be  a  thyng  of  excellent  yoifedome.  cpflronomie, wzs  to  vs,from  the  be¬ 
ginning  commended, and  in  maner  commaunded  by  God  him  felfe.In  afinuch  as 
he  made  the  Sonne, CMone, and  Stems, to  be  to  vs, for  Sijgnes,an&  knowledge  ofSea- 
fons,and  for  Diftin&ions  oFDayes,and  yeares,  Many  wordes  nede  not .  But  I 
wifh,euery  man  fliould  way  this  wor d,Signes.  And  befides  that,  conferre  it  alfo 
with  the  tenth  Chapter  of  Hteremie.  And  though  Some  thinke ,  that  there, they 
haue  found  a  rod.- Yet  Modeft  Reafon,wiIl  be  indifferent  Iudge,  who  ought  to  be 
beaten  therwith,in  relped  of  our  purpofe.  Leauing  that :  I  pray  you  vnderftand 
this  :  that  without  great  diligence  of  Obferuation ,  examination  and  Calculation, 
their  periods  and  oourfes(wherby  Dift'intfion  ofSeafons,yeares,and  New  Mones 
might  precifely  be  knowne) could  not  exa&ely  be  certified  .  Which  thing  to  per¬ 
formers  that  Art ,  which  we  here  haue  Defined  to  be  Aftronomie.  Wherby ,  we 
may  haue  the  diffindl  Courfe  of  Times, dayes, yeares,  and  Ages:  afwell  for  Confi- 
deratio  of  Sacred  Prophefies,accomplifhed  in  due  time, foretold ;  as  for  high  My- 
fticall  Solemnities  holding.- And  for  all  other  humaine  affaires  ,  Conditions ,  and 
couenanres ,  vpon  certaine  time  ,betwcne  man  and  man  •  with  many  other  great 
vfcs.-  Wherin ,  ( verely)  , would  be  great  incertainty,  Confufion,vn truth,  and  bru- 
tifli  Barbaroufnes:  without  the  wonderfull  diligence  and  fkill  of  this  Arte :  conti¬ 
nually  learning, and  determining  Times, and  periodes  of  Time ,  by  the  Record  of 
the  heauenlybooke ,  wherin  all  times  are  written .-  and  to  be  read  with  an  Aftrono - 
■me  all  fidffe,  in  ftede  of  afcftue. 

Muflke  , of Motion, hath  his  Original!  caufe .-  Therfore ,  after  the  motions 

moft  fwift,and  moft  Slow, which  are  in  the  Firmament, of  Nature  perfonned:and 
vnderthe  Astronomers  Conftderation  -now  I  will  Speake  ofan  other  kinde  of Motion , 
producing  fou  nd,audible,and  of  Man  numerable.  CMufikel  call  here  that  Science, 
Which  of  the  Grekes  is  called  Harmonic* .  Not  medling  with  the  Controueriie  be- 
tweiie  the  auncient  Harmoniftes,2.rtd  Canoniftes .  Nf  ufllce  is  a  Ninth  ernaticaJJ. 

Science , which  teaebtetb,by  fenfe  and  reafon,  perfectly  to  iudge, and 
oTcfef  the  diiierfities  of  foundes,hye  and  low.  Aftronomie  and  cMuftke 
are  Sifters, faith  Plato.  As, for  Aftronomie,  the  eyes :  So,  for  Harmonious  Motion, the 
eares  were  made.  But  as  Aftronomie  hath  a  more  diuine  Contemplation ,  and  co- 
modity,then  mortall  eye  can  perceiue  :  So, is  c Muftke  to  be  confidered,that  the 
i  ,  *  Minde  may  be  preferred,before  the  care .  And  from  audible  found,  we  ought 

to  afeende ,  to  the  examination  :  which  numbers  are  Harmonious which  not. 
And  why, either,  the  fee  arc  :  of  the  other  are  not.  I  could  atiarge,in  theheauenly 
2.  *  motions  and  diftances  ,  defcribe  ameruaiIous  Harmonie  ,  o£  Pythagoras  Harpe 

^ .  with  eight  ftringes.  Aifo,fbmwhat  might  be  fay d  of  Mercurius*  two  Harpes, 
eche  of  foure  Stringes  Elementall.  And  very  ftraunge  matter, might  be  alledged 
5 .  of  the  Harmonie,  to  our  *  Spiritual!  part  appropriate.  As  in  Ptolomms  rhird  boke,  in 

the  fourth  andfixth  Chapters  may  appeare .  *  And  what  is  the  caufe  of  the  apt 
6  bondtymd  frendly  felowlhip,of  the  Intelle&uall  and  Mentall  part  of  vs ,  with  our 

groftc& corruptible  body :  but  a  certaine  Meane,  and  Harmonious  Spirituality,  with 

both 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 


both  participatyng^  of  both  (in  a  maner)reftdtyngi  In  the *  Tune  of  Mans  <voyce,and  alp 
*  the found  of  Infrument^dmx  might  be  fay  d,  of  Harmonic:  N  o  common  Muficien  g . 

would  lightly  beleue.But  of  the  fundry  Mixture(as  I  may  terme  it)  and  concurfe,  I'D* 

diuerfe  collation, and  Application  of  th  efe  Harmonies:  as  of  thre,foure,fiue,or  mo:  Read  in  A* 
Maruailous  haue  the  efre&es  ben:  and  yet  may  be  foundc,and  produced  the  like:  r^°dls!ns  - 
with  feme  proportional!  confidcration  for  our  time, and  being  :  inrdpedt  of  the 
State ,  of  the  thinges  then :  in  which ,  and  by  which ,  the  wondrous  effe&es  were  tH^'an£ 
wrought.  Democritus  and  T heophrasius  affirmed,  that, by  CELufike,  griefes  and  di-  y. chapters, 
feafes  of  the  Minde,and  body  might  be  cured, or  inferred.  And  we  finde  in  Re-  where you 
cord e, that  T er pander,  Anonffmemas^  Orpheus  ^Amphion,Dauid,  Pythagoras^  Empedo-  Jkall  bane 
cles,  jjclepiadesymd  T imotheus, by  Harmonicall  Confonacy,haue  done, and  brought  fom£  occafion 
to  pas, thinges, more  then  meruailous ,  to  here  of.  Of  them  then,  making  no  far-  ffder  to 
der  difcourfe,in  this  place  :  Sure  I  am,  that  Common  Mufike ,  commonly  vfed,  is 
found  to  the  c Muficiens  and  Hearers,to  be  fo  Commodious  and  pleafant ,  That  if  commonly  is 
I  would  fay  and  difpute,but  thus  much:  That  it  were  to  be  otherwife  vfed ,  then  it  thought. 
is, I  iliould  finde  more  repreeuers,  then  I  could  finde  priuy,or  fkilfull  of  my  mea¬ 
ning.  In  thinges  therfore  euident,and  better  knowen,then  I  can  exprefTe:andfo 
allowed  and  liked  of,  (as  I  would  wilh/ome  other  thinges, had  the  like  hap)  I  will 
{pare  to  enlarge  my  lines  any  farder,but  confequently  follow  my  purpofe. 

Of  Cofmograpllie,!  appointed  briefly  in  this  place,  to  gcue  youforae 


intelligence.  Cofmographie,is  the  whole  and  perfed  defeription  of 
the  heauenly,and  alfo  elementall  parte  of  the  world  ,  and  their  ho* 
mologall  application ,  and  mutuall  collation  necelfarie.  This  Art, 
requireth  AHronomie ,  Geographic ,  Hydrographie and  CMttfike .  Therfore ,it  is  no 
finall  Arte, nor  fo  fimple,as  in  common  pra&ife,  itis(iiightly)confidered.  This 
marcheth  Heauen,  and  the  Earth,in  one  frame,and  aptly  applieth  parts  Correfpo- 
dentrSo  ,as,  the  Heauenly  Globe,  may  (in  pradife)  be  ducly  deferibed  vpon  die 
Geographicall ,  and  Hydrographical!  Globe .  And  there ,  for  vs  to  confider  an 
Aqutnociiall  Circle ,  an  Ecliptike  line ,  Colures,  Poles,  Stems  in  thei  r  true  Longitudes, 
Latitudes,Declinations,and  Verricajitie.-alfb  Climes, and  Parallels:and  by  an  Ho¬ 
rizon  annexed, and  reuolution  of  the  earthly  Globe(as  the  Heauen,is,  by  the  Pri- 
fnduantfi  tied  about  in  24.requall  Houres)  to  learne  the  Rifinges  and  Settinges  of 
S  terres  (of Virgill in  his  Georgikes:  of  Hefod:  of Hippocrates  in  his  Medicinall Sphere,  to 
Perdicca  King  of  the  Macedonians:  of  Diodes  pto  King  Antigonus ,  and  of  other  fa¬ 
mous  P  hilo fop  hers  prefcriBecra  thing  necefTary,for  due  manuring  of  the  earth ,  for 
Nauigation, for  the  Alteration  ofmans  body:being,whole,Sicke,wounded,or  bru- 
fed.  By  the  Reuolution ,  alfo ,  or  mouing  of  the  Globe  Cofmographicall ,  the 
Riling  and  Setting  of  the  Sonne:  thcLengthcs,ofdaycs  and  nightes :  the  Houres 
and  times  (both  night  and  dayjareknowne :  with  very  many  other  pleafant  and 
neceffaty  vfes  :  Wherof,  fome  are  known  chut  better  remaine, for  fuch  to  know 
and  vfe.  who  of  a  fparke  of  true  fire,can  make  a  wonderfull  bonfire,  by  applying  of  *■>« 
due  matter, duely.  1  rr 3  ° 

Of  Aftrologie ,  here  I  make  an  Arte,  feuerall  from  AHronomie :  not 
by  new  deuife,  but  by  good  reafon  and  authoritie :  for,  Aftrologie, is  an  Arte 
Mathematical! ,  which  reafonably  demonftrateth  the  operations 
and  effedles,  of  the  naturall  beames,  of  light,  and  fecrete  influence: 
of  the  Sterres  and  P  lanets. :  in  euery  element  and  elementall  body: 

b.iih  at 


lohn  Dee  Lis  Mathem  aticall  P  raeface , 

at  all  times  ,  in  any  Horizon  affigned .  This  Arte  is  furniihed  with  ma¬ 
ny  other  great  Artes  and  experiences:  As  with  perfe&e  Perftecliue,  ^JHronomic, 
Cofmographie,  Natural!  Philofophie  of  the  /{..Elementes, the  Arte  of  Graduation, and 
fome  good  vnderftading  in  CMuftke :  and  yet  moreouer,  with  an  other  great  Arte, 
hereafter  following,  though  I,  here,  fet  this  before,  for  fome  confiderations  me’ 
mouing.  Sufficient  (you  fee)  is  the  ftuffe,  to  make  this  rare  and  fecrete  Arte, of: 
and  hard  enough  to  frame  to  the  Conclufion  Syllogifticall  .  Yet  both  the  mani- 
fblde  and  continuall  trauailes  of.  the  raoft  auncient  and  wife  Philofophers,for  the 
atteyning  of  this  Arte :  and  by  examples  of  effedes ,  to  confirme  the  fame ;  hath 
left  vnto  vs  fufficient  proufe  and  witndfe  •  and  we,alfo,daily  may  pcrceaue ,  That 
mans  body,  and  all  other  Elementall  bodies,  are  altered,  difpofed,  ordred,  pleafu- 
red,  and  difpleafured,  by  the  Influential!  working  of  the  Sunne,Monc, and  the  other 
Starres  and  Planets  .  And  therfore,fayth AriBotle^  in  the  firft  of  his  Meteorological!. 
bookes,  in  thefecond  Chapter Eft  antem  necejfario  Mundus  iUefitpernis  lationibus 
fere  contimus ;  V t,  mde,  vis  tins  vniuerfta  regatur .  Ea  ftquidcm  Caufa  puma  pit  and  a 
omnibus  eft,  vndemotus  principium  exisnt.  That  is:  This  i  Elementally  World  is  of 
necefiitie,  almojl ,  next  adioyning/o  the  heauenly  motions :  T  hat  from  thence , 
nil  his  loertne  or  force  may  hegouerned.  For /hat  is  to  he  thought  thefirf  Caufe 
'Pntoall ;  from  y>hich,the  beginning  of  motion, is .  And  againe,  in  the  tenth 
Chapter,  Opcrtet  igitur  &  bomm  principia  fumamns ,  (ft  cattfits  omnium  ftmiliter. 
Principium  igitur  vt  mouenspracipuumcf  (ft  omnium  primum ,  Cir cuius  tile  eftjn  quo 
manifefte  S oils  latio ,  &c .  Andfo  forth .  His  Meteor ologicall  bookes,  are  full  ofargu- 
mentes,and  effeduall  demonftrations,ofthe  vertue,  operation,  and  power  of  the 
heauenly  bodies,  in  and  vpon  the  fower  Elementes,  and  other  bodies, of  them 
(either  perfectly, or  vnperfedly  )  compofed,  Arid  in  his  fecond  booke.  Be  Genera- 
tione  drCorruptione ,  in  the  tenth  Chapter ,  flup  circa  eftprima  latio ,  Ortusfr  Interi- 
tus  caufa  non  eft:  S ed  obliqui  Circuit  latio :  ea  namift  (ft  continua  ejlftft  daobus  motibus  ft: 
In  Erigliffie,  thus .  Wherefore  the  uppermost  motion,  is  not  the  caufe  of  Gene * 
ration  and  Corruption,  but  the  motion  of  the  Zodiake :  for ,  that ,  both,  is  con * 
tinuall ,  and  is  caufed  of  two  mouinges .  And  in  his  fecond  booke,  and  fecond 
Chapter  of  hys  Phyfikes.  Homo  nam^generat  hominem,  at %  Sol.  For  Man  (lay  th  he) 

and  the  Sonne,  are  caufe  of  mans  generation .  Authorities  may  be  brought, 
very  many :  both  of  1000.2000.yea  and  3000.  y.eares  Antiquitie :  of  great  Philo- 
fophers.  Expert,  Wife,  arid  godly  men,for  that  Conclufion:  which,daily  and  houre- 
dy,we  men,may  difeerne  and  perceaue  by  fenfe  andreafon  :  All  beaftes  do  feele, 
andfimplyihew,  by  their  actions  and  paffions,  outward  and  inward  ;  All  Plants, 
Herbes,  Trees,  Flowers,  and  Fruites .  And  finally,  the  EIementes,and  all  thinges 
of  the  Elementes  compofed,  do  geue  Teftimonie  (as  Ariftotle  fayd)  thattheyr 
Whole  Fdijpoftions,  yertues ,  andnaturall  motions,  depend  of  the  jiffiiuitie  of 
tl heauenly motions  and  Influences .  Whereby,  hefide  the  jftecifcaU  order  and 
forme, due  to  cuery  feede:  and  hefide  the  Flature ,propre  to  the  Indiuiduall ' Ma • 
trix,  of the  thing  produced:  What fhall  he  the  heauenly  Imprefiion,the  perfeCf 
and  circumfieffe  JFlrologien  hath  to  Conclude.  N  ot  onely  (by  Apotelefmesft 0  orb 
but  by  Nat-urall  and  Mathematical!  demonftratipn  Whereunto,  what 

Sciences  are  reqtiifitc  (  without  exception  )  I  partly  haue  here  warned:  And  In  my 
Propadmmes  (  befides  other  matter  there  dficlofed  )  I  haue  Mathematically  furni- 
ihed  vp  the  whole  Method ;  To  this  our  age, not  fo  carefully  handled  by  any,that 

euer 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

cuer  I  faw, or  heard  of.  I  was,  (for  *  2i.yeares  ago)  by  certaine  earneft  difpUtati-  *  Anno.  t  54S 
ons,of  the  Learned  Gerardus  Mercator ,and  Antomus Oogaua,  (and  other, )  therto  fo  and  1 540. ?;j 
prouoked:and(by  my  conftantand  inuirtcible  zeale  to  the  veritie)in  oblcruations  Louayn, 
ofHeauenly  Infliienciesf  to  the  Minute  of  time,  )than,fo  diligent:  And  chiefly  by 
the  Supernatural!  influence,frorn  the  StarreofIacob,(b  directed  .-That  any  Modeft 
and  Sober  Student, carefully  and  diligently  fekingforthe  Truth,  will  both  finde 
&  cofefie,  therin,to  be  the  Veritie, of  thefe  my  wordes:  And  alfo  become  a  Reafo- 
nable  Reformer,  of  three  Sortes  of people:  about  thefe  Influentiall  Operations, 
greatly  erring  from  the  truth.  Wherof,  the  one ,  is  Light  Beleuers,the  other,  Note* 

Light  Del|)ilers,and  the  third  Light  Pracflifers.  The  firft,& moft  comon 

Sort,  thinke  the  Heauen  and  Sterres, to  be  anfwerable  to  any  their  doutes  or  de-  *  * 
fires:  which  is  not  fo;and,in  dedc,they,to  much,ouer  reache.  The  Second  forte 
thinke  no  Influentiall  vertue  (  fro  the  heauenly  bodies  )  to  beare  any  Sway  in  Ge-  *  * 

neration  and  Corruption, in  this  Hlementall  world.  And  to  the  Sunne  ,  Mone  and 
Sterres  ( beingfo  many,fo  pure,fo  bright ,  fo  wonderfull  bigge ,  fo  farre  in  diftancc, 
fb  manifold  in  their  motions ,  fo  conftant  in  their  periodes .  &c  . )  they  affigne  a 
fleight, Ample  office  or  two,and  fo  allow  vnto  the(according  to  their  capacities)as 
much  vertue, and  power  Influentiall,as  to  the  Signe  of  the  Sunne,  Mone,  and  feuen 
Sterres,  hanged  vp(for  Signesjin  Lon  don, for  diftindion  ofhoufes ,  &  fuch  groffe 
helpes,in  our  wordly  affaires:  And  they  vnderftand  not(or  will  not  vnderftand)  of 
the  other  workinges,and  vertues  of  the  Heauenly  Stinne,Mone,  and  Sterres  .•  notfo 
much, as  the  Mariner,or  Hufband  man  :  no ,  not  fo  much, as  the  Elephant  doth,  as 
the  Cynocephalus ,  as  the  Porpentinc  doth :  nor  will  allow  thefe  perfed ,  and  incor¬ 
ruptible  mighty  bodies,  fo  much  v-ertuall  Radiation,  &  Force ,  as  they  fee  in  a  litle 
peece  of  a  Magnes  Hone: which,  at  great  diftance,fheweth  his  operation .  And  per- 
chaunce  they  thinke, the  Sea  &  Riuers  (  as  the  Thames )  to  be  fome  quicke  thing, 
and  fo  to  ebbe,and  flow,  run  in  and  out,  of  them  felues,at  their  owne  fantafies. 

God  helpe,God  helpe.  S urely, thefe  men,come  to  fhort :  and  either  are  to  dull; 
or  willfully  blind:  or, perhaps, to  malicious  .  The  third  man,  is  the  common  and 
vulgare  '^Aftrologien,ot  Pradifer :  who,  being  not  duely,artificially,and  perfedly  3 . 
furnifhed:yet,either  for  vaine  glory,or  gayne :  or  like  a  Ample  dolt,  &  blinde  Bay¬ 
ard,  both  in  matter  and  maner,erreth:to  the  difcredit  of  the  Wary ,  and  modeft  A- 
J?roJoricn:cLnd  to  the  robbing  of  thofe  moft  noble  corporall  Creatures,of  their  Na¬ 
tural!  Vertue:  being  moft  mighty :  moft  beneficiall  to  all  elementall  Generation, 
Corruptiorfand  the  appartenances  -  and  moft  Harmonious  in  their  Monarchic: 

For:  which  thinges, being  knowen, and  modeftly  vfed:we  might  highly,and  conti¬ 
nually  glorifie  God, with  the  princely  Prophet,  faying.  J  he  Heauens  declare 

the  Glorie  of  GodtSoho  made  the  Heaues  in  his  wife  dome:  "Soho  made  the  Sonne , 
for  tohaue  dominion  of the  day :  the  Mone  and  Sterres  to  hauc  dominion  of the 
nygbt:  whereby,®  ay  today  loiter eth  talke:  and  night, to  night  dedaretb  know* 
ledge.tprayje  him, ally e  Sterres, and  Light.  Amen. 

JN  order,  nowfoloweth ,  of Stfttlkc,fomewhat  to  fay,  what  we  meane  by 
that  name: and  what  commodity, doth, on  fuch  Art,  depend.  Statike ,  is  an 
Arte  Mathematicall, which  demonflrateth  the  caufes  ofheauynes, 
and  lightnes  of  all  thynges :  and  of  motions  and  properties ,  to  hea- 
uynes  and  lightnes  ,belonging.  And  for  afmuch  as,  by  the  Bilanx ,  or  Ba¬ 
lancers  the  chieffenfible  Inftrument , )  Experience  of  thefe  demonftrations  may 

b.iiij.  be 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

be  had:  we  call  this  Anfpatike:dn2it  isjhe  Experimentes  of  the  Balance.  Oh,  that  men 
wift,  what  proffit,(aIl  maner  of  wayes)by  this  Arte  might  grow,  to  the  hable  exa- 
»  miner,and  diligent  pra&ifer.  Thou  onely,knoweft all  thinges  precifely  (O  God) 
■”  who  haft  made  weight  and  Balance, thy  Iudgement:.  who  haft  created  all  thinges 
in  Number ^Waight,  and  haft  way  ed  themountaines  andhilsina  Ba- 

lance:  who  haft  peyfed  in  thy  hand ,  both  Heauen  and  earth .  We  therfore  war¬ 
's  ned  by  the  Sacred  word, to  Confider  thy  Creatures.-and  by  that  conftderation,  to 
”  Wynne  a  glyms{asitwere,  )or  lhaddowof  perceiuerance  that  thy  wiledome, 
>>  might,  and  goodnes  is  infinite,and  vnfpeakable,in  thy  Creatures  declared :  And 
”  being  farder  adder  tiled ,  by  thy  mercifull  goodnes ,  that  ,three  principal!  wayes, 
••  were,ofthe,vfed  in  Creation  ofall  thy  Creatures ,  namely ,  Number^  Waight  and 
'»*  OHeafure, And  for  as  much  as,of  2N lumber  and  Meafure, the  two  Artes(aundent,  fa¬ 
s’  mous,and  to  humaine  vfes  moft  neceflary, )  are, ail  ready, fufficiently  kno'wen'  and 
js  extant:  This  third  key ,  we  befeche  thee  ( through  thy  accuftomed  goodnes,) 
«  that  it  may  come  to  thenedefull  and  fufficientknowledge,offuch  thy  Seruauntes, 
”  as  in  thy  workemanlhip ,  would  gladly  finde, thy  true  occaftons  (purpofely  of  the 
>»  vfed )  whereby  we  fhould  glorifie  thy  name, and  ftiew  forth  (to  the  weaklinges  in 
faith)  thy  wondrous  wifedome  and  Goodnes.  Amen. 

Meruaile  nothing  at  this  pang(godly  frend,you  Geiidc  and  zelous  Student.) 
An  other  day, perchaunce, you  will  perceiue,  what  occafion  moued  me.  Here,  as 
now, I  will  giue  you  fome  ground ,  and  withallfomelhew ,  of  certaine  commodi¬ 
ties, by  this  Arte  arifing.  And  bycaufe  this  Arte  is  rare ,  my  Wordes  and  pradlifes 
might  be  to  darke :  vnleaftyou  had  fome  light, hoiden  before  the  mattenand  that, 
beft  will  be, in  giuing  you,out  of  Archimedes  demonftrations,a  few  principal  Con- 
cluftons,as  folowerh. 

1. 

The  Superficies ofeuery  Liquor,  byitfelfe  confiflyng ,and  in 
quyet,  is  Sphxricall  :  the  centre  whereof,  is  the  fame ,  which  is  the 
centre  of  the  Earth. 

2.  .  , 

If  Solide  Magnitudes, being  of  the  fame  bignes,  or  quatitie,  that 
any  Liquor  island  hauyngalfo  the  fame  Waight :  be  let  downe  in¬ 
to  the  lame  Liquor, they  will  fettle  downeward,fo,that  no  parte  of 
them,fhall  be  aboue  the  Superficies  of  the  Liquor  :  and  yet  neuer- 
theles ,they  will  not  finke  vtterly  downe,or  drowne. 

V 

If  any  Solide  Magnitude  beyng  Lighter  then  a  Liquor ,  be,  let 
downe  into  the  fame  Liquor ,  it  will  fettle  downe,  fo  farre  into  the 
fame  Liquor,  that  fo  great  a  quantitie  of  that  Liquor,  as  is  the  parte 
of  the  Solid  Magnitude,  fettled  downe  into  the  fame  Liquor :  is  in 
Waight, squall, to  the  waight  of  the  whole  Solid  Magnitude. 

4* 

Any  Solide  Magnitude ,  Lighter  then  a  Liquor ,  forced  downe 

into 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

ifjto  the  fame  Liquor ,  will  moue  vpward  ,  with  fo  great  a  poweiq 
by  how  much ,  the  Liquor  hauyng  xquall  quantitie  to  the  whole 
Magnitude's  heauyer  then  the  fame  Magnitude, 


J- 


/ 


Any  Solid  Magnitude, heauyer  then  a  Liquor, beyng  let  do  wne 
into  the  fame  Liquor, will  linke  downe  vtterly :  And  wilbe  in  that 
Liquor  ,  Lighter  by  fo  much ,  as  is  the  waight  or  heauynes  of  the 
Liquor, hauing  bvgnes  or  quantitie, squall  to  the  Solid  Magnitude, 


6, 


i.V. 

If  any  Solide  Magnitude ,  Lighter  then  a  Liquor  ,  be  let  downe  Sphar  e  according  to 

1  J  ^  j  i  r  r*  ^  |  |  -111  any  proportion  af- 

into  theiame  Liquor ,  the  waight  or  the  lame  Magnitudewill  be, 
to  the  Waight  of  the  Liquor . (Which  is  aquallin  quantitie  to  the 
whole  Magnitude,)  in  that  proportion ,  that  the  parte ,  of  the  Mag- 
nitude  fettled  downe, is  to  the  whole  Magnitude. 

gY  thefe  verities  ,  great  Errors  may  be  reformed, in  Opinion  of  the  Natural! 

Motion  of  thinges, Light  and  Heauy.  Which  errors, are  in  Natural!  Philofophie 
(almoft  )  of  all  me  allowed.-to  much  trufting  to  Authority /and  falfe  Suppofitions. 

As, Of  any  two  body es, the  heauyer,  to  moue  downward  falter  then 
the  lighter.  This  error,is  notfirftby  me, Noted;  but  by  one  lohn  Baptist  de 
nedichs.  Thechief  of  his  propofitions,is this:  which  feemeth  a  Paradox. 

If  there  be  two  bodyes  of  one  forme,  and  of  one  kynde,  asquail  in  . 

quantitie  or  vnasquall ,  they  will  moue  by  aequall  fp ace,  in  xquall  A*ar  °X* 
tymeiSo  that  both  theyrmouynges  be  in  ay  re ,  or  both  in  water ;  or 
in  any  one  Middle. 

Hereupon ,  in  the  feate  of  Gunny  ng,certar  e  good  difeourfes  (  otherwife)  jV.  T. 
may  receiiie  great  amen  dement,  and  furderance.  In  the  emended  purpofe ,  alio,  rj-i  .  < 

allowing  fomwhat  to  the  imperfection  df Nature :  not  aunfwerable  to  the  preci- 
fenes  oldemon;f  ration .  Moreouer,by  the  forefaid  propofitiofts  (  wifely  vied.)  thefe  Prof  oft - 
The  Ayre,the  water, the  Earth, the  Fire,  may  be  nerely,knowen,how  light  or  hea-  t ions. 
uy  th  y  arc  { N  aturally )  in  their  affigned  partes  :  or  in  the  whole.  And  then,to 
thinges  Eiementall,turningvourprad:ife:  you  may  deale  for  the  proportion  of the 
Eiementes ,  in  the  thinges  Compounded .  Then,  to  the  proportions  of  the  Hu¬ 
mours  in  Man:  their  waightes:  and  the  waight  of  his  bones,  and  fiefh.&c.  Than, 
by  waight, to  haue  confideration  of  the  Force  of  man, any  maner  ofwav:  in  whole 
or  in  pai  t.Then  ,may  you,  ofShips  water  drawing ,  diucrfly,in  the  Sea  and  in  frefh 
water,  haue  plealant  confideration and  ofwaying  vp  of  any  thing,  fonken  in  Sea 
or  mftefli  water  &c .  And  (to  lift  vp  your  head  a  loft :  )  by  waight, you  may, as 
precifely,as  by  any  inftrument  els,meafure  the  Diameters  of  Sonne  and  eMone.&c. 
Frendejpray  you ,  way  thefe  thinges, with  the  iuft  Balance  ofReafon.  And  you 
will  hnde  Memailes  vpon  Meruailes  ;  And  gfteme  one  Drop  of  Truth  (  yea  in 
Naturall  Phtlo,opnie)more  worth,  then  whole  Libraries  of  Opinions,  vndemon- 
ftrated:  or  not  aunfwenng  to  Natures  Law,and  your  experience.  Leaning  thefe 

c-i*  thinges. 


the  waight  of  the 
S phare  thereto 
£wymming> 


A  common 
error  jioted* 


T he  practije 
Statical l,  to 
kriovp  the  pro¬ 
portion,  be- 
txvene  the 
Cube,  and  the 
Sphare 


J.D, 

*  For,  Jo,  bane 
you.  2  5  6, 

partes  of  a 
Gratae. 


*The  proportion  of 
the  Square  to  the 
Circle  infiribed. 


*The  Squaring, of 
the  Circle,Mecha~ 
nically . 

*To  any  Square 
geuen,  to  gene  a 
Circle,  equaU. 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface . 

thinges,thus:I  will  giue  you  two  or  three,light  pra&ifes,  to  great  purpofe :  and  fb 
iinifli  my  Annotation  StaticalL  In  Mathematical!  matters ,  by  the  Mechanidens 
ayde ,  we  will  behold,  here,  the  Commodity  of waight .  Make  a  Cube,of  any 
one  Vniforme :  and  through  like  heauy  ftufFe:  of  the  lame  Stuffe,make  a  Sphere 
or  Globe,precifdy,of  a  Diameter  squall  to  the  Radicall  hdc  of  the  Cube .  Your 
ftuffe,may  be  wood,  Copper,  Tinne,  Lead,SiIuer.&c.  (being, as  I  fayd,oflike  na¬ 
ture  ,  condition, and  like  waight  throughout. )  And  you  may ,  by  Say  Balance, 
haue  prepared  a  great  number  of  the  Imalleft  waightes  :  which,  by  thofe  Balance 
can  be  difeerned  or  tryed.-and  fo,haue  proceded  to  make  you  a  perfed  Pyle,  com¬ 
pany  &  Number  of  waightes:  to  the  waight  oflix,eight,or  twclue  pound  waight: 
moft  diligently  tryed,all.And  of  euery  one  ,  the  Contentknowen,  in  your  lead 
waight,that  is  wayable.  [They  that  can  not  haue  thele  waightes  of  precifenes : 
may, by  Sand, Vniforme, and  well  dufted,makc  them  a  number  of waightes, fome- 
whatnerepredfenes  :  by  hailing  euer  the  Sand :  they  lliall  ,at  length,  come  to  a 
•lead  common  waight.Therein,I  leaue  the  farder  matter, to  their  difcretion,wiiom 
nedelliali  pinche.]  Th  e.  Venetians  conftderation  of  waight ,  may  feme  prccife 
enough:by  eight  delcentes  progrefsionall,*  hailing ,  from  a  grayne.  Your  Cube, 
Sphere, apt  Balance, and  conuenient  waightes,being  ready -fall  to  worker .  Firft, 
way  your  Cube.Note  the  Number  of  the  waight .  Wav, after  that,  your  Sphere. 
N  ore  likewife,th  e  N  uber  of  the  waight.If yo  u  now  find  the  waight  ofyour  C  ube, 
to  be  to  the  waight  of  the  Sph^re,as  21 .  is  to  n.-Then  you  fee,  how  the  Mechani- 
cien  and  Experimenter ,  without  Geometrie  and  Demonftration,  are  (  as  nerely  in 
effed)£ought  the  proportion  of  the  Cube  to  the  Sphere  :  as  I  haue  demonftrated 
it,in  the  end  of  the  twelfth  boke  of  Euclide.  Often ,  try  with  the  lame  Cube  and 
SphcCre.Then,chaunge,your  Sphere  and  Cube,to  an  other  matter:  or  to  an  other 
bignes  :  till  you  haue  made  a  perfed  vniuerfall  Experience  ofit.  Pofsible  it  is, 
that  you  lliall  wynne  to  nerer  termes,in  the  proportion. 

When  you  haue  found  this  one  certaine  Drop  of  Naturall  veritic,procede  on, 
to  Inferre,and  duely  to  make  allay, of  matter  depending.  As,  bycaule  it  is  well  de¬ 
monftrated  ,  that  a  Cylinder ,  whofe  heith ,  and  Diameter  of  his  bafe,is  squall  to 
the  Diameter  of the  Sphere  ,is  Sefquialterto  the  fame  Sphere  (thatis,as  3.  to  2:) 
To  the  n  umber  of  the  waight  of  the  Sphere, adde  halfe  fo  much, as  it  is  :  and  fo 
haue  you  the  number  of  the  waight  of  that  Cylinder.  Which  is  alfo  Compre¬ 
hended  of  our  former  Cube:  So,that  the  bafe  of  that  Cylinder ,  is  a  Circle  deferi- 
bed  in  the  Square ,  wrhich  is  the  bafe  of  our  Cube.  But  the  Cube  and  the  Cy- 
linder, being  both  of  one  heith ,  haue  their  Bafes  in  the  fame  proportion  ,  in  the 
which, they  are ,  one  to  an  other,  in  their  Mafsines  or  Soliditie .  But,before,we 
haue  two  numbers, exprelsing  their  Mafsines  ,  Solidities  ,  and  Quantities ,  by 
Waight  :wherfo  re,  we  haue  *  the  proportion  of  the  Square,to  the  Circle,  inlcribed 
in  the  fame  Square.  And  fo  are  we  fallen  into  the  knowledge  fenlible,  and  Expe¬ 
rimental!  of  ^Archimedes  great  Secret:  of  him ,  by  great  trauaile  of  minde ,  fought 
and  found.  WherFore,to  any  Circle  giuen ,  you  can  giue  a  Square  squall :  *  as 
I  haue  taught, in  my  Annotation, vpon  the  lirft  propolition  of  the  twelfth  boke. 
And  likewile,to  any  Square  giuen, you  may  giue  a  Circle  squall:  *Ifyou  deferibe 
a  Circle,which  lliall  be  in  that  proportion,  to  your  Circle  inlcribed,  as  the  Square 
is  to  the  fame  Circle  -This,you  may  do,by  my  Annotations, vpon  the  lecond  pro¬ 
polition  of  the  twelfth  boke  of  Euclide ,  in  my  third  Probleme  there.  Your  dili¬ 
gence  may  come  to  a  proportion, of  the  Square  to  the  Circle  inlcribed ,  nerer  the 
tmth,then  is  the  proportion  of  14.10  n.  And  confider,  that  you  may  begyn  at 
the  Circle  and  Square,  and  fo  come  to  conclude  of  the  Sph^re,&  the  Cube, what 


John  Dee  his  MathematicathBr.xface. 

their  proportion  is:as  now ,  yon  came  from  the  Sphere  to  the  Circle.  For, of  Sib 
uer,or  Gold, or  Latton  Lamyns  or  plates  (thorough  one  hole  drawees  the  manef 
is)if  you  make  a  Square  figure.-&  way  itrand  then,defcrib.ing  theron,  the  Circle  in 
fcribed:&  cut  of,&  file  away,precifely  (to  the  Circle)  the  ouerplus  of  the  Square: 
you  lhall  then,waying  your  Circle ,  fee, whether  the  waight  of  the  Square ,  be  to 
your  Circle,  as  14.  ton.  As  I  haue  Noted ,  in  the  beginning  of  Cuchdes  twelfth 
boke.&c.after  this  refort  to  my  laft  propofition,vpon  the  laft  of  the  twelfth .  An  d 
there, helpe  your  felfe, to  the  end.  And,  here,  Note  this,  by  the -way .  That  we 
may  Square  the  Circle ,  without  hauing  knowledge  of  the  proportion, of  the  Cir¬ 
cumference  to  the  Diameter :  as  you  haue  here  perceiued .  And  otherwayes 
allb,  I  can  demonftrate  it.So  that, many  haue  cumberd  them  felues  fuperfluoiifly, 
by  trauailing  in  that  point  firft ,  which  was  not  of  neeefsitie,fijrft :  and  alfb  very  in¬ 
tricate.  And  eafily,you  may,  (and  that  diuerfly)  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Circumference:  the  Circles  Quantitie ,  being  firft  knowen.  Which  thing,!  leaue 
to  your  confideratiommaking  haft  to  defpatch  an  other  Magiftrall  Probleme:  and 
to  bring  it,nerer  to  your  knowledge,and  readier  dealing  with, then  the  world  (be¬ 
fore  this  day,) had  it  for  you, that  I  can  tell  of. And  that  is,  A  Mechmicall  Dubblyng 
of  the  Cube:&c.  Which  may,  thus, be  done:  Make  of  Copper  plates, orTyn 
plates, a  fourfquare  vpright  Pyramis,or  a  Cone:  perfectly  fafhioned 
in  the  holow, within  .  Wlierin,  let  great  diligence  be  yfed ,  to  ap~ 
proche  (as  nere  as  may  be )  to  tbe  Mathematical!  perfection  of  thofe 
figures .  At  their  bafes, let  them  be  all  open :  euery  where,  els,  moll 
dole, and  iufl  to.  From  the  vertex,  to  the  Circumference  of  the  bafe 
of  the  Cone:  &  to  the  fides  of  the  bafe  of  the  Pyramis  :Let  q.flraight 
lines  be  drawen,in  the  infide  of  the  Cone  and  Pyramis :  makyng  at 
their  fall, on  the  perimeters  of  the  bafes ,  equall  angles  on  both  fides 
them  felues  ,  with  the  fayd  perimeters .  Thefe  4. lines  ( in  the  Pyra¬ 
mis  :andas  many, in theCone)diuide:one,in  12.  ^quallpartes  :  and 
an  other, in  24. an  other, in  60 ,  and  an  other,  in  100  .  (reckenyng  vp 
from  the  vertex. )  Or  vfe  other  numbers  of  diuifion ,  as  experience 
fh all  teach  you.  Then,*  fet  your  Cone  or  Pyramis,  with  the  vertex 
downward ,  perpendicularly ,  in  refped  of  the  Bafe.  (Though  it  be 
otherwayes, it  hindreth  nothyng.)  So  let  the  moll  fledily  be  flayed. 
N  ow, if  there  be  a  Cube,  which  youwold  haue  Dubbled.Make  you  a  prety  Cube 
of  Copper,  Siluer,  Lead,  Tynne,  Wood,  Stone,  or  Bone.  Or  els  make  a  hollow 
Cube, or  Cubik  coffen,  of  Copper,  Siluer,  Tynne,or  Wood  &c .  Thefe, you  may 
fo  proportio  in  refpeft  ofyour  Pyramis  or  Cone  ,  that  the  Pyramis  or  Cone,  will 
be  liable' to  conteine  the  waight  of  them,  in  water,  3  .or  4.  times  :at  the  leaft:  what 
ftufffo  euer  they  be  made  of.Let  not  your Solid  angle ,  at  the  vertex,be  to  lharpe: 
but  that  the  water  may  come  with  eafe,to  the  very  vertex,of  your  hollow  Cone  or 
Pyramis.Put  one  ofyour  Solid  Cubes  in  a  Balance  apt:  take  the  waight  therof  ex¬ 
actly  in  water  .  Powre  that  water,  (  without  Ioffe  )  into  the  hollow  Pyramis  or 
Cone>quietly.  Marke  in  your  lines, what  numbers  the  water  Cutteth :  Take  the 
waight  of  the  lame  Cube  again  e  .•  in  the  lame  kinde  of  water ,  which  you  had  be¬ 
fore  :  put  that  *  alfo,  into  the  Pyramis  or  Cone, where  you  did  put  the  firft.  Marke 
now  againe,  in  what  number  or  place  of  the  lines,  the  water  Cutteth  them.  Two 

c.ij.  wayes 


Note 

Squaring  of 
the  Circle 
"yitbotuknowt 
ledos  of  the 
proportion  ve- 
tveene  Cir¬ 
cumference 
and'Diame- 
ter. 


ToOubble 

the  Cube  re - 
dilj :  by  Art  - 
Afechanicall : 
depending  vp-  1 
pen  ‘Demon-  - 
ilration  Add- 
thematic  all. 


1.  D. 

T he  ^..fidos  of  this 
Tyramis  muft  be  4. 
Ifofceies  Triangles  4 
like  mdaqmU. 


T.D. 

* In  all  workinget 
with  this  Pyramis 
or  Cone, Let  their 
Situations  be  in  all 
Pointes  and  Condi¬ 
tions,  a  like, or  all 
anetwhileyouare 
about  one  worke.Elf 
you  will  ene. 


I.D. 

*  Conjider  well  whan 
you  muft  put  your 
waters  togyther:  and 
whan, you  muft  emp¬ 
ty  your first  water, 
out  of  your  Pyramis 
or  Cone.  Els  yeti 
WiU  erre. 


*  Vlitruuius. 
Lib.p.Cap.y, 

GT 

God  be  than¬ 
ked  for  this 
Jnuention,dr 
thefrnite  en- 

-*Note. 


Note,  .as  con¬ 
cerning  the 
Spharicall 
Superficies  of 
the  Water. 


KF  » 

>? 

?? 

Ji 

JJ 


*Note. 


Note  this  A- 
bridgement  of 
Dabbling  the 
pube.&C' 


Iohn  D  ee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

wayes  you  may  conclude  your  piirpofe :  it  is  to  wete ,  either  by  numbers  or  lines. 
By  numbers  :  as, if  you  diuide  the  fide  of  your  Fundamental!  Cube  into  fo 
many  squall  partes,  as  it  is  capable  of,conueniently,with  your  cafe ,  and  pre- 
cifenes  of  the  diuifion  .  For,  as  the  number  of  your  firft  and  leffe  line  ( in  your 
hollow  Pyramis  or  Cone,)  is  to  the  fecond  or  greater  (  both  being  counted 
from  the  vertex)  fofhall  the  number  of  the  fide  of  your  Fundamentall  Cube, 
be  to  the  nuber  belonging  to  the  Radicall  fide, of  the  Cube, dubble  to  your  Fun- 
dam entail  Cube:  Which  being  multiplied  Cubik  wife, will  fone  fhew  it  felfe,  whe¬ 
ther  it  be  dubble  or  no ,  to  the  Cubik  number  ofyour  Fundamentall  Cube .  By 
lines, thus;  As  yoiir  lefleand  firft  line, (in  your  hollow  Pyramis  or  Cone,)is  to  the 
fecond  or  greater, fo  let  the  Radicalfide  ofyour  Fundametall  Cube, be  to  a  fourth 
proportionall  line ,  by  the  1 2 .  propofition,  of  the  fixth  boke  of  Euclide  .  Which 
fourth  line,fhall  be  the  Rote  Cubilqor  Radicallfide  of  the  Cube ,  dubble  to  your 
Fundamentall  Cube :  which  is  the  thing  we  defired .  For  this, may  I  ( with  ioy) 
lay, eyphka,  eyphka, eyphka :  thanking  the  holy  and  glorious  Trinity:  hauing 
greater  caufe  therto  ,  then  *  t Archimedes  had  (for  finding  the  fraude  vfed  in  the 
Kinges  Crowne,  of  Gold) :  as  all  men  may  eafily  ludge  :  by  the  diuerfitie  of  the 
frute  following  of  the  one, and  the  other .  Where  I  fipakc  before,  of  a  hollow  Cu¬ 
bik  C offen.-the  like  vle,is  ofit:  and  without  waight.Thus.  Fill  it  with  water,  preci- 
fely  full,and  poure  that  water  into  your  Pyramis  or  Cone,  And  here  note  the  lines 
cutting  in  your  Pyramis  or  Cone .  Againe,fill  your  coffen,like  as  you  did  before. 
Put  that  Water,alfo,to  the  firft .  Marke  the  fecond  cutting  of your  lines .  N ow, 
as  you  proceded  before,  fo  muft  you  here  precede .  *  And  if  the  Cube,  which  you 
lb ou Id  Double,  be  ncuer  lb  great ;  you  haue,  thus,  the  proportion  (in  ftnall )  be- 
twene  your  two  litle  C  ubes :  And  then, the  fide, of  that  great  Cube(to  be  doubled) 
being  the  third  ,  will  haue  the  fourth,  found,  to  it  proportionall :  by  the  12.  of  the 
fixth  ofEuclide. 

N ote,that  all  this  while,”!  forget  not  my  firft  Propofition  Staticall,here  rehear- 
fed:  that,  the  Superficies  of  the  water, is  Spharicall .  Wherein,  vfe  your  diferetion: 
to  the  firft  line,addinga  finall  heare  breadth,more:and  to  the  fecond,halfe  a  heare 
breadth  more, to  his  length  .  For, you  will  eafily  perceaue,  that  the  difference  can 
be  no  greater,  in  any  Pyramis  or  Cone,  of  you  to  be  handled.  Which  you  fhall 
thus  try  e  .  F  or  finding  the fwelling  of  the  water  aboue  leuell .  Square  the  Semidiame¬ 
ter,  from  the  Centre  of  the  earth,to  your  firft  Waters  Superficies .  Square  then, 
halfe  the  Subtendent  ofthat  watry  Superficies  (  which  Subtendentmuft  haue  the 
equall  partes  of  his  meafure,  all  one,  with  thofe  of  the  Semidiameter  of  the  earth 
to  your  watry  Superficies)  :  Sub  trade  this  fquare,ffom  the  firft:  Of  the  refidue, 
take  the  Rote  Square.  That  Rote, Subtrade  from  your  firft  Semidiameter  of  the 
earth  to  your  watry  Superficies :  that,  which  remaineth,  is  the  heith  of  the  water, 
in  the  middle,  aboue  the  leuell .  Which, you  will  finde,  to  be  a  thing  infenfible. 
And  though  it  were  greatly  fenfible,*  yet,  by  helpe  of  my  fixtTheoreme  vpon  the 
laft  Propofition  of  Euclides  twelfth  booke,  noted :  you  may  reduce  all, to  a  true 
Leuell .  But,  farther  diligence,of you  is  to  be  vfed,againft  accidentall  caufes  of  the 
waters  fwelling:as  by  hauing(fomwhat)with  amoyft  Sponge,before,made  moyft 
your  hollow  Pyramis  or  Cone,  will  preuent  an  accidentall  caufe  of  Swelling,  &c. 
Experience  will  teach  you  abundantly :  with  great  eafe,  pleafure,and  comoditie. 

Thus,may  you  Double  the  Cube  Mechanically,  Treble  it,  and  fo  forth,  in  any 
proportion .  N ow  will  I  Abridge  your  paine,  coft,  and  Care  herein.  Without  all 
preparing  ofyour  Fundamentall  Cubes :  you  may  (alike)  worke  this  Conclufion. 
For, that, was  rather  akinde  of  Experimentall  dem6ftration,then  the  fhorteft  way: 

and 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Er^face. 

and  all,  vpon  one  Mathematicall  Demonftration  depending  .  Take  water  (  as 
much  as  conueniently  will  ferue  your  turne :  as  I  warned  before  of  your  Funda¬ 
mental!  Cubes  bignes  )  Way  it  precifely .  Put  that  water, into  your  Pyramis  or 
Cone .  Of  the  lame  kinde  of  water,  then  take  againe,  the  lame  waight  you  had 
before :  put  that  fikewile  into  the  Pyramis  or  Cone .  For,  in  eche  time,  your  mar¬ 
king  of  the  lines,  how  the  Water  doth  cut  them,  Ibail  geue  you  the  proportion  be- 
twen  the  Radicall  fides,crf any  two  Cubes, wherof  the  one  is  Double  to  the  other: 
working  as  before  I  haue  taught  you:*lauing  that  for  you  Fundamental!  Cube  his 
Radicall  fide:  here,you  may  take  a  right  line,  at  pleafure. 

Yet  farther  preceding  with  ourdroppeof  Naturall  truth :  you  may  (now) 

geue  Cubes, one  to  the  other,  in  any  proportio  geue:  Rational!  orlr- 
rationall :  on  this  maner.Make  a  hollow  Parallelipipedon  of  Copper  or  Tinn'c: 
with  one  Bafe  wating,  or  open:as  in  our  Cubike  Coffen.  Fro  the  bottomc  of  that 
Paralielipipedon,raife  vp,many  perpendiculars, in  euery  ofhis  fower  fides.Now  if 
any  proportion  be  alfigned  you, in  right  lines. -Cut  one  ofyour  perpendiculars  (or 
aline  equall  to  it ,  or  lefie  then  it )  likewife :  by  the  lo.of  the  fixth  of Eu elide.  And 
thofe  two  partes ,  fet  in  two  fundry  lines  of thofe  perpendiculars  (  or  you  may  fet 
them  both, in  one  line)  making  their  bcginninges,to  be,  at  the  bale:  and  fo  their 
lengthes  to  extend  vpward  .  Now,  fet  your  hollow  Parallelipipedon,  vpright, 
perpendicularly,fteadie .  Poure  in  water,  handfomly,totheheith  ofyour  Ihorter 
line .  Poure  that  water,  into  the  hollow  Pyramis  or  Cone .  Marke  the  place  of 
the  riling.  Settle  your  hollow  Parallelipipedon  againe  .  Poure  water  into  it: 
vnto  the  heithofthe  fecond  line  ,  exa&ly  .  Poure  that  water  *  duely  into  the 
hollow  Pyramis  or  Cone :  Marke  now  againe,  where  the  water  cutteth  the  lame 
line  whichyoumarkedbefore  .  For,  there,  as  the  firft  marked  line,  is  to  thefe- 
cond  ;  So  fhall  the  two.  Radicall  fides  be,  one  to  the  other,  of  any  two  Cubes: 
which,  in  their  Soliditie,  lhall  haue  the  lame  proportion,  which,  was  at  the  firft  afi 
figned :  wereitRationali  or  Irrationall  .• 

Thus, in  fundry  waies  you  may  furnilhe  your  felfe  with  fuch  ftraungc  and  pro¬ 
fitable  matter:  which, long  hath  bene  wifhed  for.  And  though  it  be  Naturally  done 
and  Mechanically :  yet  hath  it  a  good  Demonftration  Mathematicall .  Which  is 
this  .•  Alwaies  ,you  haue  two  Like  Pyramids  :  or  two  Like  Cones,in  the  proporti¬ 
ons  alfigned :  and  like  Pyramids  or  Cones,are  in  proportion,one  to  the  other,  in 
theproportion  of  their  Homologall  fides  (or  lines)  tripled.  Wherefore,  if  to  the 
firft,  and  fecond  lines,foun  din  your  hollow  Pyramis  or  Cone,  you  ioyne  a  third 
and  a  fourth,  in  continuallpropbrtion  .-  that  fourth  line,  lhall  be  to  the  firft,  as  the 
greater  Pyramis  or  Cone,  is  to  the  lelfe :  by  the  33-of  the  eleuenth  ofEuclide  .  If 
Pyramis  to  Pyramis,  or  Cone  to  Cone,  be  double ,  then  lhall  *  Line  to  Line,  be 
alfo  double,  &c.  But,as  our  firft  line,  is  to  the  fecond, fo  is  the  Radicall  fide  of  our 
Fundamentall  Cube,to  the  Radicall  fide  of  the  Cube  to  be  made ,  or  to  be  dou¬ 
bled:  and  therefore, to  thofe  twaine  alfo,  a  third  and  a  fourth  line ,  in  continuall 
proportion,  ioyned :  will  geue  the  fourth  line  in  that  proportion  to  the  firft,as  our 
fourth  Pyramidall,  or  Conike  line,  was  to  his  firft :  but  that  was  double,  or  tre- 
ble,&c.as  the  Pyramids  or  Cones  were, one  to  an  other  (as  we  haue  proued)  thcr- 
fore,this  fourth,  ihalbe  alfo  double  or  treble  to  the  firft,as  the  Pyramids  or  Cones 
were  one  to  an  other  .*  But  our  made  Cube,is  deferibed  of  the  fecond  in  proporti¬ 
on, of  the  fower  proportionall  lines :  therfore  *  as  the  fourth  line, is  to  the  firft,  lb 
is  that  Cube, to  the  firft  Cube :  and  we  haue  proued  the  fourth  line,  to  be  to  the 
firft,  as  the  Pyramis  or  Cone,  is  to  the  Pyramis  or  Cone Wherefore  the  Cube  is 

c.iij.  to  the 


n 

yy 

yy 

yy 

yy 

}} 

yy 

T ogme  Cubes 
one  to  the  o'— 
t her  in  any 
proportion. 
Ratio  nail  or 
Irrationall. 

yy 

yy 

>t 

it 

j? 

}> 


?> 

?> 

» 

yy 

» 


'  Empty¬ 
ing  the 
firft. 


The  demonfiratient 
vf this  Dubbling  of 
the  Cube  And  of  the 
reft. 


r.D. 

*  Hereby  ,helpe  you, 

filfto  become  a  pr, 
cife  praSHftr.  ^Ant, 
fo  con ftder.horo, no¬ 
thing  at  all .  you  ar 
hindred(ftnftbly ) , 
the  Conuexitie  of 
the  water. 


rBy  the  3!.cf  the  e 
leuenth  bookc  of 
Euclide . 


l.T>. 

*Undy  out  diligence 
in  praftije.can  Jo 
f  in  -tonight  ofiva- 
terjpeiforme  it: 
Therefore, now. you 
are  able  to geue good 
reafon  of  your  whole 
doing. 


* Note  this 
Corollary. 


*T he great 
Commodities 
following  of 

thefe  new  In¬ 
ventions. 


Such  is  the 
Fruiteofthe 
Mathemati - 
tali  Sciences 
and  Artes ♦ 


lohn Dee  his  Mathematicall  Preface. 

to  the  Cube, as  Pyramis  is  to  Pyramis, or  Cone  is  to  Cone .  But  we  *  Suppofc  Py- 
ramis  to  Pyramis,or  Cone  to  Cone,  to  be  double  or  treble.&c.  Therfore  Cube, is 
to  Cube,double,or  treble, &c.Which  was  to  be  demonftrated.  And  of  the  Paralle- 
lipipedo,it  is  euidet ,  that  the  water  Solide  Parallelipipedons,are  one  to  the  other, 
as  their  heithes  are,feing  they  haue  one  bale .  Wherfore  the  Pyramids  or  Cones, 
made  of  thofe  water  Parallelipipedons,are  one  to  the  other, as  the  lines  arefone  to 
the  other) betwene  which,our  proportion  was  affigned  .  But  the  Cubes  made  of 
lines, after  the  proportio  of  the  Pyramidal  or  Conik  homologall  lines, are  one  to  the 
other,as  the  Pyramides  or  Cones  are ,  one  to  the  other  (  as  we  before  did  proue) 
therfore, the  Cubes  made,  flralbe  one  to  the  other,as  the  lines  alfigned,are  one  to 
the  othen'Which  was  to  be  demonftrated.Note.  *This,my  Demonftratiois  more 
generall,then  onely  in  Square  Pyramis  or  Cone:  Confider  well .  Thus ,  haue  I, 
both  Mathematically  and  Mechanically, ben  very  long  in  wordesiyet  fl  truft)no- 
thing  tedious  to  thcm,who,  to  thefe  thinges ,  are  well  affedied.  And  verily  I  am 
forced (auoiding  prolixitiejto  omit  fundry  fuch  things, ealie  to  be  pradifed: which 
to  the  Mathematicien,would  be  a  great  Threafure  :  and  to  the  Mechanicien,no 
fmall  gaine.*N ow  may  you, Betwene  two  lines  ginen ,finde  two  middle 
proportionals, in  Continuall  proportion  :  by  the  hollow  Paralleli- 
pipedon,  and  the  hollow  Pyramis,. or  .Cone..  Now,anyParallelipipedon 
rectangle  being  giuen:thre  right  lines  may  be  found,proportionall  in  any  propor¬ 
tion  aiTigned,ofwhich,ilial  be  produced  a  Parallelipipedon,  a?quall  to  the  Paralle- 
lipipedon  giuen.Hereof,I  noted  fomwhat,vpon  the  36,propolition,ofthe  n.boke 
of Euclide.  N ow,all  thofe  thinges, which  Vitruuius  in  his  Archite<fture,fpecified 
liable  to  be  done,  by  dubbling  of  the  C  ube  Or,  by  finding  of  two-middle  propor- 
tionall  lines,  betwene  two  lines  giuen,may  eafely  be  performed  .  Now,thatPro- 
bleme,  which  I  noted  vnto  you, in  the  end  ofmy  Addition,  vpon  the  34.ofthe  n. 
boke  of  Euclide ,  is  proued  pofsible.  N  ow,may .  any  regular  body,  be  T  ranflormed 
into  an  other, &c.  N ow,  any  regular  body : any  Sphere,  yea  any  Mixt  Solid :  and 
(that  more  is)Irregular  Solides,  may  be  made(in  any  proportio  affigned)like  vnto 
the  body, firft  giuen.  Thus, of  a  Manneken,  (as  the  Dutch  Painters  terme  it)in  the 
fame  Symmetric ,  may  a  Giant  be  made.-  and  that, with  any  gefture,by  the  Manner 
ken  vfed :  and  contrary  wife.N  o  w,  may  you ,  of  any  Mould,  or  Model!  of  a  Ship, 
make  one,of  the  lame  Mould  (in  any  affigned  proportion)  bigger  or  lelfer.  Now, 
may  you,of  any*Gunne,or  little  peece  or  ordinauce,make  an  other,with  the  fame 
Symmetric  ( in  all  pointes)  as  great, and  as  little,as  you  will.Marke  thatr  and  thinke 
on  it ,  Infinitely ,  may  you  apply  this,  fo  long  fought  for, and  now  fo 
eafily  concluded :  and  withall,fo  willingly  and  frankly  communi¬ 
cated  to  fuch,  as  faithfully  deale  with  vertuous  ftudies.Thus,canthe 
Mathematicall  minde, deale  Speculatiuely  in  his  own  Arte:  and  by  good  meanes. 
Mount  aboue  the  cloudes  and  fterres :  And  thirdly, he  can, by  order, Defcend,to 
frame  Naturall  thinges,  to  wonderful!  vfes  :and  when  he  lift ,  retire  home  into  his 
owne  Centre :  and  there,prepare  more  Meanes, to  Afcend  or  Defcend  by :  and, 
all,to  the  glory  of  God ,  and  our  honeft  delegation  in  earth. 

Although,  the  Printer ,  hath  lookedfor  this  Preface, a  day  or  two ,  yet  could  I 
not  bring  my  pen  from  the  paper ,  before  I  had  giuen  you  comfortable  warning, 
and  brief  inftru<ftion  s,offome  of  the  Commodities,by  Statike^  hable  to  be  reaped: 
In  the  reft,I  will  therfore,be  as  brief, as  it  is  pofsible/and  with  all,defcribing  them, 
fomwhat  accordingly.  And  that,you  fhall  percciue,by  this,  which  in  order  com- 

v  ineth 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

meth  next.  For,wheras,  it  is  fo  ample  and  wonderfu  11, that, an  whole  yeare  long, 
one  might  finde fruitfull  matter  therin,to  fpeake  of:and  alfo  in  pra&ile3is  a  Threa- 
fure  endeles  :yet  will  I  glanfe  ouer  it, with  wordes  very  few. 

This  do  I  call  Anthropographte.  which  is  an  Art  reftored ,  and  of 
my  preferment  to  your  Seruice.  I  pray  you,  thinke  of  it ,  as  of  one  of  the  chief 
pointes,of  Humane  knowledge.  Although  itbe,butnow,firft  Cofirmed,  with  this 
new  name  :  yet  the  matter,  hath  from  the  beginning,  ben  in  confederation  of  all 
perfed  P  hilofophers.  Anthropographie,is  the  defcription  of  the  Num¬ 
ber  ,Meafure,  Waight ,  figure,  Situation,  and  colour  of  euery  diuerfe 
thing, conteyned  in  the  perfect  body  of  MAN :  with  certain  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  Symmetric ,  figure ,  waight ,  Characterization,  and  due 
locall  motion, of  any  parcell  of  the  fayd  body,  afsigned;  and  of  N fi¬ 
bers, to  the  fayd  parcell  appertainyng.  This,is  the  onepartofthe  Defini¬ 
tion, mete  for  this  place:  Sufficient  to  notifie,  the  particularitie,  and  excellency  of 
the  Arte:and  why  itis,  here ,  afcribed  to  the  Mathematical.  Yf  the  defcription 
of  the  heauenly  part  of  the  world,had  a  peculier  Art,called  o Ajlronomie If  the  de¬ 
fcription  of  the  earthly  Globe,  hath  his  peculier  arte,call  ed  Geographic.  If  the  Mat¬ 
ching  ofboth,hath  his  peculier  Arte, called  Cofmographic :  Which  is  the  Defcriptid 
of  the  whole,and  vniuerfall  frame  of  the  world :  Why  fliould  not  the  defcription 
of  him,who  is  the  Leife  world:and,fro  the  beginning,called  CVticrocofmtts ( that  is.  M 
JJT  he  Lefte  World.)kn&  for  whole  lake,  and  feruice,all  bodily  creatures  els,  were  t^oe  LcIfe 
created  :  Who,alfo,participateth  with  Spirites,  and  Angels :  and  is  made  to  the  I-  W&rld‘ 
mage  and  fimilitude  of  GW:  haue  his  peculier  Artc'and  be  called  the  frteofArtesi 
rather,  then,  either  to  want  a  name,or  to  haue  to  bale  and  impropre  a  name  i  You 
muft  offundry  profeffions,borow  or  challenge  home ,  peculierpartes  hereofrand 
farder  procede:  as, God,  Nature ,  Reafon  and  Experience  lhall  informe  you.  The 
Anatomiftes  willreftore  to  you,fome  part:  The  Phyfiognomiftes,fome:The  Chy- 
romantiftes  fome.The  Metapofcopiftes,fome:  The  excellent,  Albert  Durer,*.  good 
part: the  Arte  ofPerfpediue,will  fomwhat,for  the  Eye,helpe  forward :  Pythagoras , 
Hipocrates, Plato,Galenus,Meletius,&  many  other  (in  certaine  thinges  )  will  be  Con- 
tributaries.  And  farder, the  Heauen,the  Earth, and  all  other  Creatures, will  eche 
fiew, and  offer  their  Harmonious  feruice  ,  to  fill  vp, that, which  wanteth  hereof: 
and  with  your  own  Experience,  concluding :  you  may  Methodically  regifter  the 
whole, for  the  pofteritie :  Whereby,  good  profc  will  be  had,  of  our  Harmonious, 
and  Microcofinicall  conftitution.  The  outward  Image,and  vew  hereof:  to  the  Art 
of  Zographie  and  Painting,  to  Sculpture ,  and  'Archite&ure (for  Church,Houfe,  Mwocofi 
Fort, or  Ship)  is  moft  necefaiy  and  profitable :  for  that,  itis  the  chiefe  bafe  and  mm. 
foundation  ofthem  .  Lookein  *  Vitruuius, whether  I  deale  fincerely  foryour  *  Lib  y* 
behoufe,  or  no .  Lookein  Alhertus  D ur er us, De  Symmetriahumani  Corporis.  Looke  ^ap • 1  • 
in  the  2  7. and  28.  Chapters, of  the  lecond  booke,  De  occulta  Philofophia  .  Confi- 
der  th eArke  of  Hoe .  And  by  that,  wade  farther .  Remember  the  Delphicall  Oracle 
2i0  S  C  E  T  El  P  S  v  M  (  Kpnoive  thy  felfe  )  fo  long  agoe  pronounced :  of fo 
many  a  Philofopher  repeated :  and  of  the  Wifett  attempted :  And  then,  you  will 
perceaue,  how  long  agoe,  you  haue  bene  called  to  the  Schole,where  this  Arte 
might  be  learned.  Well.  Iam  nothing  affrayde,ofthedildayneoflbme  Rich,  as 
thinke  Sciences  and  Artes,  to  be  but  Seuen.  Perhaps, thole  Such, may,  with  igno¬ 
rance,  and  lhame  enough,  come  fliort  ofthem  Seuen  alio  :  and  yet  neuerthelefe 

c.iiij.  they 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface, 

they  can  not prcfcribe  a  certaine  number  of Artesrand  in  eche, certaine  vnpaflable 
boundes,ro  God,Naturc,and  mans  Induftrie.New  Artes,dayly  rife  vp:  and  there 
O*  was  no  fuch  order  taken, that,  All  Artes,lbould  in  one  age, or  in  one  land, or  of  one 

man,be  made  knowen  tothe  world.Let  vs  embrace  the  giftes  of  God ,  and  wayes 
to  wifedome ,  in  this  time  of  grace ,  from  aboue ,  continually  bellowed  on  them., 
who  thankef  ully  will  receiue  them :  Et  bonis  Omnia  Ccoperabuntur in  bonum. 

Trochilike,  is  that  Art  Mathematical!, which  demonftrateth. 
theproperties  of  all  Circular  motions ,  Simple  and  Compounde. 
And  bycaufe  the  frute  hereofvulgarly  receiued,is  in  Wheles ,  it  hath  the  name  of 
Trochilike :  as  a  man  would  lay ,Whele  Art. By  this  art, a  Whele  may  be  geuen  which 
lhall  moue  ones  about,  in  any  tyme  aligned  .  Two  Wheles  may  be  giuen, 
whofe  turnynges  about  in  one  and  the  fame  tyme,  (  or  equall  tymes)  ,  lhall  haue, 
one  to  the  other,  any  proportionappointed .  By  Wheles,  may  a.  ftraight  line  be 
defcribed :  Likewife,a  Spirail  line  in  plaine,Conicali  Se&ion  Iines,and  other  Irre¬ 
gular  lines,  at  pleafure,  may  be  drawen .  Thefe,  and  fuch  like,  are  principal!  Con- 
clulions  of  this  Arte  :  and  helpe  forward  many  plealant  and  profitable  Mechani- 
Saw  Milks,  call  workcs  :  As  Milles,to  Saw  great  and  very  long  Deale  bordes ,  no  man  being 
by .  Suchhaue  I  feenein  Germany :  and  in  the  Citieof  Prage ;  in  thekingdome 
of  Bohemia :  Coyning  Milles,Hand  Millesfor  Corne  grinding:  Andallmaner  of 
Milles,and  Whele  worke:  By  Winde,  Smoke,  Water,  Waight,  Spring,  Man  or 
Beall, moued .  Take  in  your  hcmd,Agricola  here  CAEctalUca  :  and  then  lhall  you 
(in  all  Mines)  perceaue,how  great  nede  is,  ofWhele  worke.By  Wheles,llraunge 
workes  and  in  credible, are  done  -  as  will, in  other  Artes  hereafter,  appeare.  A  won. 
derfull  example  of  farther  polfibilitie,  and  prefent  commoditie ,  was  fene  in  my 
time,  in  a  certaine  Inllrument:  which  by  the  Inuenter  and  Artificer(before)  was 
folde  for  xx.  Talentes  of  Golde:and  then  had  (by  milFortune)receaued  fome  iniu- 
rie  and  hurt :  And  one  lanellm  of  Cremona  did  mend  the  lame,  and  prefented  it  vn- 
to  the  Emperour  Charles  the  fifth .  Hieronymus  Cardanus ,  can  be  my  witnelle,  that 
therein,  was  one  Whele,  which  moued,  and  that,in  fuch  rate,thar,in  yoco.yeares 
onely,  his  owne  periode  fliould  be  finifiied .  A  thing  almoffc  incredible :  But  how 
farre,l  keepe  me  within  my  boundcs:  very  many  men(yetaliue)  can  tell. 

HellCofophlC,  is  nere  Siller  to  Trochilike:  and  is.  An  Arte  Mathema¬ 
tically  which  demonftrateth  the  defigning  of  all  Spirail  lines  in 
Plaine ,  on  Cylinder ,  Cone ,  Sphere ,  Conoid  ,  and  Spheroid,  and 
their  properties  appertayning  .  The  vfe hereof,  in  Architecture ,  and  di- 
uerfe  Inflrumentes  and  Engines, is  moll  necellary.  For,in  many  thinges,the  Skrue 
worketh  the  feate,  which,  els, could  not  be  performed  .  By  helpe  hereof ,  it  is 
*Atheneus  *  recorded,  that, where  all  the  power  of  the  Citie  of  Syracufa,was  not  hableto 
Ltb.  5  .cap, 2.  moue  a  certaine  Shipfbeing  on  ground)mightie  Archimedes , letting  to ,  his  Skruifh 
Engine ,  caufed  Hiero  the  king ,  by  him  felf ,  at  eafe,to  remoue  her,  as  he  would. 
Trodu.  Wherat,the  King  wondring :  A?ro mans acm-os,  ApyjAi  Aycm-msAo/s. 
Pag.  r  8 .  From  this  day,  forward  (laid  the  King  )  Credit  ought  to  be  giuen  to  Archimedes ,  what 
focuer  he  fayth. 

Pneumatithmie  demonflrateth  by  clofe  hollow  Geometri¬ 
cal!  Figures,(regular  and  irregular  )  theftraunge  properties  ( in  mo¬ 
tion  or  ftay)of  the  Water, Ayre, Smoke ,  and  Fire,in  theyr  cotinuitie, 

and 


Iohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

and  as  they  are  ioyned  to  the  Elementes  next  them.  This  Arte ,  to  the 
Naturall  Philofopher,is  very  profitable:  to  proue,that  Vacuum ,  or  Emetines  is  not 
in  the  world.  And  that, all  N attire,  abhorreth  it  fo  much :  that ,  contrary  to  ordi¬ 
nary  law,the  Elementes  will  moue  or  hand .  As, Water  to  afcend: rather  then  be- 
twene  him  and  Ayre,Space  or  place  lhould  be  left,mOre  then  (naturally)  that  qua- 
titie  of  Ayre  requireth,or  can  fill.  Againe,  Water  to  hang, and  not  defcend: rather 
then  by  defcending,to  leaue  Eiriptines  at  his  backe  .  The  like,  is  of  Fire  and  Ayre: 
they  willdefcend.-when,cither,  their  Cotinuitiefhould  be  dif!blued:or  their  next 
Element  forced  from  them.  And  as  they  willnotbeextended,todifcontinuitie: 
So, will  they  not, nor  yet  of  mans  force,canbe  preft  or  pent,in  fpace ,  notfufhcient 
and.aunfwcrable  to  their  bodily  fubftance.Great  force  and  violence  will  they  vfe, 
to  enioy  their  naturall  right  and  Iibertie.  Hereupon,  two  or  three  men  together, 
bykeping  Ayrevnder  a  great  Cauldron,  and  forcyng  the  fame  downe,  orderly, 
may  without  harme  defcend  to  the  Sea  bottome :  and  continue  there  a  tyme  &c. 
Where,N ote,how  the  thicker  Element(as  the  Water)giueth  place  to  the  thynner 
(as, is  the  ayre:)and  receiueth  violence  of  the  thinner, in  maner.  Sec.  Pumps  and 
all  maner  of  Bello  wes,  haue  their  ground  of  this  Art:  and  many  other  ftralinge  dc- 
uifes.  Asflydraulica&rganes  goyng  by  water.  Sec.  Of  this  Feat,  (called  common¬ 
ly  Pneumatica> )  goodly  workes  are  extant ,  both  in  Greke,and  Latin .  With  old 
and  learned  S  chole  m en,it  is  called  S dentin  de pleno  &  vacuo. 

Menadrie,  isan  Arte  Mathematicall, which  demonfirateth, 
how ,  aboue  Natures  vertue  and  power  fimple :  Vertue  and  force 
may  be  multiplied  :  and  fo,  to  dired,to  lift,  to  pull  to ,  and  to  put  or 
caft  fro  ,  any  multiplied  or  fimple ,  determined  Vertue ,  Waight  or 
Force:  naturally, not, fo ,  diredible  or  moueable.  Very  much  is  this  Art 
furdred  by  other  Artes  •  as,  in  fome  poihtes,  by  Perjfeciiue:  in  fome,  by  St  at  ike :  in 
fome,by  Trochili  ke.znd  in  othcr,by Helicofophie.-znd  Pneumatithmie.  By  this  Art, 
all  Cranes, Gybbettes,&  Ingines  to  lift  vp ,  or  to  force  any  thing, any  maner  way, 
are  ordred :  and  the  certaine  caufe  of  their  force, is  knoWne :  As,  the  force  which 
one  man  hath  with  the  Duche  waghen  Racke:therwith,to  fet  vp  agayne,a  mighty 
waghenladen,befng  ouerthrowne.  The  force  of  the  Croflebow  Racke,  is  certain¬ 
ly,  here,demonftrated.The  reafon,why  one  m5,  doth  with  a  Ieauer,Iift  that8which 
Sixe  men,  with  their  handes  onely,  could  not,  fo  eafily  do.  By  this  Arte,in  ottr 
common  Cranes  in  London ,  wherepowreisto  Cranevp,thewaight  df  2000. 
pound: by  two  Wheles  more  (by  good  order  added  )  Arte  concluded!,  that  there 
may  be  Craned  vp  20oooo.pound  waight  &c.So  well  knew  Archimedes  this  Arte.* 
that  he  alone, with  his  deuifes  and  engynes,(twife  or  thrife)fpoyIed  and  difeomfi- 
ted  the  whole  Army  and  Hofte  of  the  Romaines,  befieging  Syracufa,  Marcus  Mar- 
cellus  the  Confed,  being  their  Generali  Capitaine.  Such  huge  Stones,  fo  many, with 
fuch  force ,  and  fo  farre ,  did  he  with  his  engynes  hay  le  among  them,  out  of  the 
Citie.  And  by  Sea  likewife :  though  their  Ships  might  come  to  the  walls  ot'Syra- 
cufa ,  yet  hee  vtterly  confounded  the  Romaine  Nauye.  >  What  with  his  mighty 
Stones  hurlyng:  what  with  Pikes  of*  /  8  fote  long, made  like  lhaftes:  which  he  for¬ 
ced  almoft  a  quarter  of  a  myle.What,  with  his  catchy  ng  hold  of  their  Shyps  ,  and 
hoyfing  them  vp  aboue  the  water  ,  and  fuddenly  letting  them  fail  into  the  Sea  a- 
gaine:what  with  his*  Burning  Glades; by  which  he  fired  their  other  Shippcs  afar- 
of:  what, with  his  other  pollicies, deuifes,  and  engines,  he  fo  manfully  acquit  him 
felfe :  that  all  the  Fotce,courage,and  pollicie  of  the  Romaines  (for  a  great  feafon) 

d.j.  could 


To  goto  the 
bottom  of  the 
Sea  Without 
damoer. 

o 


Plutarchus  in  Mir* 
eo  Marcello . 
Synejiusia  Epifio * 
lis. 

Polybius* 

Plinius. 

QuintilUnus. 

T.  Liuius. 
*iAthen&uf, 


*  Qalenus. 

o 

xAnthemtus. 


‘Burning 

GLtJfes. 


Games* 


lohn  Dee  his  Matheifiatkall  Preface . 

could  nothing  prcuailc/or  the  winning  ofSyracula.  Wherupon ,  the  Romanes 
named  Archimedes, Briareus^nd  Cmtimmus.  Zonaras  maketh  mention  of  one  Pro-* 
clftSj who  fo  well  had  perceiued  Archimedes  Arte  of  c Memdrie ,  and  had  fb  well  in* 
uented  of  his  owne  ,  that  with  his  Burning  Glades,  being  placed  vpon  the  walks 
of  Byfance ,  he  multiplied  lb  the  heate  of  the  Sunne,and  direded  the  bcames  of 
the  lame  again  ft  his  enemies  Nauie  with  fuch  force ,  and  fo  fodeinly  ( like  lighte- 
ning)that  he  burned  and  deftroyed  both  man  and  ihip .  And  Dion  fpecifieth  of 
Prijcits, a  Geometrickn  in  Bylance,  who  inuented  and  vied  fondry  Engins,  of  Force 
multiplied :  Which  was  caule,  that  the  Empcroxr  Seuerus  pardoned  him,  his  lifc,af* 
ter  he  had  wonne  BylancecBycaufe  he  honored  the  Arte ,  wytt,  and  rare  induftrie 
of P  rife  ft s.  But  nothing  inferior  to  the  inuention  of  thefe  engines  of  Force,  was  the 
inuention  ofGunnes.  Which,  from  an  Englifh  man, had  the  occalion  and  order 
of  firft  inuenting:  though  in  an  other  Iand,and  by  other  men,it  was  firft  cxecuted.- 
And  they  thatlhould  fee  the  record,  where  the  occalion  and  order  general!,  of 
3)  Gunning, is  firft  difcourfed  of,wouid  thinke:  that,linall  thinges,llight5and  comon : 
3,  commingto  wife  mens  confideration,and  induftrious  mens  handling ,  may  grow 
,3  to  be  of  force  incredible. 

Hypogciodie,  is  an  Arte  Mathematical!,  demonftratyng,how, 
vnder  the  Sphxricall  Superficies  of  the  earth,  at  any  depth,  to  any 
perpendicular  line  afsigned(whofe  diftance  from  the  perpendicular 
of  the  entrance:  and  the  Azimuth  ,likewife, in  refped:  of  the  faid  en¬ 
trance,  is  knowen)  certaine  way  may  be  prarfcribed  and  gone :  And 
how,  any  way  aboue  the  Superficies  of  the  earth  deligned ,  may  vn~ 
d^r  earth, at  any  depth  limited ,  be  kept  :  goyng  alwayes ,  perpendi¬ 
cularly  ,vnder  the  way  ,  on  earth  defigned  :  And,  contrarywife,Any 
way,(ftraight  or  croked ,  )vnder  the  earth,  beynggiuen  :  vppon  the 
vtface, or  Superficies  of  the  earth, to  Lyne  out  the  fame :  So, as,  from 
the  Centre  of  the  earth  ,  perpendiculars  drawen  to  the  Spherical! 
Supefficies  of  the  earth,  fhail  precifely  fall  in  the  Correfpondent 
poirites  of  thofe  two  wayes  .  This ,  with  all  other  Cafes  and  cir- 
cumftances  herein ,  and  appertenances ,  this  Arte  demonftrateth . 
This  Arte,  is  very  ample  in  vanetie  of  Conclusions :  and  very  profitable  fundry 
wayes  to  the  Common  Wealth .  The  occafion  of my  Inuenting  this  Arte, was  at 
the  requeft  of  two  Gentlemen, who  had  a  certaine  worke(  of  gaine)  vnder  ground: 
and  their groundes  did  ioyne  ouer  the  worke :  and  by  reafon  of  the  crokednes, 
diuers  depthes,  and  heithes  of  the  way  vnder  ground ,  they  were  in  doubt,  and  at 
controuerfie,  vnder  whofe  ground,  as  then,  the  worke  was  *  The  name  onely  (be¬ 
fore  this  )  was  of  me  publifhed,  Deltinere  Snbtcrraneo  The  reft, be  at  Gods  will. 
For  Pioners,  Miners,  Diggers  for  Mettalls,  Stone,  Cole,  and  for  fecretepaffages 
vnder  ground, betwene  place  and  place  (as  this  land  hath  diuerie)  and  for  other 
purpofes^any  man  may  eafily  perceaue,  both  the  great  fruite  of  this  Arte,  and  alfo 
in  this  Arte,  the  great  aide  of  Geometric. 

Hydragogie,  demonftrateth  the  poffible  leading  of  Water, by 
Natures  lawe  ,  and  by  artificial  helpe  ,  from  any  head  (being a 

Spring,  {landing,  or  running  Water  )  to  any  other  place  affigned. 

Long 


Iohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface, 

Long, hath  this  Arte  bene  in  vfe :  and  much  thereof  written :  and  very  marueilous 
workes  therein, performed :  as  may  yetappeare,in  Italy :by  the  Kuynes  remaining 
of  the  Aquedu&es .  In  other  places, of  Riuers  leading  through  the  Maine  land* 

Nauigable  many  a  Mile.  And  in  other  places,of  the  marueilous  forcinges  of  Wa¬ 
ter  to  Afcend .  which  all, declare  the  great  fkiIl,to  be  required  ofhim,who  fhould 
in  this  Arte  be  perfe&c,  for  all  occafions  of  waters  poftlble  leading .  T  o  Ipeakc 
of  the  allowance  of  the  Fall, for  euery  hundred  foote:  or  of  the  Ventills  (if  the  wa¬ 
ters  labour  be  farre,and  great)  I  neede  not  .•  Seing,  at  hand  (about  vs)many  expert 
men  can  fufficiently  teftific,  in  effe&c,  the  order  :  though  the  Demonftration  of 
the  N  eceifitie  thereof*  they  know  not  :  N  or  yet ,  if  they  lhould  be  led*  vp  and 
downe,  and  about  Mountaines,  from  the  head  of  the  Spring:  and  then, a  place  be¬ 
ing  afligned :  and  of them,  to  be  demaunded,  how  low  or  high,  that  laft  place  is,  in 
refpe&e  of  the  head,  from  which  (fo  crokediy,  and  vp  and  downe  )  they  be  comes 
Perhaps,they  would  not,  or  could  not,  very  redily,or  nerely  afloyle  that  quefrion. 

Geometric  therefore,  is  neceflary  to  Hydragogie .  Of  the  fimdry  wayes  to  force  wa¬ 
ter  to  afcend ,  eyther  by  T ympane,  Kettell mills,  Skrue ,  Cteftbike ,  or  filch  like :  in  Vi~ 
truuim,  ^Agncola,  (and  other,) fully, the  maner  may  appeare .  And  fo, thereby ,alfb 
be  m oft  euident,  how  the  Artes,  of  P neumatithmie, Heiicofophie,  Statike ,  Trochihke , 
and  CMenadrie ,  come  to  the  furniture  of  this,in  Speculation,  and  to  the  Corn  mo¬ 
di  tie  of  the  Common  Wealth,in  praftife. 

Horometrie,  is  an  Arte  Mathematical!,  which  demofbrateth, 

how, at  all  times  appointed,  theprecife  vfuall  denominatio  of  time, 
may  be  knowen, for  any  place  afligned .  Thefe  wordes,are  finoth  and 
plaine  ealie  Englilhe,  but  the  reach  of  their  meaning, is  farther,  then  you  woulde 
lightly  imagine .  Some  part  of  this  Arte,  was  called  in  olde  time,  Gnomomce:  and 
of  lat  eflorologiographia :  and  in  Englilhe, may  be  term  ^Dulling  .  Auncient  is 
the  vfe ,  and  more  auncient,is  the  Inuention .  The  vfe,doth  well  appeare  to  haue 
bene  (at  the  Ieaft)  aboue  two  thoufand  and  three  hundred  yeare  agoe in  *  King  ^Reg.zo* 
K^dchaz,  Diall,  then,by  the  Sunne,lhewing  the  diftin&ion  of  time .  By  Sunne, 
Mone,and  Sterres,this  Dialling  may  be  performed, and  the  precife  Time  of  day  or 
night  kno  wen .  But  the  demonftratiue  delineation  of  thefe  Dialls,of  all  fortes* 
requireth  good  fkill, both  of  AHronomie, and  Elementall, SphccricalfPhx- 

nomenaII,and  Conikall .  Then, to  vfe  the  groundes  of  the  Arte,  for  any  regular 
Superficies,  in  any  place  offred :  and  ( in  any  poflible  aptpofition  therof)  theron, 
to  defcribe  (  all  maner  of  wayes )  how,  vfualLho  wers,  may  be  (  by  the  $  times  flia- 
dow  )  truely  determined :  will  be  found  no  Height  Painters  worke .  So  to  Paint* 
and  prefcribe  the  Sunnes  Motion, to  the  breadth  ofaheare.  In  this  Feate(in  my 
youth )  I  Inuented  a  way, How  in  any  Horizontall,Murall,or  ./Equine- 
dtiall  Diall, &c.  At  all  howers (the  Sunne  fhining)  the  Signe  and  De- 

gree  afcendent,may  be  knowen .  which  is  a  thing  vetf  neceffary  for 
the  Riling  of  thole  fixed  Sterres :  whofe  Operation  in  the  Ayre,  is  of  great  might, 
euidently .  I  Ipeake  no  further, of  the  vfe  hereof.  But  forafmuch  as, Mans  affaires 
require  knowledge  of  Times  &  Momentes,when,neither  Sunne,Mone,or  Sterre, 
can  be  fene:  Therefore, by  Induftrie  Mechanical!,  was  inuented,firft,how,by  Wa- 
ter,running  orderly, the  Time  and  howers  mightbe  knowen:  whereof,  theVamous 
Cteftbms ,  was  Inuentor :  a  man,  of Vitruuius,  to  the  Skie  (iuftly)  extolled .  Then, 
after  that,  by  Sand  running,were  howers'  meafured  :  Then,bv  TrocMke  with 
waight :  And  of  late  time,  by  Trochilike  with  Spring :  without  waight.  All  thefe, 

d.ij.  by- 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface  . 

by  Sunne  or  Sterres  diredion  ( in  certaine  time )  require  ouerfight  and  reformati¬ 
on,  according  to  the  heauenly  dsquinodiall  Motion:  befidesthe  ineequalitie of 
their  owne  Operation .  There  remayneth  (without  parabolicall  meaning  herein) 
Afcrfctuall  among  the  Philofophers,a  more  excellent,  more  commodious,and  more  maruei- 
lous  way,  then  all  thefe  .*  ofhauing  the  motion  of  the  Primouant  (or  firft  a?quino- 
diall  motion, )by  Nature  and  Arte,Imitated:  which  you  fhall  (  by  furder  fearch  in 
waightier  ftudyes  )  hereafter, vnderftand  more  of.  And  fo,  it  is  tyme  to  firiifh  this 
Annotation,of  Tymes  diftindion,vfed  in  our  common,and priuate  affaires:  The 
commoditie  wherof,no  man  would  want, -that  can  tell,  how  to  beftow  his  tyme. 

Zograpllie^is  an  Arte  Mathematicall, which  teacheth  and  de- 
monftrateth ,  how ,  the  Interfedlion  of  all  vifuall  Pyramides ,  made 
by  any  playne  al signed,  ( the  Centre,  diftance,and  lightes,beyng  de¬ 
termined)  may  be,  bylynes,and  due  propre  colours,  reprefen  ted. 
A  notable  Arte, is  this*and  would  require  a  whole  Volume, to  declare  the  proper¬ 
ty  thereof:  and  the  Commodities  enfuyng .  Great  fkili  of  Geometric,  LsArithme- 
uke^PerJpeclme,  and  Antkropographie,  with  many  other  particular  Artes,hath  the  Zo¬ 
grapher,  nede  of  for  his  perfedion.For,  the  moft  excellent  Painter, (who  is  but  the 
propre  Mechanicien,  &  Imitator  fenfible,  of  the  Zographer)  hath  atteined  to  fuch 
perfedion,that  Senfe  of  Man  and  beaft,haue  iudged  thinges  painted,  to  be  things 
naturalfand  not  artificial!  :aliue, and  not  dead.This  Mechanicall  Zographer  ('com¬ 
monly  called  the  Painter)is  meruailous  in  his  fkill:and  feemeth  to  haue  a  certaine 
diuine  power:  As,offrendes  abfent,to  make  a  frendly ,  prefent  comfort :  yea,  and 
of  frames  dead, to  giue  a  continual! ,  filent  prefence :  not  onely  with  vs ,  but  with 
our pofteritie, fomany  Ages.  Andfoprocedyng,  Confider,How,in  Winter, he 
can  fhew  you, the  liuely  vew  of  Sommers  Toy, and  riches:and  in  Sommer,exhibite 
the  countenance  of  Winters  dolefu.U  State, and  nakednes.Cities,Townes, Fortes, 
Woodes,  Armyes, yea  whole  Kingdomes  (be  they  neuerfofarre,or  greate)  can 
he,with  eafbjbring  with  him,  home  (to  any  mans  Judgement )  as  Paternes  liuely, 
of  the  thinges  rehearfed.  In  one  little  houfe,  can  he,enclofe(with  great  pleafure 
of  the  beholders,)  the  portrayture  liuely,of  all  vifible  Creatures,either  on  earth,or 
in  the  earth, liuitig:  or  in  the  waters  lying,Creping,fiyding,or  fwimmingior  ofany 
foule,or fly, in  the  ayre  flying.  Nay, in  refped of  theStarres,the Skie,the  Cloudes: 
yea,in  the  fliew  of the  very  light  it  felfe  (that  Diuine  Creature  )  can  he  match  our 
eyes  Iudgement,moft  nerely.  Whata  thing  is  this'thinges  notyet  being,he  can 
reprefent  fo ,  as, at  their  being, the  Picture  fhall  feame  (in  maner)to  haue  Created 
them.  To  what  Artificer, is  not  Pidure,a  great  pleafure  and  Commodities  Which 
of  them  all, will  refufe  the  Diredion  and  ayde  ofPidure'The  Archited,the  Gold- 
fmith'and  the  Arras  Weauer :  ofPidure,make  great  account.  O  ur  liuely  Herbals, 
our  portraitures  ofbirdes,  beaftes,ancl  fifties  :  and  our  curious  Anatomies,which 
way,are  they  moll:  perfedly  made,or  with  moft  pleafiire,ofvs  beholden?  Is  it  not, 
by  Pidure  onely?  And  if  Pidure ,  by  the  Induftry  of  the  Painter,  be  thus  commo¬ 
dious  and  meruailous:  what  fhall  be  thought  of Zographie, the  Scholemafter  ofPi- 
dure,and  chief  gouernor?  Though  I  mention  not  Sculpture ,in  my  T able  ofArtes 
Mathematicall :  yet  may  all  men  perceiue,How,that  Picture  and  Sculpture ,  are  Si¬ 
fters  germaine:and  both, right  profitable ,  in  a  Commo  wealth.and  of  Sculpture, zf- 
well  as  of  Pitiure,excellent  Artificers  haue  written  great  bokes  in  commendation. 
Witnefle  I  take, of  Georgia  Vafarijittore  Aretino:of  Pomponius  Gauricus :  and  other. 
To  thefe  two  Artes,  (with  other,  )is  a  certaine  od  Arte ,  called  Althalmafat,  much 
beholdyng:  more,  then  the  common  Sculptor ,Entayler,Keruer,  Cutter, Grauer,  Foun - 


Iohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

der,  or  Paynter(&c)knovf  their  Arte,to  be  commodious. 

Ar chltecture^to  many  may  feme  not  worthy,  or  not  mete,  to  be  reckned  -An  obiettion, 
among  the  Artes  UVtathematicall.To  whom, I  thinke  good, to  giue  fome  account  of 
my  fb  doyng.N'ot worthy,  (will  they  fay,)bycaufe  it  is  but  for  building, of  a  houfe, 

Pallace, Church, Forte, or  fuch  like,groffe  Workes.And  you,alfo,  defined  the  Artes 

OWathanaticalljLQ  be  fuch, as  dealed  with  no  Materiallor  corruptible  thing: and  al- 

fo  did  demonftratiuely  procedein  their  faculty  ,by  Number  or  Magnitude .  Firft, 

you  fee, that  I  covmt fetdyArchiteclurey  among  thole  ^Artes  Mathematically  which  The  Aufwer, 

are  Deriued  from  the  Principals :  and  you  know ,  that  fuch,may  deale  with  Na- 

turall  thinges,and  fenfible  matter ,  Of  which ,  fome  draw  nerer,to  the  Simple  and 

abfolute  Mathematicall  Speculation, then  other  do  .  And  though, the  Architect  ” 

procureth,  enformeth,  &  diredeth,the  Mechanicienf. o  handworke,  &  the  building  ” 

aduall,ofhoufe,Caftell,or  Pallace,  and  is  ehiefludgeofthefame :  yet ,  with  him 

felfe  (as  chief  CWafier  and  Architect  >  )  remaineth  the  Demonftratiue  reafon  and 

caufe,  of  the  Mechaniciens  worke.-  in  Lyne,plaine,  and  Solid :  by  Geometrically  A-  ” 

rithmeticall,Opticall,Muficall,AttronomicallyCofmographicall  ( &  to  be  brief)  by  all  the  ” 

former  Deriued  Artes  Mathematically  and  other  Naturall  Artes,hable  tot>e  confir-  ** 

med  and  ftablifhed.If  this  be  fo:  then,  may  you  thinke, that  Architecture, hath  good 

and  due  allowance ,  in  this  honeft  Company  of  Artes.  CMathematicall  Deriuatiue. 

I  will,herein,craue  Iudgement  of  two  moft  perfed  Architefies :  the  one ,  being  Vi- 
truuius,  the  Romaine :  who  did  write  ten  bookes  thereof, to  the  Emperour  ^Augu¬ 
stus  ( in  whofe  daies  our  Heauenly  Archemafter,  was  borne  )  :  and  the  other,  Leo 
Baptifla  Alhertus ,  a  Florentine :  who  alfo  published  ten  bookes  therof .  oArchi- 
tetlura  ( fayth  Vitruuius )  est  Scientia  pluribus  dijciplinis  dr  ruarijs  eruditionibus  or n  at  as 
cuius  Iudicio  probantur  omnia ,  qua  ab  cater  is  Artifcibus  perficiuntur  opera  .  That  is. 
Architecture,  is  a  Science  garnifhed  with  many  doCtrines  &  diuerfe 
inftruCtions :  by  whofe  Iudgement,  all  workes,by  other  workmen 
finifhed,  are  Illdged  .  It  followeth.&z  nafcitur ex  Fabrica ,  dr  Ratiocinatione.&e. 

Ratiocinatio  auttm  eft,  qua,res fabrtcatas,S  olertia  ac  ratione  proportions >demonBr are  atifi 
exphcare  potest .  jdrchiteffiure  groweth  ofFramingfind  %eafoning.i?c.  %ea* 
foningyis  ibdifwnch  of  t  hinges framed fiicith forecaft ,and proportion:  can  make 
demonstration^  and  manif eft  declaration  .  Againe.  Cum ,  in  omnibus  enim  re¬ 
bus,  turn  maxim l  etiam  in  Architectura,  hac  duo  infunt :  quod  fignifcatur,  dr  quod  figni- 
ficat .  Significant propofit a  res,  de  qua  dicitur  rhanc  autem  Si^mficat  Demonfiratioyrati- 
onibus doctrinarum explicata  .  Forafmuch  as  ,  in  all  t  hinges*  therefore  chiefly 
in  jdrc  hit  effur ey  t  hefe  two  thinges  are  :the  thing  fignifted:  and  that  Oflicb  fig • 
nifieth ,  The  thing  propounded ,  thereof  Wjpedke,  is  the  thing  Signified. 

But  ■Demonftr ation  ,expreffed  Toith  thereafonsof diuerfe  doSirines  ftoth  Jigni* 

fie  the  fame  thing .  After  that  .Ft  liter aius fit ,  peritus  Graphidos,eruditus  Geometria , 
dr  Optices  non  ignarus  :  infiructus  Artthmetica-.hifiorias  complures  nouerit ,  Philofophos 
dmgenter.audiuerit:%Muficamftiuerit  \  Medicina  non  fit  ignarus,  refionfa  lurijperitoru 
nouerit:  Afirologiam,  Calife  ratipn.es  cognitas  habeat  .An  Architect  (fayth  he)  ought 
to  ynderftand  Languages  yto  be  fkilfull  ofF  ainting ,  mellinftruffied  in  Geome * 
trie,  not  ignorant  ofFerJpeffiiue , furnijhed'toith  Arithmetike  faue  knowledge 
of  many  hiftories,  and  diligently  haue  hard  Fhilofophers y  haue  f  kill  of  Mu> 
fike,  not  ignorant  ofFlyfike ,  know  the  aunfweres  of  Lawyers ,and  haue  Aftro - 

d.itj.  nomiey 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

nomie,  and  the  courfes  C&lefliall ,  in  good  knowledge .  He  geueth  reafon  5  or¬ 
derly,  wherefore  all  thefe  Artes,Do&rines,and  Inftru&ions,  are  requisite  in  an  ex¬ 
cellent  Architect .  And  (for  breuitie)  omitting  the  Latin  text, thus  he  hath. 
Secondly,  it  is  behofefull for  an  Architedto  haue  the  knowledge  of  Taint  in?: 
that  he  may  the  more  eafilie fajhion  out fin patternes painted ,the forme  of  what 
Worke  he  liketh.  And  Geometrie,geuethto  Architecture  manyhelpes :  and first 
teacheth  the  Vfe  of the  flute,  and  the  Cumpafie:  wherby  (chiefly  and  eafilie )  the 
defcriptions  of  Buildinges ,  are  defpatched  in  Groundplats:  and  the  directions  of 
S  quires  ,Leuells  , and  Lines.  Likewifefiy  TerJpeCtiue/he  Light es  of the  be  a* 
nen,are  1 Kell  led  Jin  the  buildinges :  from  certaine  quarters  of  the  World .  (By 
Arithmetike  ,the  charges  of  Buildinges  are fiummed  together:  the  meafures  are 
exprefied,  and  the  hard  questions  of  Symmetries,  are  by  Geome tricall  Meanes 
and  Methods  difcourjed  on.  tyre.  Befides  this ,of the  Nature  of  tbinges( which 
in  Greke  is  called  ?u<7ioXo/i&  )  Thilojophie  doth  make  declaration  .  Which,  it  is 
neceffary ,for  an  Architect, with  diligence  to  haue  learned :  becaufe  it  hath  ma • 
nyand  diners  naturall  queftions:  asfpeciallyfin  Aqueducdes .  For  in  their 
courfes,  leadinges  about,  in  the  leuell ground,  and  in  the  mountinges ,  the  natu * 
rail  Spirit  es  or  breathes  areingendred  diners  Wayes  :  The  hindrances ,  which 
they  caufe,  no  man  can  helpe,  but  be, 'Which  out  ofThilofophie,  hath  learned  the 
originall  caufes  of thinges .  Like  wife , who foeuer  flail  read  Ctefibius,  or  Ar» 
chimedes  bookesf  and  of others, who  haue  written fuel?  flules)can  not  thinke,as 
they  do :  'bnleffe  he  f  ull  haue  receaued  of  Thilofophers ,  inflruCiions  in  thefe 
thinges  .  And  Mufike  he  mufti  nedes  know :  that  he  may  haue  lender  standing, 
both  of  Tegular  and  Mathematicall  Mufike:  that  he  may  temper  Well  his  Ba* 
liftes,  Catapultes , and  Scorpions.  iyc.  Moreouer ,the  Brafen  Veffels , which  in 
T  beatres,ate  placed  by  Mathematicall  order, in  ambries  fender  the  Steppes:  and 
the  diuerfities  of  the foundes  (which y  Grecians  call  w  )  are  ordred  according 
to  Mu  f  call  Symphonies  W  Harmonies:being diflributed in y  Circuites, by  (Di* 
ateffaronJDiapente,and  (Diapafon.  That  the  conuenient  boy  ce,  of  the  players 
found, whe  it  came  to  thefe  preparations,  made  in  order ,  there  being increafed: 
Withy  increafing, might  come  more  cleare  &  pleafant,to y  eares  of  the  lokers  on. 
i&c.And  ofAJlronomieJs  knoweyEaSt, Weft, Southland  North .  The  fajhion 
of  the  heauen ,  the  AEquinox ,  the  Solfticie ,  and  the  courfe  of  the fibres.  Which 
thinges grnleafl  one  know:he  can  not perceiue ,any  thyng  at  all, the  reafon  of  Ho* 
rologies.Seyng  ther fore  this  ample  Science ,is  garnified ,  beautified  and  flored. 
With  fo  many  and  fundry  f  kils  and  knowledges:!  thinke , that  none  can  iuflly  ac* 
count  themfidues  ArchiteCfes ,of  the  fnddeyne.  But  they  onely,who  from  their 
childes yeares ,afcendyng  by  thefe  degrees  of  knowledges,  beyngfoUered  bp  with 
the  atteynyng  of  many  Languages  and  Artes  ,  haue  Wonne  to  the  high  T aber* 
nacle  of  Archiffiure.is'c.And  to  whom  Nature  hath giuen fuch  quicke  Circum* 
fieCfionjbarpnes  of  Witt,  and Memorie,that  they  may  be  bery  abfoktelyfkilU 
fullin  Geometrie , . Afironomie ,  Mufike,  and  the  reft  of  the  Artes  Mathemati * 


John  Dee  his  MatliematicallPrrface, 

calkSticb  fur mount  and pajfe  the  callyng3andftatt',  of  Ar  chit e  tides:  and  are  he*  A  t&fatbe* 
come  Mathematiciens.e&c.Mndthey  are found feldome.  As,  in  tymes  paft  } 1 \>as  matieien, 
Mriftarchus*Samius:Tbildlaus3andArcbytasfTarentynes:  Apollonius  Bergpus: 
Eratofthenes  Cyreneus: Archimedes 3and  SeopasJSyracufians.  Who  alfojeft  to 
theyr pofteritiepnany  Engines  andGnomomcaUypork.es:  by  numbers  andnatu* 
rail  meanes  ftnuented  and  declared. 

Thus  much.,  and  the  fame  wordes  (in  fenfejin  one  onely  Chapter  of  this  Inco¬ 
parable  ArchitectVitruutus,{CdX\  youfinde.And  if you  (hould  ,  hut  take  his  boke-in 
your  hand,and  (lightly  loke  thorough  it, you  would  fay  ftraight  way :  This  is  Geo-  yitrmws* 
metrie,Anthmetike, ^Astronomic, Mufike,Anthropographie,fJjdragogie,  Horometrie.&c, 
and  (to  coclude )  the  Storehoufe  of  all  workmafhip .  No  w,let  vs  liften  to  our  other 
Iudge,our  FlorcntmeyLeo.Baptifta:a.nd  narrowly  confider,how  he  doth  determine 
of  Architecture.  Sed  anteoy  vltra  progrediar.&c.  But  before  Iprocede  any  further 
((ayth  he)/  thinkefthat  I  ought  to  exprejfe  7  yohat  man  I  leould  haue  to  bee  al* 
lowed  an  Architect.  For  ft  ypill  not  bryng  in  place  a  Carpenter :  as  thoughyou 

might  font. pare  him  to  the  Chief  M afters  of other  jtirtes.  For  the  hand  of the 
•  farpenterfs  the  Ar  chit  e  tides  Inftrument,  But  I  ypill  appoint  the  Architect  to  be 
that  manfttoho  hath  the J kill  ft  by  a  certaine  and  meruailous  meanes  and  1 Vayft  n  tu  ' 
both,  in  mindeand  Imagination  to  determine:  and alfo  in  yporke  to  finifh :  yphat  ” 
yoorkes foeuerfty  motion  of ypaight}and  cupplingand  framyng  together  of  bo* 
dyespnay  moH  aptly  be  Qjmtnodious for  the  yportbieft  Vjes  of  Man,  And  that  he  » 
may  be  able  toperforme  thefe  thinges }  he  hath  nede  of  atteynyng  and  knowledge 
of  the  beft3and  moft  yporthy  thynges.  tyre .  1  he  yphole  Feate  of Architecture  in 
buildy ngponfUeth  in  Line  ament es  3and  in  Framyng .  ylna  the  yphole  power; 

and fktll  ofLineamentesftendetb  to  this :  that  the  right  and  ahfolute  Ip  ay  may 
he  had3of Coaptyngand  ioyning  Lines  and  angles'.by  yohich  3the face  of  the  buiti 
dyng  or  frame  pnay  be  comprehended  and  concluded ,  And  it  is  the  property  of 
Lineamentes  pto  prefcribelmto  buildynges  }and  euery  part  of tbem3an  apt  place , 

CT  certaine  ntiber :  a  Worthy  maner}and  afemely  order :  thatfoft  yphole  forme 

and  figure  of the  buildyngpnay  reft  in  the  1?ery  Lineament  es. (type .  And  ype  may  *  The  Im- 

preferibe  inmynde  and  imagination  the  ypbole  formes  ft  all  materiall ftuffe  be*  matcrialitl" 

Jtig  ft  eluded Which  point  ype f hall  atteynefty  Fbotyng  and  forepointyng  the  an* 

glespnd  lines  fty  a  Jure  and  certaine  diretiiion  and  connexion.  Seyng  thenfthefe 

thinges  y  are  thus :  Lineamente 3fhalbe  the  certaine  and  constant  hrefcribyng3  WbatftAnu- 

concerned  in  mynde:  made  m  lines  and  angks:and finiftbed  ypith  a  learned  minde  mntts' ' 

andypyt.  We  thanke  you  Maher  Baptist,  that  you  haue  fo  aptly  brought  your  „ 

Arte ,  and  phrafe  therof ,  to  haue  (ome  Mathematical!  perfection :  by  certaine  or-  ,,  <3S(jte, 
der,  nuber,  forme,  figure,  and  Symmetric  mentall:  all  naturall  &  fenfible  ftuffe  fet  a  » 
part.  N ow, then, it  is  euidcnt,(Gentle  reader)how  aptely  and  worthely ,  I  haue 
preferred  Architecture,  to  be  bred  andfoftered  vp  in  the  Dominion  of  the  pereles 
Princefe,  (JUathematicx :  and  to  be  a  naturall  SubieCt  of  hers .  And  the  name  of 
Architecture,  is  of  the  principalitie, which  this  Science  hath,  aboue  all  other  Artes. 

And  Plato  affirmeth  ,  the  Architect  to  be  AH  after  ouer  all, that  make  any  worke. 
Wherupon,he  is  neither  Smith,nor  Builder:  nor3(eparatcly,  any  Artificer:  but  the 

d.iiij.  Hed, 


Anno.  IJ5P, 


lohnDee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

Hed,thcProuoft,  the  Dirc£ter,and  Iudge  of  all  Artificial!  workes,  and  all  Artifi- 
cers.For,thc  true  Architects is  hable  to  teach ,D em  onft  rate,diftribu  te,dcfcrib c ,  and 
Iudge  all  workes  wrought.  And  he,onely,Iearcheth  out  the  caufes  and  reafons  of 
all  Artificial!  thynges.Thus  excellent, is  Architecture : tho ugh  few(in  our  dayes)at- 
teyne  thereto  :  yet  may  not  the  Arte, be  otherwife  thought  on,  then  in  veiy  dede 
it  is  worthy. Nor  we  may  not, of  auncient  Artes,make  new  and  impeded  Definiti¬ 
ons  in  our  dayesrfor  fcarfitie  of  Artificers  :  No  more, than  we  may  pynche  in, the 
Definitions  of  Wifedomc, or  Honefite ,  or  of  Frendejhyp  or  of  Iujlice .  No  more  will 
I  confent,to  Diminifli  any  whit, of  the  perfedionand  dignitie ,  ("by  iuft  caufe  )  al¬ 
lowed  to  abfolute  Architecture.  V  nder  the  Diredion  of  this  Arte ,  are  thre  prin- 
cipall,necdTary  Mechanic  all  Artes .  Namely ,  Horvfwg ,  Fortification ,  and  T{aupegie. 
Horvfingj  I  vnderftand,both  for  Diuine  Seruice,and  Mans  common  vfage: publike, 
and  priuate.Of  Fortification  an dNaupegie,  ftraunge  matter  might  be  told  you:  But 
percnaunce/ome  will  be  tyred, with  this  Bederoll,  all  ready  rehearfcd:  and  other 
fomc,  will  nycely  nip  my  grofle  and  homely  difcourfing  with  you  :  made  in  poll: 
haft :  for  fearc  you  fliould  wante  this  true  and  frcndly  warny ng,  and  taft  giuyng, 
of  the  Power  JSIathematicall .  Lyfe  is  ihort,  and  vncertaine  :  Tymes  are  periloufe; 
Bcc .  And  ftill  the  Printer  awayting,  for  my  pen  ftaying :  All  thefe  thingcs,with 
farder  matter  of  I-ngratefulnes,  giue  me  occafion  to  paffe  away ,  to  the  other  Artes 
remainyng,  with  all  fpede  pofsible. 

Xhc  Arte  of  Nauigation,  demoiiftrateth  how, by  the  fhorteft 
good  way,  by  the  apteft  Diredtio,&  in  the  fhorteft  time,  a  fufficient 
Ship,betwene  any  two  places  (in  paffage  Nauigable,) afsigned :  may 
be  codinded:  and  in  all  ftormes,&  naturall  difturbances  chauncyng, 
how, to  vie  the  beft  pofsible  meanes ,  whereby  to  recouer  the  place 
fir  ft  afsigned .  What  nede ,  the  Mafler  Pilote ,  hath  of  other  Artes ,  here  before 
recited, it  is  eafie  to  knowras,  of  Hydrographies  AChonomky^ACirologie ,  and  Horome- 

trie .  Prefuppofing  continually, the  common  Bafe,andfoundacion  or  all:  namely 

Arithmetike  and  Geometric.  So  that,he  be  hable  to  vndcrftand,and  Iudge  his  own 
neceflary  Inftrumehtes,and  furniture  N eceftary:  Whether  they  be  pcrfedly  made 
or  norand  alfo  can, (if nede  be) make  them,hym  fclfe.  As  Quadrantes,  The  Aftro- 
nomers  Ryng,The  Aftronomers  ftaffe,The  Aftrolabc  vniucrfaii.  An  Hydrogra- 
phicall  Globe.Charts  Hydrographicall,true,(not with  parallell  Meridians) .  The 
Common  Sea  CompasrThe  Compas  of  variacion:  The  Proportionalfand  Para- 
doxall  Compafle$(of  melnuented,forourtwo  Mofcouy  Mafter  Pilotes,atthc  re- 
queft  of  the  Company)  Clockes  withfpryng:  houre,halfe  houre,and  three  houre 
Sandglalfes: & fundry  other  Inftrumetes:  And  alfo,  be  hable,on  Globe,  or  Playne 
todeferibe  the  Paradoxall  Compalfe :  andduely  to  vie  the  fame,to  allmanerof 
purpofes,  whereto  it  was  inuented.  And  alfo,  be  hable  to  Calculate  the  Planetes 

places  for  all  tymes.  ,c  .  T 

Moreouer,with  Sonne  Monc  orSterrefor  without)be  hable  to  define  the  Lon- 
gitude  Be  Latitude  of  the  place, which  he  is  in:  So  that,the  Longitude  &  Latitude 
of  the  place,from  which  he  fayled,be  giuen :  or  by  him, be  knowne.  whereto, apper- 
tayneth  expert  meanes, to  be  certified  euer,of  the  Ships  way .  &c.  And  by  toreie- 
ing  the  Rifing,Settyng ,  N oneftedyng ,  or  Midnightyng  of  cer taine  tempeftuous 
fixed  Sterres  :  or  their  Coniun<ftions ,  and  Anglynges  with  the  Pranetes ,  &c.he 
ought  to  haue  expert  coniedure  of  Stormes ,  T empeftes ,  and  Spoutes :  and  iuch 
lyke  Meteorological!  effe<ftes,daungerous  on  Sea.  For  (as  Plato  fayth  y)Mutanonest 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

epportunitatefy  tempo  rum  prefentire,  non  minus  rei  militari,  quam  Agriculture?  Nauiga - 
tionitfc  conuenit.  T o  forefee  the  alterations  and  opportunities  of  tymesjs  come * 
nient ,  no  lefe  to  the  Art  of  JVarre }  then  to  HuJ  bandry  and  Navigation.  And 
befides  fuch  cunnyng  meanes ,  more  euident  tokens  in  Sonne  and  Mone ,  ought 
of  hym  to  be  knowen:  fuch  as(the  Philofophicall  Po ex€)Virgilius  teacheth,  in  hys 
GeorgikesAN'ncxc  he  fayth, 

Sol  quofy  dr  exoriens  dr  quum  fe  condet  in  vndas, 

Signa  dabitySolem  certifima  ftgna fequuntur.drc . 

- - —  'Horn  ftpe  videmns , 

Ipjtus  in  vultu  varios  err  are  colores. 

Caruleus,  pluuiam  denunciat  dgneus  Euros. 

Sin  macule  incipient  rutilo  immifcerier  ign  ’t , 

Omnia  turn  par  iter  vento^nimbifq,  videbis 
Eeruere:  non  ilia  quifquam  me  nocie  per  altum 
Ire ,  necp  a  terra  moueat  conuellere  funem .  dfc. 

Sol  tibi ftgna  dabit. Salem  quis  dicerefalfum 
lAudeati - - drc. 

And  fo  of  Mone,  Sterres, Water, Ayre, Fire, Wood, Stones, Birdes, and  Bcaftes, 
and  of  many  thynges  els,a  certaine  Sympathicall  forewarnyng  may  be  had:  fome- 
tymes  to  great  pleafure  and  proflit ,  both  on  Sea  and  Land.  Sufnciendy,  for  my 
prefent  purpofe ,  it  doth  appeare,  by  the  premiffes ,  how  Mathematically  the  Arte  of 
Navigation,  is:and  how  it  nedeth  and  alfo  vfeth  other  Mathematicall  Artes  :  And 
now,  if  I  would  go  about  to  fpeake  of  the  manifold  Commodities,  commyng  to 
this  Land,  and  others,  by  Shypps  and  Navigation ,  you  might  thinke ,  that  I  catch 
at  occafions ,  to  vfe  many  wordes ,  where  no  nedc  is. 

Y et,  this  one  thyng  may  I,  (iuftly)  fay.  In  Nauigaiion, none  ought  to  haue  grea¬ 
ter  care, to  be  fkillfull,then  ourEngiiih  Pylotes.  And  perchaunce,Some,  would 
more  attempt:  And  other  Some,more  willingly  would  be  aydyng,  if  they  wift  cer- 
tainely,What  Priuiledge,God  had  endued  this  Hand  wirh,by  reafon  of  Situation, 
moft  commodious  for  Nanigation,  to  Places  moft  Famous  8c  Riche.  And  though, 
(of*  Late)  a  young  Gentleman,a  Courragious  Capitaine ,  was  in  a  great  ready- 
nes, with  good  hope,  and  great  caufes  ofperfuafion,to  haue  ventured,  for  a  Dll- 
CO  lierye,  (either  Wejlerly,  by  Cape  de  Paramantia :  or  ,  aboue  Noua  Zemla, 
and  the  Cjremijfes)and  was, at  the  very  nere  tyme  of  Attemptyng  ,  called  and  em¬ 
ployed  otherwife(both  then, and  fince,)in  great  good  feruice  to  his  Countrey ,  as 
the  Irifh  Rebels  haue  *  tailed:  Yet, I  fay,  ( though  the  fame  Gentleman ,  doo  not 
hereafter, deale  therewith)Some  one, or  other ,fhould  liften  to  the  Matter:  and  by 
good  aduife,and  diferete  Circumfpe&ion ,  by  little,  and  little,  wynne  to  the  fuffn 
cient  knowledge  ofthatTradeand Voyage: Which,  now,  I  would  be  Tory, 
(through  CarelefnefTe,want  of  Skill, and  Courtage, )  fhould  remayne  Vnknowne 
and  vnheard  of.  Seyng,  alfo,we  are  herein,  halfe  Challenged,  by  the  learned,by 
halfe  requeft,publifhed.  Therof,verely,  might  grow  Commoditye ,  to  this  Land 
chiefly,  and  to  the  reft  of  the  Chriften  Common  wealth,  farre  pafling  all  riches 
and  worldly  Threafure. 

Thaumaturglfee,is  that  Art  Mathematicall,  which  giueth  cer¬ 
taine  order  to  makeftraunge  workes ,  of  the  fenfe  to  be  perceiued, 

and  of  men  greatly  to  be  wondred  at.  By  fundiy  meanes,this  Wonder- 
worke is  wrought.  Some,by  Fneumatithmie .  As  the  workes  of  Ctefibius  and  Hero , 

A.j.  Some 


Georgia,  i. 


*Anno.\%6j 

s.H.g . 


*Anno.i$6g 


lohtt  Dee  liis  Mathematical!  Preface. 

Soineby  waight.wherof T imam  lpeaketh.Some,by  Strirtges  ftrayned,or  Springs, 
therwith  Imitating  liucly  Motions.Some,  by  other  meanes,as  the  Images  of  Mer¬ 
curic  .-and  the  brafen  hed,fnade  by  Albertus  Magnus,  which  dyd  feme  tp  Ipeake.-Btn?- 
thins  was  excellent  in  thefe  feates.  T  o  w  h  o  m  ,CaJsi  od or  us  writyng,fayth.2  our  put* 
pofe  is  to  know  profound  thyngesiand  to jkew  meruajles.  <By  the  diSpofition  of 
jour  Arte ,  Metals  do  low :  (Diomedes  ofbrafie ,  doth  blow  a  Trumpet  loude  :  a 
brafen  Serpent  hiffetkbyrdes  made  ,fingfwetelj.  Small  thynges  lee  rehearfe 
ofyou,loho  can  Imitate  the  heauen.ejrc.  Of  the  ftraunge  Selfmouyng,  which,  at 
*4mo.  1551  Saint  Denys ,  by  Paris  ,*Ifaw ,  ones  or  twife  (  Orontius  beyng  then  with  me,  in 
C ompany  jit  were  to  ftraunge  to  tell.  But  fome  haue  written  it.  And  yet,  (I  hope) 
it  is  there, of  other  to  be  fene.  And  by  PerJpecJiue  alio  ftraunge  thingcs,arc  done.  As 
partly  (before)  I  gaue  you  to  vnderftandin  Perjpetfm.  As,  to  fee  in  the  Ayre,  a  loft, 
thelyuely  Image  of  an  other  man ,  either  walkyng  to  and  fro  :  or  ftandyng  ftill. 
Likewife,  to  come  into  anhoufe,and  there  to  fee  the  liucly  ftiewofGold,Siluer 
or  precious  ftones:and  commyng  to  take  them  in  your  hand ,  to  finde  nought  but 
Ayre. Hereby,  haue  fome  men  ( in  all  other  matters  counted  Wife  )  fouly  ouerfnot 
the  fellies :  mifdeaming  of  the  meanes.Thaforeiayd  CUudmCAeflinus.  Hodie  mag- 
na  literature  viros  &  magne  refutdtioms  ‘videmus ,  opera  qua  dam  quafi  miranda  ,fupra 
Nat ura  putare:  de  qmbnsin  PerjfeBiua  dobhis  caufamfdciliter  reddidijfit.Thzt  is  JSlow 
a  dayes  ,!»e fee  fome  men, yea  of  great  learnyng  and  reputation,  to  Iudge  certain 
1 V0rk.es  as  meruaylous  ,ahone  the  power  of  Mature :  Of lefich  1 vorkes,one  that 
leerefkillfull  in  Terfpeltiue  might  eafely  hauegiuen  the  faufe.  Of  Archimedes 
Sphere, Cicero  witneftqth .Which  is  very  ftraunge  to  tftinke  on.  For  when  Archie 
medes{£ ayth  he) did  faflen  in  aSph  cere , the  mouynges  of  the  Sonne,  Mone,and of 
the  fine  other  r?lanets,he  did, as  the  God,H>hiclfin  Timeeus  of?  Into)  did  make 
the  leorld.  That  ^one  turnytig,Jhould  rule  motions  mo  filmlike  in flownes,  arid 

fw  fines.  But  a  greater  caufe  of  meruayling  we  haue  by  CUudianm  report  hereof. 
Who  aiftrmeth  this  Archimedes  worfo,  to  haue  ben  of  Glafte.  And  difeourfeth  of  it 
more  at  large:  which  I  omit.  The  Doue  ofwood ,  which  the  Mathematicien  Ar¬ 
ch  jt  as  did  make  to  fly e, is  by  iMgellius  ipoken  of.O  tDadalus  ftraunge  Images,  Plato 
reporteth .  Homer  e  of  Vulcans  Selfmowtrs ,  (by  fccret  whcles)lcaueth  in  writyng .  Ari- 
fiotkja  hys  Volmkes,  of  both,  makethmention.  Meruaylous  was  the  workeman- 
-£ftyp,of  late  dayes, performed  by  good f  kill  otTrochilike.  dec  •  Tor  in  Noremberge, 
A  flye  oflern, beyng  let  out  of  the  Artificers  hand,did(as  it  were)fly  about  by  the 
geftes,at  the  table, and  at  length, as  though  it  were  weary ,  rctoutne  to  his  mafters 
hand  agayne .  Moreouer,  an  Artificial!  Egle ,  was  ordred ,  to  fly  out  of  the  fame 
Towne,a  mighty  way, and  that  a  loft  in  the  Ayre,  toward  the  Empcroiir  comming 
thethenand  followed  hym,  beyng  come  to  the  gate  of  the  townc.*  Thus,you  fee, 
What,ArteMathematicallcan perform e,when Sldll ,  will,  Induftry,  andHabili- 
ty,  are  duely  apply ed  to  profe. 

A  DC  ef'o't  An  d  for  thefe, and  fuch  like  marueilous  Ades  and  Feates, Naturally  ,Mathc- 

ApologeJca/L  matically,and  Mechanically,  wrought  and  contriued :  ought  any  honeft  Student, 
and  Modeft  Chriftian  Philofopher,be  countcd,&  called  a  Coniurer  ?  Shall  the 
folly  of  Idiotes,  and  the  Mallice  of  the  Scornful!,  to  much  preualle,  that  He,  who 
feeketh  no  worldly  game  or  glory  at  their  handes  :  But  onely,of  God, the  threafor 
of  heauenly  wifedome,&  knowledge  of  pure  veritie :  Shall  he  (I  fay)  in  the  meane 


SDe  his  qua 
Munch  mi- 
rabiltter  eue- 
niunt.  cap.  8 


Thfc.  i. 


ST 


lohii  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface* 

fpace,  be  robbed  and  fpoiled  of  his  honed:  name  and  fame  <  He  that  feketh  (  by  Si 
Paules  aduertifement )  in  the  Creatures  Properties ,  and  wonderful!  vertues,  to 
finde  iufte  caufc,  to  glorifie  the  Asternalfand  Almightie  Creator  by :  Shall  that 
man,  be  ( in  hugger  mugger  )  condemned,  as  a  Companion  of  the  Helhoundes , 
and  a  Galley  and  Coniurer  of  wicked  and  damned  Spiritesc’  He  that  bewaileth  his 
great  want  of  time,fufficient(to  his  contentation)for  learning  of  Godly  wifdome, 
and  Godly  Verities  in  :  and  onely  therin  fetteth  all  his  delight :  Will  that  ma  leefe 
and  abufe  his  time,  in  dealing  with  the  Ghiefe  enemie  of  Chrift  our  Redemer:  the 
deadly  foe  of  all  mankinde  :  the  fubtile  and  impudent  peruerter  of  Godly  Veritie: 
the  Hypocriticall  Crocodile:  the  Enuious  Bafilifke,  continually  defirous,  in  the 
twinkeofaneye,todeftroy  all  Mankinde,  both  in  Body  and  Soule  ,  eternally  i  . 

Surely  (for  my  part, fomewhat  to  fay  herein)  I  haue  not  learned  to  makefobrutifh, 
and  fo  wicked  a  Bargaine .  Should'  I,  for  my  xx.or  xxv.  yeares  Studie  :  for  two  or 
three  thoufand  Markes  fpending :  feuen  or  eight  thoufand  Miles  going  and- trauai- 
ling, onely  for  good  learninges  lake  r  And  that,  in  all  maner  of  wethers  :  in  all  ma- 
ner  of  waies  and  paftages  :  both  early  and  late :  in  daunger  ofviolence  by  man :  in 
daunger  o.fdcftru&ion  by  wilde  beaftes :  in  hunger :  in  third: :  in  perilous  heates 
by  day,  with  toyle  on  foote :  in  daungerous  dampes  of  colde,by  night,  almoft  be- 
reuing  life  :  (as  God  knoweth) :  with  iodginges,  oft  times,to  iinall  eafe  :  and  font-  , 
time  to  Idle  fecuritie.  And  for  much  more  (then  all  this)  done  &  fuifred,  for  Lear¬ 
ning  and  attaining  of  Wifedome :  Should  I  ( I  pray  you)  for  all  this,no  otherwife, 
nor  more  warily :  or  (by  Gods  mercifulnes  )  no  more  luckily,  haue  fiftied,  with  fo 
large, and  coftly,a  N ette,  fo  long  time  in  drawing  (and  that  with  the  helpe  and  ad- 
uife  of  Lady  Philofophie,&  Queen  e  Theologic)  :  but  at  length,  to  haue  catched, 
and  drawen  vp,*  a  Frog  i  Nay, a  Deuill  <  For,fo,doth  the  Common  peuifh  Pratler  *  ^ prouerfa 
Imagine  and  Iangle:  And,fo,doth  the  Malicious  fkorner,fecretly  wiftie,&  brauely  FaJfefi[bt, 
and  boldly  face  down, behinde  my  backe .  Ah, what  a  miserable  thing, is  this  kinde  ^caught 
of  Men  <  How  great  is  the  blindnes  &  boldnes,of  the  Multitude, in  thinges  aboue  re&% 
their  Capacitie  <  What  a  Land:  whata  People :  what  Man  ers :  what  Times  are 
thefe  <  Are  they  become  Deuils,them  felues:  and, by  falfe  witnelfe  bearing againft 
their  Neighbour,  would  they  alfo,  become  Murderers  *  Doth  God, fo  long  geue- 
them  refpite,  to  reclaime  them  felues  in,  from  this  horrible  {laundering  of  the  gilt- 
leife :  contrary  to  their  owne  Confciences :  and  yet  will  they  notceafe  <  Doth  the 
Innocent,forbeare  the  calling  of  them,  Juridically  to  aunfwerehim,accordingto 
the  rigour  of  the  Lawes  :  and  will  they  defpife  his  Charitable  pacience  1  As  they, 
aeainft  him,  by  name,  do  forge, fable, rage, and  raife  {launder,  by  Worde  &  Print: 

Will  they  prouoke  him,  by  worde  and  Print, likewife,  to  N ote  their  Names  to  the 
World :  with  their  particular  deuifes, fables, beaftly  Imaginations,  andvnchriften- 
like  {launders  c’  Well :  Well .  O  (you  fuch  )  my  vnkinde  Countrey  men  .  O  vn- 
naturall  Countrey  men  .  O  vnthankfull  Countrey  men  .  O  Brainficke,  Raflie, 
Spitefull,and  Difdainfull  Coun trey  men  .  Why  opprefteyou  me,  thus  violently, 
with  yo  ur  {laundering  of  me :  Contrary  to  Veritie:  and  contrary  to  your  owne 
Confciences  <  And  I,  to  this  hower,  neither  by  worde,  deede,  or  thought,  haue 
ben e, any  wav, hurtfull, damageable, or  iniurious  to  you,or  yours  <  Haue  I,fo  long, 
fo  dearly, fo  farre,fo  carefully, fo  painfully ,fo  daungcroufly  fought  6c  trauailed  for 
fhelearnlng  of  Wifedome,&  atteyning  ofVertue  :  And  in  the  end(ln  youriudge- 
met)am  I  become, worfe, then  when  I  begaf  Worfe,the  a  Mad  man.?  A  dangerous 
Memberin  the  Common  Wealth:  and  no  Member  of  the  Church  of  Chrift?  Call 
you  this, to  be  Learned  ?  Call  you  this, to  be  a  Philofopher  ?  and  a  louer  of  Wife- 
dome  ?  To  forfake  the  ftraight  heauenly  Way  *.  and  to  wallow  in  the  broad  way  of 

A.ij.  dam- 


Iohn  Dee  his  Mathematicall  Preface . 

damnation  ?  To  forfake  the  light  of  heauenly  Wifedome:  and  to  luike  in  the  dun¬ 
geon  of  thePrinee  of  darken  ene  ?  To  forfake  the  Veritie  of  God,&his  Creatures: 
and  tofawne  vpon  the  Impudent, Craftic,Obftinate  Tier,  and  continuall  difgracer 
of  Gods  V  eritie,  to  the  vttermoft  of  his  power  l  T  o  forfake  the  Life  &  Bliffe  Aiter- 
nall:  andto  cieauevntothe  Author  of  Death  euerlafting  ?  that  Murderous  Tv- 
rant,  moft  gredily  awaiting  the  Pray  of  Mans  Soule  ?  Well  :  I  thanke  God  and 
ourLordelefus  Chrift,  for  the  Comfort  which  I  haue  by  the  Examples  of  other 
men,  before  my  time :  To  whom, neither  in  godlines  of  life,  nor  in  perfection  of 
learning,  I  am  worthy  to  be  compared :  and  yet,  they  fuftained  the  very  like  Iniu- 
ries ,  that  I  do  :  or  rather, greater.  Pacient  Socrates ,  his  ^Apologie  will  teflifie :  Apu- 
leius  his  ^Apologies,  will  declare  the  Brutifhneffe  ofthe  Multitude  .  loannes  Via*. r, 
Earle  of  Mirandula,  his  Apokgie  will  teach  you,  of  the  Raging  flaunder  ofthe  Ma¬ 
licious  Ignorant  againft  him  .  Joannes  T rithemim,  his  Apologie  will  fpecifie,  how 
he  had  occafion  to  make  publike  Proteftation :  as  well  by  reafon  of  the  Rude  Sim¬ 
ple  :  as  alfo,in  refpeft  of  fuch,as  were  counted  to  be  of  the  wifeftfort  of  men.  Ma- 
„  ny  could  I  recite  :  But  I  deferre  the  precife  and  determined  handling  of  this  mat- 
O**  „  ter:  being  loth  to  deted  the  Folly  &  Mallice  of  my  N  atiue  Countrey  men.*Who, 
„  fo  hardly,  can  difgeft  or  like  any  extraordinary  courfe  of  Philofophicall  Studies: 
,,  not  falling  within  the  Cumpaffe  of their  Capacitie :  or  where  they  are  not  made 
priuie  of  the  true  and  fecrete  caufe,  of  fuch  wonderfull  Philofophicall  Feates. 
Thefe  men,  are  of fower  fortes,  chiefly .  The  firft,  I  may  name,  Faine pratling  bu- 
fte  bodies  .-The  fecond ,  Fond  Frendes :  The  third,  Imperfectly  serious:  and  the  fourth, 
t Malicious  Ignorant  .  To  cche  of  thefe  (briefly, and  in  charitie  )  I  will  fay  a  word 
I#  ortwo,andforeturne  to  my  Preface.  Vaine  pratling  bufe  bodies ,vfe  your  idle 
allemblies,and  conferences,  otherwife,  then  in  talke  of  matter,  either  aboueyour 
Capacities,  for  hardnefle :  or  contrary  to  your  Confciences,  in  Veritie  .  Fonde 
2 .  Frendes,  leaue  of,fo  to  commend  your  vnacquainted  frend,vpon  blindeaTedion: 
As,  becaufe  he  knoweth  more, then  the  common  Student:  that,  therfore,  he  inuft 
needes  be  fkiifull,andadoer,infuch  matterandmaner,asyouterme  Coniuring. 
Wecning,thereby,  you  aduaunce  his  feme :  and  that  you  make  other  men,  great 
marueilers  of  your  hap,  to  haue  fuch  a  learned  frend  .  Ceafe  to  aferibe  Impietie, 
where  you  pretend  Amitie .  For, if  your  tounges  were  true,  then  were  thatyour 
frend,  Vntrue,  both  to  God, and  his  Soucraigne .  Such  Frendes  and  Fondlinges,  I 
fliake  of,  and  renounceyou :  Shakeyou  of,  your  Folly.  Imperfectly  serious, to  you, 
3*  do  I  fey:  that  (perhaps)  well,  do  you  Meane :  But  farre  you  mifle  the  Marke :  If  a 
Lambe  you  will  kill,tofeede  the  flocke  with  his  bloud.  Sheepe,  with  Lambes 
bloud,  haue  no  naturall  fuftenaunce :  No  more,  is  Chriftes  flocke,  with  horrible 
flaunders,  duely  edified.  Nor  your  feire  pretenfe,  byfuch  rafhe  ragged  Rheto- 
rike,any  whit,well  graced.  But  fuch,asfo  vfe me, will  finde  a  fowle  Gracke  in  their 
Credite .  Speake  that  you  know  :  And  know,  as  you  ought :  Know  not, by  Heare 
Eiy,  when  life  lieth  in  daunger.  Search  to  the  quicke,&  let  Charitie  be  your  guide. 
4.  c Malicious  Ignorant ,  what  (hall  I  fey  to  thee  ?  Prohibe  linguam  tuam  a  malo .  ^Ade - 
tr action  c  parcite  lingua: .  Caufe  thy  toung  to  refraine  fro  euill.  fefraineyour  toung 
from  flaunder .  Though  your  tounges  be  fliarpned.  Serpent  like,  &  Adders  poy- 
Pfai,  1 40 .  fon  lye  in  your  lippes  :  yet  take  heede,and  thinke, betimes,  with  your  felfe.  Fir  lin¬ 

gua  fm  non  flabilietur  in  terra .  Firum  violentum  venabitur  malum ,  donee pracipitetur. 
For,fure  I  am,  fhtja  faciet  Dominus  Iudicium  afflicti  .•  &  vindictam pauperum . 

Thus,  I  require  you,  my  aflured  frendes,  and  Countrey  men  (  you  Mathemati- 
dens,Mechaniciens,andPhilofophers,Charitable  and  diferete)  to  deale  in  my 

behalfe. 


lohn  Dee  his  Matliematicail  Preface. 

behalf, with  the  light  &  vntrue  toungcd,  my  enuious  Aduerfaries,or  Fond  fr ends » 

And  farther,  I  would  wifhc,  that  at  leyfor,  you  would  confider,how  Bafdius  Mag* 
nus,  layeth  CMofes  and  Daniel:,  before  the  eyes  of  thofe,  which  count  all  fuch  Stu¬ 
dies  Philofophicall  (as  mine  hath  bene)  to  be  vngodly ,  or  vnprofitable .  Waye 
well  S. Stephen  his  witnefle  of  CMofes .  Erudttus  est  CMofes  omni  Sapientta  JUgyptioru:  ^  £ 

&  eratpotens  in  verbis  &  openbm fuis .  Mofes  leas  inRmfifed  in  all  rnaner  of^ife* 
dome  of  the  ^Egyptians :  and  he  "ivas  of  power  both  in  his  hordes ?  and  forties. 

You  lee  this  Philofophicall  Power  &  Wifcdome, which  CMofes  had, to  be  nothing 
mifliked  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Yet  Plinius  hath  recorded,  Mofes  to  be  a  wicked  Magi* 
cien .  And  that  (of  force)  muft  be,  either  for  this  Philofophicall  wifedome,iearned, 
before  his  calling  to  the  leading  of  the  Children  of  Jfrael :  or  for  thofe  his  won- 
ders,wrought  before  King  Pharao ,  after  he  had  the  conducing  of  the  Ifraelites.  As 
concerning  the  frft,you  perceaue,  how  S. Stephen,  at  his  Martyrdome  (  being  full 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft)  in  his  Recapitulation  of  the  olde  Teftament,hath  made  men¬ 
tion  of  Mofes  Philofophie :  with  good  liking  of  it :  And  Baflius  Magnus  alfo,  auou- 
cheth  it,  to  haue  bene  to  Mofes  profitable  (  and  therefore,  I  fay,  to  the  Church  of 
God,  neceflary).  But  as  cocerning  Mofes  wonders, done  before  King  PharaovGod , 
him  felfe,  fayd  :  Vide  vt  omnia  osfenta,  qua  pofui  in  manu  tua ,  facias  coram  Pharaowe. 

See  that  thou  do  all  thofe  bonders  before  Pharao  ?  Tvhicb  I  haue  put  in  thy  hand. 

Thus, you euidently perceaue, how vaShly^P  limits hath llaundered  Mofes, ofvayne  Lib. 30. 
fraudulent  CMagike,  faying  :  EH  Sr  alia  Magices  F  actio,  a  CMofe ,  Iamne,&  Iotape,  Iii*  Cap,  1. 
dais  pendens :  fed  multis  millibus  annorum pojl  Zoroastrem.frc.  Let  all  ftich ,  there¬ 

fore,  who,  in  Iudgement  and  Skill  of  Philofophie,  are  farre  Inferior  to  Plinie,  take 
good  heede,leaft  they  ouerfhoote  them  felucs  rafhly ,  in  Iudging  of  Phtlofophcrs 
Hraunge  Actes  •  andtheMeanes,how  they  are  done .  But,  much  more, ought  they 
to  beware  of  forging,  deuifing,  and  imagining  monftrous  feates,  and  wonderfull 
Workes,  when  and  where,  no  fuch  were  done :  no,  not  any  fparke  or  likelihode,of 
fuch, as  they, without  all  fhame,  do  report .  And  ( to  conclude  )  moft  of  all,  let 
thembea!hamedofMan,andafraide  of  the  dreadfullandlufteludge:  bothFo- 
iiflily  or  Malicioufly  to  deuife :  and  then,deuililhly  to  father  their  new  fond  Mon- 
fters  on  me :  Innocent,  in  hand  and  hart :  for  trefpacing  either  againft  the  lawe  of 
God,  or  Man,  in  any  my  Studies  orExercifes,  Philofophicall,  or  Mathematical!: 

As  in  due  time,  I  hope,  will  be  more  manifeft. 

No  w  end  I, with  ArcllCIHclftriC.  Which  name,  is  not  fo  new, as  this 
Arte  is  rare.For  an  other  Arte,vnder  this, a  degree(for  fkill  and  power)  hath  bene 
indued  with  this  Englifh  name  before.  And  yet, this, may  feme  for  our  purpofc, 
fufficiendy,at  this  prefent.  This  Arte,  tgacWth  to  bryng  to  adtuall  ex¬ 
perience  fenhble,all  worthy  conclufions  by  all  the  Artes  Mathema¬ 
tical!  purpofed,  &  by  true  Naturall  Philofophie  concluded  :& both 
addeth  to  them  a  farder  fc :ope,in  the  termes  of  the  fame  Artes ,  &  al¬ 
io  by,hys  propre  Method, and  in  peculier  termes,  procedeth ,  with 
helpe  of  the  forefayd  Artes  ,  to  the  performance  of  complet  Expe- 
rieces, which  of  no  particular  Art,  are  hable  (Formally)  to  be  challen¬ 
ged  .  If  you  remember, how  we  considered  ^Architecture,  in  refpetft  of  all  com¬ 
mon  handworkes  :  fame  light  may  you  haue, therby, to  vnderftand  the  Souerain- 
ty  and  propertie  of  this  Science.  Science  I  may  call  it,rather,  then  an  Arte:  for  the 
excellency  and  Mafterlhyp  it  hath  ,  ouerfomany  ,  and  fo  mighty  Artes  and 

A.iij.  Sciences. 


1. 

2. 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematicall  Preface. 

Sciences.  And  bycaufe  it  procedeth  by  Experiences ,and  fearcheth  forth  the  caufes 
of Conclufions,by  Experiences :  and  alfo  putteth  the  Conditions  them  felues,  in 
Experience ,it is  named  of  fom c^Scientia  Experimental^ .  The  Experimentall  Sci* 
ence.  Nicolaus  Cufanus  termeth  it  fo,  in  hy  s  Experimentes  Statikall ,  And  an  other 
Pbilefopher ,  of  this  land  Natiue  ( the  flcure  of  whofe  worthy  fame, can  neuer  dye 
nor  wither)  did  write  therof  largely,  at  the  requeft  of  Clementthe  fixt.  The  Arte 
carrieth  with  it,  a  wonderfull  Credit :  By  reafon,  it  certefieth ,  fenfibly, fully,  and 
completely  to  the  vtmoft  power  of  Nature, and  Arte.  This  Arte,certifieth  by  Ex¬ 
perience  complete  and  abfolute :  and  other  Artes,with  their  Argumentes,and  De- 
monftrations ,  perfuaderand  in  wordes,proue  very  well  their  Concluflons.  *.  But 
U*  wordes,and  Argumentes,are  no  fenfible  certifying.-  nor  the  full  and  finall  frute  of 

Sciences  praftifable.  And  though  fome  Artes,haue  in  them, Experiences, yet  they 
are  not  complete ,  and  brought  to  the  vttermofl, they  may  be  ftretched  vnto,and 
applyed  fenfibly.  As  for  exam  pie:  the  Naturall  Philofopher  difputeth  and  malceth 
goodly  fliew  of: reafon :  And  the  Aftronomer,and  the  Optical!  Mechanicien,put 
fome  thynges  in  Experience: but  neither, all, that  they  may:  nor  yet  fufficiently,  and 
to  the  vtmoft,thofe,which  they  do.  There, then,the  Archemajler  ftcppeth  in, and 
leadeth  forth  on  ,  the  Experiences ,  by  order  of  his  dodrine  Experimentall ,  to  the 
chief  and  finall  power  of  Naturall  and  Mathematicall  Artes.Oftwo  or  three  men, 
in  whom, this  Defcription  of  ArchemaBry  was  Experimentally  rifled,  I  haue  read 
and  hardrand  good  record, is  of  their  fuch  perre&ion..  So  that,this  Art,  is  no  fan- 
tafticall  Imagination:  as  fomeSophifter,  might,  Cum  fats  Infolubiltbtu^  make  a  flo- 
rifh:  and  dalfell  your  Imagination: and  dafln  your  honeffc  defire  and  Courage, from 
beleuing  thefe  thinges,fo  vnheard  of,fo  meruaylous,&  of  fuch  Importance.  Well: 
as  you  will.I  haue  forewarned  you.I  haue  done  the  part  of  a  frende.-I  haue  dischar¬ 
ged  my  Duety  toward  God:for  my  finall  Talent,  at  hys  moft  mercyfull  handes  re- 
ceiued.  T o  this  Science,doth  the  Science  Alnirangiat, great  Seruice.  Mule  nothyng 
of  this  name.  I  chaunge  not  the  name,  fo  vfed,  and  in  Print  publifhed  by  other: 
beyng  a  name,  propre  to  the  Science.  Vnderthis,commeth  <^Ars  Smtrillia ,  by 
Artefbius,  briefly  written .  But  the  chief  Science ,  of  the  Archemafter ,  ( in  this 
world)as  yetknowen  ,  is  an  other  (  as  it  were)  OPTICAL  Science :  wherof, 
the  name  finall  be  toldf  God  willyng)  when  I  finall  haue  fome,  ( more  iuftjoccafion, 
therof,  to  Dilcourfe. 

Here,I  muft  end ,  thus  abruptly  (  Gentle  frende,  and  vnfayned  louer  of  honeft 
and  neceflary  verities.)  For,they,who  haue(for  your  fake,  and  vertues  caufe)re- 
quefted  me,(an  old  forworn e  Mathematicien)  to  take  pen  in  hand :  ( through  the 
confidence  they  repofed  in  my  long  experience:  and  tryed  fincerity)  for  the  decla- 

ryng  andreportyng  fomewhat,of  thefruteand  commodity,  by  the  Artes  Ma¬ 
thematicall, to  beatteynedvnto:euenthey,  Sore  agaynft  their  willes,are 
forced,for  fundty  caufes,  to  fatiffie  the  workemans  requefl: ,  in  endyng  forthwith: 
He,  fo  feareth  this,  fo  new  an  attempt,&  fo  coftly:  And  in  matter  fo  flenderly  (he- 
therto)amongthe  common  Sorte  ofStudentes,confideredor  efiemed. 

And  where  I  was  willed,  fomewhat  to  alledge, why, in  our  vulgare  Speche,this 
part  of  the  Principall  Science  of  Geometric,  called  Euclides  Geometricall  Elementes, 
is  publifhed, to  your  handlyng  :  being  vnlatined  people,  and  not  Vniuerfitie 
Scholers :  Verily,IthinkeitnedelefTe.  ,  • 

i*  For, the  Honour,and  Eftimation  of  the  Vniuerfities,and  Graduates, 
is,  hereby,  nothing  diminiflied.  Seing,  from,  and  by  their  Nurfe  Children,  you  ' 
receaue  all  this  Benefite :  how  great  foeuer  it  be. 

Neither 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

N  either  are  their  Studies,  hereby,  any  whit  hindred.  No  more,  then  thxltalian  a , 

Vniuerfities, 2S  Academia  Bone  mentis,  Ferrarienfs,  Florentine,  Medielanmfis,  Patauina, 

Pagienfis,  Pentfma,  PifanayRomamfienenfis,  or  any  one  of  them,  finde  them  fellies, 
any  deale, difgraced,  or  their  St  udies  any  thing  hindred ,  by  F rater  Lucas  de  Burge > 
or  by  ‘liicelaus  T artalea,  who  in  vulgar  Italian  language, haiie  publifhed,  not  onely 
*  Euchdes  Geometric,  but  of  Archimedes  feme\vhat :  and  in  Arithmetike  and  Practical!. 
Geometric,  very  large  volumes,  all  in  their  vulgar  fpeche .  N  or  in  Germany  haue 
the  famous  Vniuerfities,  any  tiling  bene  diicontent  with  Albertns  Durerus, his  Geo¬ 
metrical!  Inftitutions  in  Dutch;  orwith  Gulklmus  Xy lander,  his  learned  tranflation 
of  the  firftfixe  bookes  oPEuclide,  outofthe  Greke  into  the  high  Dutch  .Nor  with  : 

Gmlterm  H .  Riffius ,  his  Geometricall  Volume :  very  diligently  tranflated  into  the 
high  Dutch  tounge,  and  publifhed .  Nor  yet  the  Vniuerfities  of  Spaine,  or  Portu- 
gall,  thinke  their  reputation  to  be  decayed ;  or  fuppofe  any  their  Studies  to  be  hin-  - 
dred  by  the  Excellent  P.  ?{onmus,  his  Mathematical!  workes, in  vulgare  fpeche  by 
him  put  forth .  Haue  you  not,  likewife,  in  the  French  tounge,  the  whole  Mathe¬ 
matical!  Quadriuie  ?  and  yet  neither  Paris,  Orleance, or  any  of  the  other  Vniuer¬ 
fities  ofFraunce,  at  any  time,  with  the  T ranflaters,or  P ublifhers  offended  :  or  any 
mans  Studie  thereby  hindreeb 

And  furely  ,  the  Common  and  V ulgar  Scholer  (  much  more,  the  Gramarian)  3 . 

before  his  comming  to  the  Vniuerfitie,  ihall  (  or  may)  be ,  now  (according  to  Plato 
his  Counfell)  fuiriciently  inftruded  in  Arithmetike  and  Geometrie, For-  the  better  and 
eafier  learning  ofallmaner  of  P  hilofophie,  Academically  P  erf  ateticall.  And  by  that 
meanes,  goe  more  cherefully,  more  fkilfully, and  fpedily  fonvarde,  in  his  Studies, 
there  to  be  learned.  And,fo, in  leffe  time,profite  more,then  (otherwife)  he  fliotild, 
or  could  do.  J  ••• 

Alfo  many  good  and  pregnant  Engliihe  wittes,  of  young  Gen  tlemen, and  of  4« 
other,  who  neuer  intend  to  meddle  with  the  profound  fearchand  Studie  of  Philo- 
fophie  ( in  the  Vniuerfities  t obe  learned  )  may  neuertheleffe,  now,  with  more  eafe 
and  libertie,  haue  good  occaiion ,  vertuoufly  to  occupie  the  fliarpheffe  of  their 
wittes :  where,els  (perchance  )  otherwife, they  would  in  fond  exercifes,fpend  (  or 
rather  leefe)  their  time :  neither  feruing  God :  nor  furderingthe  Weale, common 
orpriuate. 

And  great  Comfort,  with  good  hope,  may  the  Vniuerfities  haue,  by  reafon  of  5 . 
this  Engltfe  Geometrie,. and  Mathematicall  Preface, that  they  (hereafter) 

Ihall  be  the  more  regarded ,  efteemed ,  and  reforted  vnto.  For,  when  it  ihall  be 
knowen  and  reported,  that  of  the  Mathematicall  Sciences  onely, fuch  great  Commo¬ 
dities  are  enfuing  (  as  I  hauefpeciiied ) :  and  that  in  dede,  fome  of  you  vnlatined 
Studentes,  can  be  good  witneile, of  fuch  rare  fruite  by  you  enioyed  (thereby)  :  as 
either,before  this, was  not  heard  of;  or  els,n0tfb  fully  credited:  Well,may  all  men 
conie&ure,  that  farre  greater  ayde,and  better  furniture, to  winne  to  the  Perfection  „ 
ofall  Philofophie,may  in  the  Vniuerfities  be  had:  being  the  Storehoufes  &  Threa-  Vniuerfities 
lory  of  all  Sciences,  and  all  Artes,  neceflaryfor  the  beft,  and  moft  noble  State  of  »» 
Common  Wealthes.  ,  „ 

Befides  this,  how  many  a  Common  Artificer,  is  there,  in  thefe  Reaimes  of  6. 
England  and  Ireland,  that  dealeth  with  Numbers, Rule, &  CumpafTe :  Who  with 
their  owne  Skill  and  experience, already  had,  will  be  hable  (  by  thefe  p-00d  helpes 
and  informations)  to  finde  out, and  deuifc,new  workes, ftraunge  Engines  and  In- 
ftriimentes ; :  for  fundry  purpofes  in  the  Common  Wealth  ?  or  for°priuate  plea- 
hire .?  and  for  the  better  maintay  ning  of  their  owne  ehate  ?  I  will  not  ( therefore) 

A.iiij.  fight 


lolmDee  his  Mathematical!  Preface. 

fightagainft  myne  owne  fhadowe.  For,  no  man  (lam  fure)  will  open  his  mouth 
againft  this  Enterprife.No  ma  (I  fay)  who  either  hath  Charitie  toward  his  brother 
(  and  would  be  glad  of  his  furtherance  in  vertuous  knowledge)  :  or  that  hath  any 
care  &  zeale  for  the  bettering  of  the  Comon  ftate  of  this  Realme.N  either  any, that 
niake  accompt,  what  the  wifer  fort  of  men  (  Sage  and  Stayed  )  do  thinkc  of  them; 
T o  none  ( therefore  )  will  I  make  any  Apologie,  for  a  vertuous  a&e  doing :  and  for  * 
c6mending,or  fetting  forth, Profitable  Artes  to  English  men, in  the  Englifh  toung. 
„  But,  vnto  God  our  Creator ,  let  vs  all  be  thankefull :  for  tha  i,jfs  he ,of his  Good* 

»  neSjby  his  Town  ,  and  in  his  la  if e  dome ,  hath  Created  all  thynges ,  in  Number, 

S33  35  JV aight^and  Meafure\ So,  to  vs ,  of  hy  s  great  Mercy ,  he  hath  reuealed  Meanes, 
}>  whereby,  to  attcyne  the  fufficient  and  neceflary  knowledge  of  the  forefayd  hys 
”  three  principalllnfiramentes  :  Which  Meanes ,  I  haue  abundantly  proued  vnto 
33  you,to  be  the  Sciences  and  i^Artes  fJMathematicall. 

And  though  I  haue  ben  pinched  with  firaightnes  of tyme:that,no  way, I  could 
fo  pen  downe  the  matter(in  my  Mynde)  as  I  determined :  hopyng  of  conucnient 
layfure  ••  Y et,if  vertuous  zeale, and  honeft  Intent  prouoke  and  biyng you  to  the 
readyngand  examinyng  ofthis  Compendious  treatife,I  do  notdoute,  but,as  the 
veritie  therof(accordyng  to  our  purpofe  )  will  be  euident  vnto  you  :  So  the  pith 
and  force  therof ,  will  perfuade  you  :  and  the  wonderfull  if  ute  therof, highly  plea- 
fure  you.  And  that  you  may  the  eafier  perceiue,and  better  remember ,  the  prin- 

The  Ground,  cipall  pointes ,  whereof  my  Preface  treateth ,  I  will giue  you  the  Groundplatc 
jlatt  of  this  of  my  whole  difcourfe,in  a  Table  annexed:  from  the  foft  to  the  lafl,foinewhat  Me- 
pntfaceina  thodically  contriued. 

T  able.  If  Haft,  hath  caufed  my  poore  pen, any  where ,  to  Rumble  :  You  will,  (I  am 

fure)  in  part  of  recoin  pence,  (for  my  carneft  and  lincere  good  will  to  plea- 
fure  you) ,  Coniider  the  rockifh  huge  mountaines,  and  the  perilous 
vnbeaten  wayes, which  (  both  night  and  day ,  for  the  while  )  it 
hath  toyled  and  labored  through,to  bryng  you  this  good 
N ewes, and  Comfortable  profe, of  Vertues  frute. 

So, I  Commityou  vnto  Gods  Mercyfuil  diredion ,  for  the  reft :  hartety 
befechy  ng  hym,  to  profper  your  Studyes,and  honeft  Intentes: 
to  his  Glory, &  the  Commodity  of  our  Countrey.  Amen. 

Written  at  my  poore  Houfe 
At  Cfytortlake. 

Anno. i  s  7  o.  February.# . 


f.vee. 


J  «  IJ  C  Ga 

Here  liauc  you(accorcling  to  my  promiffe)  the  Groundplat  of’ 

my  MAT  HEM  ATI  CALL-  Pradface:  annexed  to  Euclide  (now  firft) 
publifhed  in  our  Englilhetounge.  An,  i  570.  Febr.  3. 


I 

f  _ 

Sciences, 
and  Artes 

Mathe- 

maticalL 


Erincipdl, 
Iffbich  are  two, 
oneljy 


Arithmetike.< 


Simple, 


tenances ;  where,  an  Fmt,  is  Indiuijtble . 


^Geometric. 


-  ddiX  t ,  Which  With  aide  of  Geometric  principal,  demon  Sirateth  fome  tArithmeticall  Con- 
clufion ,  or  Turpofe, 

Simple 3Which  dealeth  With  Magnitudes,  onely :  and  demonSlrateth  all  their  properties,  pajfi* 
ens,  and  appertenances :  whofe  Torn ,  is  Indmfible . 

.  MlXt,  Which  With  aide  of  ^Arithmetike  principal! , demon  ftrateth feme  G eometricall purpefi: as 

EVCLIDES  ELEMENTbS. 


\  " 

In  thinges  Supernatu  -  ' 

r all, at  cm  all, &  Diuine: 

By  Application, Afcem 
ding. 

The  vfe 

thereof,  is  ^ 
*  either } 

In  thinges  Mathema¬ 
tical l:  Without  farther 

Application. 

J  . 

In  thinges  If  at ur all: 
both  Subflatiall,&  Ac- 
cidentall,Fifible,  &  In- 
uifible.&c.By  Applicat 
„tion:  Defcending. 

The  like  Vfes 
and  zfifippli  -= 
cations- are, 

( though  in  a 
degree  lower ) 
in  the  Artes 
Mathema¬ 
tical  Deri- 
uatiue. 


are 


^either< 


ft  1 


K  \ 

'  i 


The  names  of 

the  Principalis: 

as,< 


Arithmetike,  f Arithmetike  ofmoftvfuall  whole  Numbers:  And  of Fra&ions  to  them  appertaining. 
Vulgar  :  lohich  Arithmetike  of  Proportions. 
conJideretlA  Arithmetike  Circular. 

|  Arithmetike  ofRadicallNubers:Simple,Compoimd,Mixt  r  And  of  their  Fractions. 
^Arithmetike  of  Cosfike  Nubers :  with  their  Fractions :  And  the  great  Arte  of  Algiebar. 


"AllLengthes. 


Geometric, 

Twlgarispbich  tea. 
cbetb  Measuring' 


Athand—r  <  All  Plaines:  As,  Land,  Borde,  GlaiTe,&c.- 
w  All  Solids :  As, Timber, Stone,V elTels,&c.“ 


from  the  ib 


ace 

ng 


fDeriuatiue 

fro  tbe  Princi* 
pads:  of  Sohichy 
Jome  bane  < 


How  farre7from  the  CMeafurer  ,  anf 
thing  is:  of  him fene,on  Land  or  Water:  called 

Apomecometrie, 

-  f 

f 

1 

Hovp  high  or  deepe,  from  the  leuell 

j  of  the  'JMeafurers  Handing ,  any  thing  is: 
j  Scene  of  hym ,  on  Land  or  Water :  called 

Hypfometrie. 

Of which 

are  o-rowen 

0 

the  Feates 
>&•  Artes  of  < 

r 

Ho\ V  broad  1  a  thing  is ,  which  is  in  the 
Meafurers  vcw  :foithe  ftuated  on  Land  or 

Water ;  called  Platometrie. 

^  J 

Mecometrie. 

<J  Embadometrie, 
Stereometric. 


Geodefie :  more  cunningly  ts 
Meafure  and  Suruey  Landes a 
Woods,  Waters.&c. 


Geographic. 


Hydrographic. 
Stratarithmetrie. 

'  Which  demonfrateth  the  matters  and  properties  of  all  Radiations  SDireBc,  'Broken,  and  TfefleBed. 

Aftronomie,—  ~  Which  demonstrated  the  Distances,  Magnitudes, and  all  IfaturaH  motions, Apparencesjand  Tajfons ,  proper  to  the  Planets  and 

fixed  Starres.for  any  time,  paft,  prefent,  and  to  come :  in  refpeBe  of  a  certaine  Horizon. or  Without  refpeBe  of  any  Horizon, 

Mufike,  —  —  Which  demonfrateth  by  reafon,and  teaeheth  by fenfe, perfectly  to  iudge  and  order  the  diuerftie  ofSoundes ,  hie  or  lew. 

Cofmographie,  ■—  Which, Wholy  and  perfectly  maketh  defeription  of  the  Heautnly,andalfo  Elementall  part  of  the  World :  and  of thefe  panes, maketh 

homologall  application,  andmutuall  collation  necefary . 


Perlpectiue,- 


fPropre  names 
^  A 


Aftrologie, 
Statike,  — 


Whic  b  reafonably  demonfrateth  the  operations  and  cjfeBes  of  the  natural!  beames  of  light, and fecrete  Inf  Hence  of  the  'Planets ,and 
fixed  Starres ,  in  cuery  Element  and  Elementall  body :  at  alt  times,  in  any  Horizon  ajftgned. 

Which  demonfrateth  the  caitfcs  ofheauincs  and  light nes  of  all  t  hinges :  and  of  the  motions  and  properties  to  heauines  and  lightnes 


«[[  Imprinted  by  John  Day . 

An.  1  s  70.  Feb.z*. 

'  : 


Allthr  Op  Ogl~ap  hie,  whic  h  defribeth  the  JJnbcr,  Meafure,  Waight,  Figure,  Situation,  and  colour  of  cuery  diners  thing  contained  in  the  perfetle  body  of 

tW  zA  Ifjandgeueth  certaine  knowledge  of  the  Figure, Symmetric,  Waight,- Char  aBerization,&  due  Locallmotion  of any  per  cell 
/-p  |  -t  •  I  of the fay  d  body  afigned:  and  of numbers  to  the faid per  cell  appertaining. 

1  rOChUlKe,  — —  -  which  demonfrateth  the  properties  of  all  Circular  motions:  Simple  and  Compound. 

Helxcofophie,  — — ■—  which  demonstrated  the  defgning  of  all  Spiral!  lines :  in  Plaine,on  Gy  Under, Cone,  Sphtre,  Conoid,  and  Spharoid :  and  their  pro- 
A  perties, 

Pneumatithmie,  —  Which  demonfrateth  by  clofe  hollow  G eometricall figures  ( Regular  and  Irregular  )  the firaunge  properties  ( in  motion  or  Stay  )  of 

the  Water, ^Ayre, Smoke, and  Fire, in  their  Continuity ,and as  they  areioyned  to  the  Element es  next  them. 

Menadrie,—  — — ~  Which  demonfrateth, how,  aboue  Ifaturcs  ZSertue,  and  power f tuple :  ri)crtue  and  force, may  be  multiplied :  and  fo  to  direBe,  to 

lift,  to  pull  to,  and  to  put  or  call  fro, any  multiplied,  or fimple  determined  Vertue,  Waight,  or  Force :  naturally,  not, ft,  dircBible,  or 
I  t  •  t  •  moueable. 

Jtlypogeioaie,  *  Which  demonfrateth , how  ,vnder  the  Spharica/l  Superficies  of  the  Earth, at  any  depth,  to  any  perpendicular  line  ajftgned  (  Whofe  di¬ 
fiance  from  the  perpendicular  of  the  entrance :  and  the  Azimuth  likew’fe,  In  refpeBe  of  the fay  d  entrance, is  knowen  )  certaine  Way, 
r  T  J  „  °  mayheprefcribedaridgone,&c. 

JTiy  Q1  agogie,— —  Which  demonfrateth  the  pajfible  leading  of  Water  by  Natures  law, and  by  artificial i  helpe,from  any  head(  being  Spring,  Slanding,or 

running  Water  )  to  any  other  place  ajftgned. 

Horometrie,  —  —  Which  demonfrateth, hove, at  all  times  appointed,  the precife,vfuall  denomination  'ftime,m(ty  be  knowen, for  any  place  ajftgned, 

Zographie,  —  ■  Which  demonfrateth  and  teaeheth, how,  the  Inter feBion  of  ail  vifuall  Pyramids,  made  by  any  plain  e  ajfignedC  the  Centcr,difiancet 

and  light  es  being  determined  )  may  be, by  lines, and  proper  colours  reprefented . 

Architecture,—  Which  is  a  Science garnifed  With  many  doBrines, and diuers  InfruBions :  by  Whofe  iudgemcnt,allWorkcs  by  other  Workmen  fini- 

fied, are  fudged. 

Nauip-ation,— —  Which  demonSlrateth,  how,  by  the  Short  efl  good  Way, by  the  apteft  direBion,and  in  the  forteSl  time-.afujficient  Shippe,  betwenea - 
^  ny  tno  places  (in  pa jjage  nauigab  le)  afigned , may  be  conduBediand  m  all formes  and  naturall  disturbances  chaunctng ,  how  to  vfe 

— ..  the  beStpojfblemeanes, to  recouer  the  place firSt  ajftgned. 

i  haumaturglke,-  which genet  h  certaine  order  to  make  firaunge  Workes,ofthefenfe  to  be  perceiuedtand  of  men  greatly  to  be  Wondred  at . 

Archemaftrie,  Which  teaeheth  to  bring  to  aBuall  experience fenfble,a!l  Worthy  conclufions  ,by  all  the  Artes  Mathematicallpurpofed :  and  by  true 

Naturall  philofephie,  concluded:  And  both  addeth  to  themafarder  Scope ,  in  the  termes  cf  the  fame  Artes:  andalfo ,  by  his  proper 
Meehnd. and  in  peculiar  termes,procedeth, with  helpe  of  tbe forfayd  Artes  ,tothe  performance  of  complete  Experiences :  Which,  of  no 
particular  Arte, are  hable( Formally  )to  be  challenged. 


f 


lohn  Dee  his  Mathematical!  Preface . 


(|Tbc.  firft  booke  of  Eu- 


elides  Elementes 


N  this  first  sooKsis  intreated of  the moft 
fimple,  eafie,  and  firft  matters  and  groundes  of  Geo¬ 
metry,  as,  namely,  of  Lyncs,  Angles,  Triangles,  Pa¬ 
rallels,  Squares,  and  ParaHelogrammc s .  Firft  of they r 
definitions, fhewyng  what  they  are.  After  that  it  tea- 
chcth  how  to  draw  Parallel  lyncs,  and  how  to  forme 
diuerfiy  figures  ofthreefides5&  foure  fides, according 
to,  the  varietie  of  their  fides,  and  Angles  :  &  copareth 
them  all  with  T riangles  ,&  alfo  together  the  one  with 
the  other .  In  it  alfo  is  taught  how  a  figure  of  any 
forme  may  be  chaunged  into  a  Figure  of  an  other 
forme.  And  for  that  it  entreateth  of  thefe  moft  com¬ 
mon  and  general!  thynges ,  thys  booke  is  more  vniuerfall  then  is  the  fecondc, 
third, or  any  other,  and  therefore  iuftly  occupieth  the  firft  place  in  order  :  as  that 
without  which,  the  other  bookes  of  JEucUde  which  follow,  and  alfo  the  workes 
of  others  which  haue  written  in  Geometry,  cannot  be  perceaued  nor  vnderftan- 
ded.  And  forafmuchasallthedemonftrations  and  proofes  of  all  the  propositi¬ 
ons  in  this  whole  booke,  depended  thefe  groundes  and  principles  following,, 
which  by  reafon  of  their  playnnes  neede  no  greate  declaration,  yet  to  remoue  all 
(be  it  neuer  fa  litle)  obfeuritie,  there  are  here  fet  certayne  fliorte  and  manifeft 
expofitions  of  them,  '  . 

^Definitions. 

i,  Afigne  or  point  is  that  fWhich  hath  no  part 

The  better  to  vnderftand  what  matter  of  thing  a  figneor  point  is,yemuft  note  that 
the  nature  and  propertieof  quantitie(wherof  Geometry  entreateth  )is  to  be  deuided, 
fo  that  whatfoeuer  may  be  deuided  into  fundry  partesys  called  q.uantitie.But  a  point, 
a!  though  it  pertayne  to  quantitie,  and  hath  his  beyng  in  quantitie,  yet  is  it  no  quanti- 
tie, for  that  it  cannot  be  deuided.  Becaufe(as  the  definition  faith)  it  hath  no  partes  in¬ 
to  vv filch  it  Should  be  deuided. So  that  a  pointe  is  the  leaf;  thing  that  by  minde  and  vn- 
derftandingcanbeimagined  and  conceyLied  :  then  which,th ere  can  be  nothing  lefte* 
as  the  point  A  ifi  the  raargent. 


The  argument 

of  the  firfl 

Book.** 


T>ef!nit'm)  tf 


A 


Afign  eorpointisof  Tithagoras  Scholersafterthismanner  defined:  Apojntism 
vmtte'tohtch  bath  pofnistj.  Nubers  are  coneeauedin  mynde  without  any  forme  &  figure,  *PV***f*e*’ 
and  therfore  wi  thout  matter  wheron  to  receaue  figure,  &  confequently  without  place  agoras, 
andpofition.  Wherfore  vnitie  beyngapartofnumber,hath  nopofition,  or  determi¬ 
nate  place. Wherby  it  is  manifeft,that  number  is  more  Ample  and  pure  then  is  magni- 
tude,and  alfo  immateriall.*  and  fo  vnity  which  is  the  beginning  of  number,  is  lefts  ma¬ 
terial!  then  a  figne  or  poynt,  which  is  the  beginnyng  of  magnitude.For  a  poynt  is  ma¬ 
terial!,  and  requirethpofition  andplace,andtherby  differed!  from  vnitie. 


2« 


A  line  is  length  “Without  breadth . 


Def'nitim  of 

*  line. 


There  pertaine  to  quantitie  three  dimenfions,  length,bredth,&  thicknes,or  depth.* 
and  by  thefe  thre  are  all  quatities  meafured  &  made  known .  There  are  alfo,  according 

B,j,  ip 


I 


S <tn  other  defi¬ 
nition  of  a  line. 

A n  other. 


The  cades  of  a 
line. 


Difference  of  a 
point fro  Smtj. 

Vnitie  is  a  fart 
of  number. 

A  poynt  is  »» 
pnrt  of  quart- 
title. 


Definition  of 
A  right  line. 


Definition  of  a 
right  line  after 
Campanus. 
Definitio  therof 

after  Archi¬ 
medes. 


Defining  thertf 
After  Plato. 


An  other  def¬ 
inition. 

Another. 


to  thefe  three  dimenfion  s,  three  kyndes  of continuall  quantities  :  a  lyne,  a  fuperficies , 
orplaine,anda  body.Thefirftkynde,nameIy,alineis  here  defined  in  thefe  wordes,  <>A 
lyneis  length  without  breadth. A  point,  forthatitis  no  quantitie  nor  hath  any  partes  into 
which  it  may  be  deuided,but  remaineth  indiuifible,hath  not, nor  can  haue  any  of  thefe 
three  dimenfions.lt  neither  hath  Iength,breadth,northickenes.But  to  a  line.which  is 
the  firft  kynde  of  quantitie.is  attributed  the  firft  dimenfion,  namely,  length,  and  onely 
thatjf’orithath  neither  breadth  nor  thicknes,but  is  eonceaued  to  be  drawne  in  length 
onely, and  by  it,it  may  be  deuided  into  partes  as  many  as  ye  lift,equall,or  vnequall.Bu  t 
as  touching  breadth  it  remaineth  indiuifible.  As  the  lyne  A  B,  which  is  onely  drawer* 
iti  length,  may  be  deuided  in  the  pointe  C  equally,  or  in  the 

point  D  vnequally,and  fo  into  as  many  partes  as  ye  lift.  There  ,  _ 

are  alfo  of  diners  other  geuen  other  definitions  of  a  lyne:  as  A  c  3 

thefe  which  follow. 

__  zA  lyne  is  the  moiiyng  of  a  poynte,zs  the  motion  or  draught  of  a  pinne  or  a  penne  to  your 
fence  maketh  a  lyne, 

Agayne,<*^/  lyne  is  a  magnitude  hailing  one  onely  [pace  or  dimenfion,  namely,  length  Wantyng 
breadth  and  thickyes. 

|  T he  endes  or  limites  of  4  lyne ^re point es. 

For  a  line  hath  his  beginning  from  a  point,and  likewife  endeth  in  a  point;  fo  that  by 
this  alfo  it  is  nianifeft,that  pointes,  for  their  fimplicitie  and  lacke  of  compofition,  are 
neither  quantitie,nor  partes  of  quantitie,but  only  the  termes  and  endes  of  quantitie. 
As  the  pointes  zAy  B,  are  onely  the  endes  of  the  line  A  B ,  and  no  partes  thereof ,  And 
herein  differeth  a  poynte  in  quantitie,  from  vnitie  in  number: 

for  rhat  although  vnitie  be  the  beginningof  nombers,  and  no  _ _ ___ _ ^ 

numberfasapointis  the  beginning  of  quantitie,and  no  quan-  A  3 

titiejyet  is  vnitie  a  part  of  number.For  number  is  nothyng  els 
but  a  colle&ion  of  vnities,and  therfore  may  be  deuided  into  them,  as  into  his  partes. 
But  a  point  is  no  part  of  quantitie,or  of  a  lyne*.  nfeither  is  a  lyne  compofed  ofpointes,as 
number  is  of  v  nities  .For  things  indiuifible  being  neuer  fo  many  added  together,  can 
neucr  make  a  thing  diuifible,as  an  inftant  in  tiine,is  neither  tyme,nor  part  of  tyme,but 
only  the  beginning  and  end  oftime,and  coupleth  &ioyneth  partes  of  tyme  together. 


4  A  right  lyne  is  that  "Which  lieth  equally  betwene  his  pointes. 

As  the  whole  line  zA B  lyeth  ftraight  and  equally  betwene  thepoyntes  AB  without 
any  going  vp  or  comming  downe  on  eyther  fide. 

Campanus  and  certain  others, define  a  right  find  thus:  A  _ 

A  right  line  is  thejhortefl  extenfion  or  draught, that  is  or  may 
b'e  from  onepoynt  to  an  other.  zArchimedes  defilieth  it  thus. 

A  right  line  is  the  fnorteif  of  all  lines, which  haue  one  and  the fitlf fame  limites  or  endes:  which  IS 
in  maner  al  one  with  the  definitio  of  Campanus.Ks  of  all  thefe  lines  A  B  C7A  D  C7A  E  Cs 
A  F  C,  which  are  all  drawen  from  the  point  A7  to  the 

poynte4?£as  Campanus  fpeaketh,  or  which  haue  the  - - & 

felf fame  limites  or  endes,as  Archimedes  fpeaketh,the  t>  _ _ 

lyne  AB  C,  beyng  a  right  line,is  the  Ihorteft.  g 

tP/Wf<?defineth  a  right  line  after  this  maner:  Aright 
line  is  that  whofe  middle  part JhadoWeth  the  extremes.  As  if  f 

you  put  any  thyrig  in  the  middle  of  a  right  lyne,you  lhall  not  fee  from  the  one  ende  to 
the  other,whxch  thynghappeneth  not  in  a  crooked  lyne.  The  Ecclipfe  of  the  Sunneffay 
Aftronomers)  then  happeneth,when  the  Sunne,the  Moone,  &our  eye  are  in  one  right 
line.For  the  Moone  then  being  in  the  midft  betwene  vs  and  the  Sunne,  caufeth  it  to  be 
darkened.Diuer  s  other  define  a  right  line  diuerfly,as  followeth, 
j tA  right  lyne  is  that  which  fiandeth  firme  betwene  his  extremes. 

Aga  ync,A  right  line  is  that  which  With  an  ether  line  of  lyke forme  cannot  make  a  figure. 

Agayne, 


of Euclides  Elementes .  FoL  2. 

A gay  ne,<*^  right  lyne  it  that  which  hath  not  one  pan  in  a  plain:  fuperficies,  and  an  other  erected, 
on  high. 

-  Aeayne,  Aright  lyne  is  that, all  Whofi partes  agree  together  With  all  his  other  partes, 
Agayne,-^  right  lyne  is  that,whofe  extremes  abiding, cannot  be  altered. 

Euclide doth  not  here  define  a  crooked  lyne, for  it  neded  not.lt  may  eafely  be  vnder- 
ftand  by  the  definition  of  a  right  lyne,  for  euery  contrary  is  well  manifefted  &  fet  forth 
by  hys  contrary. One  crooked  lyne  may  be  more  crooked  then  an  other, and  from  one 
poynt  to  an  other  may  be  drawen  infinite  crooked  lynes :  but  one  right  lyne  cannot  be 
righter  then  an  other,  and  therfore  from  one  point  to  an  other,  there  may  be  drawen 
but  one  right  lyne. As  by  the  figure  aboue  fet,you  may  fee, 

5  yfftfper fries  is  thatftobicb  bath  onely  length  and  breadth. 


r  A  fuperficies  is  the  fecond  kinde  of  quantirie,  and  to  it  are  attributed  two  dimenfi- 
ons,  namely  length,  and  breadth.  As  in  the  fuperficies  <sArBCcD, 
whofe  length  is  taken  by  thelyne^A,  or  CD,  and  breadth  bythe 
lyne  ^4C.or‘2?£Z):andbyreafonofthofetwodimenfions  a  fuper¬ 
ficies  may  be  deuided  twowayes,  namely  by  his  length,  and  by  hys 
breadth, but  not  by  thicknefie/orit  hath  none.For,that  is  attribu¬ 
ted  onely  to  a  body,which  is  the  third  kynde  of  quantitie,and  hath 
all  three  dimenfions,length,breadth,  and  thicknes,and  may  be  de- 
uided  according  to  any  of  them. 

Others  define  a  fuperficies  thus :  A fuperficies  is  the  terme  or  ende  of  a  body.  As  a  line  is  the 
ende  and  terme  of  a  fuperficies, 

6  Extremes  of a  fuperficies, are  lynes. 


As  the  endes,limites,or  borders  of  a  lyne,are  pointes,inclofing  the  line:  fo  arc  lines. 
thelimites,borders,andendesinclofingafuperficies.  As  in  the  figure  aforefayde  you 
maye  feethe  fuperficies  inclofed  with  fou  re  lynes.  The  extremes  or  limites  of  a  bodye, 
are  fuperficieiles,And  therfore  a  fuperficies  is  of  fomc  thus  defined;  A  fuperficies  is  that , 
Which  endeth  or  inclofeth  a  body :  as  is  to  be  fene  in  the  fides  of  a  die,  or  of  any  other  body , 

7  flame  fuperficies  is  thatftobich  lieth  equally  betwene  his  lines . 


As  the  fuperficies  AB  CD  lyeth  equally  and  fmoothe  betwene 
the  two  lines  AB,  and  CD:  or  betwene  the  two  lines  AC ,  and 
*B  'D :  fo  that  no  part  therof  eyther  fwelleth  vpward,or  is  depref- 
feddownward.Andthisdefmitiomuchagreeth  with  the  defini¬ 
tion  of  a  right  line,  A  right  line  lieth  equally  betwene  his  points, 


A 


B 


and  a  plaine  fuperficies  lyeth  equally  betwene  his  lynes.  Others  define  a  plaine  fuper¬ 
ficies  after  this  maner: 

tyi  plaine  fuperficies, is  the  fliortesl  extenfion  or  draught  from  one  lyne  to  an  other  dike  as  a  right 
lyne  is  the  (horteft  extenfion  or  draught  from  one  point  to  an  other, 

Euclide  alfo  leaueth  out  here  to  fpeake  of  a  crooked  and  hollow  fuperfic  ies,becaufe  it 
may  eafely  be  vnderftand  by  the  diffinition  of  a  plaine  fuperficies, being  hys  contrary. 
And  euen  as  from  one  point  to  an  other  may  be  drawen  infinite  crooked  lines,  &  but 
one  right  line, which  is  the  (hortefi: :  fo  from  one  lyne  to  an  other  may  be  drawen  infi¬ 
nite  croked  fuperficielfes,&  but  one  plain  fuperficies,  which  is  the  (horteft.Here  mu  ft 
you  confider  when  there  is  in  Geometry  mention  made  of  pointes,lmes,circles,trian- 
gles,or  ofany  other  figure$,ye  may  notconceyue  of them  as  they  be  in  matter,  as  in 
woode,  inmettall,  in  paper,  or  in  any  fuchlyke, for  fo  is  there  no  lyne, but  hath  feme 
breadth, and  maybe  deuidedmor  points,but  that  fhal  haue  fomepartes,  and  may  alfo 
be  deuided,and  fo  of  others,But  you  muft  conceiue  them  in  mynde,plucking  them  by 
imagination  from  all  mattcr,fo  {hall  ye  vnderftande  them  truely  and  perfectly, in  their 
owne  nature  as  they  are  defined, As  alynetobelong,andnotbroade:andapoynte  to 

B.  i j,  b« 


Another 

An  ether, 
jin  ether. 
Vrhj  Euclid* 
here  defneth 
net  a  crooked 
lyne. 


Definition  of  A 
fuperficies. 

A  fuperfic  set 
may  he  deusded 
two  mujes. 


An  other  dofinE 
tiers  of  a  fsper- 
ficies. 

T he  extremes  of 
*  fuperficies. 


Another  de fin's « 
tionofn  fuper - 
ficies. 

Definition  of  a. 
plume  fuperfic 
cies , 


Another  definE 
t ion  of  n  pluynt 
fuperficies. 


NOTE , 

1 


Amthtr  defini¬ 
tion  of  a  flay  no 
fiber  fetes , 

An  other  defi¬ 
nition. 

Another  defi¬ 
nition. 

An  other  defi¬ 
nition. 

Definition  of  a 
playne  angle. 


definition  of  a 
r edit  lined  an- 

gk* 


Three  fndes  of 
an  pies. 

O 

VVhat  a  right 
angle  What 
alfo  a  perpendi¬ 
cular  lyne  it. 


TV  hat  an  o&- 
Sttfe  angle  it. 


Si*?  The first  Tioolg 

be  fo  little, that  it  fhall  haue  no  part  at  all. 

Others  othcrwyfe  define  a  playne  fuperfic ics'.cyf  plains  Jkperficies  is  that,  which  is  firmly 
fit  betxvene  his  extremes, as  before  wa  s  fayd  of  a  right  lyne. 

Agayne.e^f  plaine Jkperficies  is  that  junto  all  Whofi  partes  a  right  line  may  Well  be  applied. 

Again,  A  plaine  faperficies  is  that , Which  is  the fhorteft  ofal Jkperficies, which  haue  one  &  the  felf 
extremes:  Asa  right  line  was  the  fiiortefi;  line  that  can  be  drawen  betwene  two  pointes, 

Againe,Af  playne  Jkperficies  is  that,  whofi  middle  darkeneth  the  extremes,  as  was  alfo  fayd  of 
a  right  lyne. 

*  1 1 

8  A  plaine  angle  is  an  inclination  or  bowing  of  fib  o  lines  the  one  to  the  other 
and  the  one  touching  the  other ^and  not  beyng  direBly  ioyned together. 

-  As  the 
two  lines 
AB,ScB 
C, incline 
the  one 
to  the  o- 
ther,and 
touch  the 

one  the  other  in  the  point®,  in  which  point  by  rcafon  of  the  inclination  of  the  fayd 
lines, is  made  the  angle  A  B  C.  But  if  the  two  lines  which  touch  the  one  the  other,be 
without  allinclinationof  the  one  to  the  other,artd  be  drawne  dire&ly  the  one  to  the 
other,then  make  they  not  any  angle  at  all,as  the  lines  CD,  and  D  Ey touch  the  one  the 
other  in  the  point  D}  and  yet  as  ye  fee  they  make  no  angle. 

9  And  if  the  lines  18?  hich  containe  the  angle  be  right  lynesjhen  is  it  called  4 

rightlyned  angle . 

As  the  angle  A  B  C,in  the  former  figures,is  a  rightlined  angle,  becaufe  it  is  contai¬ 
ned  of  right  lines :  where  note,that  an  angle  is  for  the  moft  part  deferibed  by  thre  let- 
ters,of  which  the  fecond  or  middle  letter  reprefenteth  the  very  angle,  and  therfore  is 
fet  at  the  angle. 

By  the  contrary,a  crooked  lyned  angle,is  that  which  is  contained  of  crooked  lines* 
which  may  be  diuerfiy  figured.  Alfo  a  inixt  angle  is  that  which  is  caufed  of  them  both* 
namely,  of  a  right  line  and  a  crooked,  which  may  alfo  be  diuerfiy  figured,  as  in  the  fi¬ 
gures  before  fet  ye*may  fee. There  are  of  angles  thre  kindes,  a  right  angle,an  acute  an- 
gle,andan  obtufe  angle, the  definitions  of  which  now  follow. 

io  When  a  right  line J landing  Upon  a  right  line  maketh  the  angles  on  either 

fide  e quail:  then  either  of  tbofe  angles  is  a  right  angle.  And  the  right  lyne 
iphkh  flandeth  ere cle  is  called  a  perpendiculer  line  to  that  fifion  Tehicb 
it  fiandeth. 

As  vpon  the  right  line  CD,  fuppofe  there  do  fiand  an  other  line  A. 

A  A,  in  fuch  fort,thatit  maketh  the  angles  on  either  fide  therof  e- 
quall :  namely,the  angle  ABC  on  the  one  fide  equall  to  the  afigle 
AB  Don  the  other  fide :  then  is  eche  of  the  two  angles  A  B  C^and 
A  BID  a.  right  angle, and  the  line  A  B, which  fiandeth  ere&ed  vpon 
the  line  CD,  withoutinclination  to  either  part  is  a  perpendicular 
line,commonlycalledamongartificersaplumbelyne.  c  ft 

1 1  An  obtufe  angle  is  that  which  is  greater  then  a  right  angle. 

As 


ofEuclides  Elementes .  FoL^, 

As  the  angle  CBE  in  the  example  is  anobtufe  angle,  for  it  is 
greater  then  the  angle  A  BC,  which  is  a  right  angle, becaufe  it  con 
tayneth  it,and  containeth  moreouer  the  angle  ABE . 

12  An  acute  angle  is  that &hich  isle  fie  then  a  right  angle. 

As  the  angle  EB  Din  the  figure  before  put  is  an  acute  angle,for 
that  it  is  lefle  then  the  angle  A  B  T), which  is  a  right  angle,  for  the  right  angle  contai¬ 
neth  it,arid  moreouer  the  angle  ABE. 

i$  A  limite  or  termejs  the  ende  ofeuery  thing . 

For  as  much  as  ofthinges  infinite  (as  TUte  faith)  there  is  no  fcience,  therefore  muft 
magnitude  or  quantitie(wherof  Geometry  entreateth) be  finite,and  haue  borders  and 
limites  to  inclofeit/which  are  here  defined  to  be  the  endes  therof.  As  a  point  is  the  li¬ 
mite  or  terme  of  a  line,becaufe  it  is  thend  therof :  A  line  likewife  is  the  limite  &  terme 
of  a  fuperficies :  and  likewife  a  fuperficies  is  the  limite  and  terme  of  a  body,as  is  before 
declared. 


14  A  figure  is  that  which  is  contayned  finder  one  limite  or  terme, or  many . 


As  the  figure  A  is  contained  vnder  one  limit, 
which  is  the  round  line,  Alfo  the  figure  3  is  con 
tayned  vnder  three  right  lines.  And  the  figure  C 
vnder  foure,and  fo  of  others,  which  are  their  li- 
mites  ortermes. 


15  A  circle  is  a plaine  figure  ^conteyned  finder  one  line ,  "which  is  called  a  cir <* 
cumfierencefmto  fiahich  all  ly^ard%en  from  one  poynt  trithin  the  figure 
and  falling  fipon  the  circumference  therof are  equal!  the  one  to  the  other. 


As  the  figure  here  fetis  a plaine  figure,  thatis  a  figure  without  groffenes  or  thick- 
nes,and  is  alfo  contayned  vnder  one  line,namely,the  crooked  lyne 
B  CD,which  is  the  circumference  therof,  it  hath  moreouer  in  the 
middle  therof  a  point,  iiiamelyjthgpointe^,  from  which,  all  the 
lynes  drawen  to  the fiip®ISSeS,are  equal:  as  the  lines  AB,AC>  A 
i>7  and  other  how  many  foeuer. 

Ofall  figures  a  circle  is  the  moft  perfect,  andtherfore  is  it  here 
firft  defined, 

16  And  that  point  is  called  the  centre  of  the  circle ,  as  is  the  point  A,  which  is 
Jet  in  the  middes  of the  former  circle . 

For  the  more  eafy  declaration,that  all  the  lines  drawen  from  the  centre  of  the  circle 
to  the  circumference,are  equall, ye  muft  note, that  although  a  line 
be  not  made  ofpointes:  yet  a  point,by  his  motion  or  draught, de- 
feribeth  a  line,  Likewife  a  line  drawen,or  moued,  deferibeth  a  fu¬ 
perficies:  alfo  a  fuperficies  being  moued  maketh  a  folide  or  bodie. 

Now  the  imagine  the  line  A  3,  (the  point  A  being  fixed)to  be  mo* 
ued  about  in  a  plaine  fuperficies,drawing  the  point  B  continually 
about  the  point  till  it  returne  to  the  place  where  it  began  firft 

tomoue:  fo  (hall  the  point  2?,by  this  motion,  deferibethe  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circlejand  the  point  tA  being  fixed, is  the  centre  of  the  circle.  Which  in 

BJii.  ali 


What  an  aiuft 
angle  is. 


T he  limite  of 
anj  thing. 

No  fcience  ef 
t hinges  infinite 


Definition  of  a 
figure. 


Definition  of  it. 
circle. 


A  circle  the 
■moft  perfeti  ef 
all  figures. 

The  centre  ef  & 
circle. 


Definition  of* 
diameter. 


Definition  of 
fsmicircl e. 


Definition  of  it 
fction  of  a  cir¬ 
cle. 


Definition  of 
recltlmed fi¬ 
gures. 

Definition  of 
three fidcd fi¬ 
gures. 


5^  The firU  TSoolfe 

all  the  time  of  the  motion  oftheline,hadlikediftance:  from  the  circumference, name¬ 
ly  ,the  length  of  the  line  A  B.  And  for  that  al  the  lines  drawn  from  the  centre  tothe  cir** 
cumlerence  are  defcribed  of  that  line,they  are  alfo  equal  vntoit,  &  betwene  thefelues. 

17  A  diameter  of  a  circle  fis  a  right  line^hich  dralben  hy  the  centre  thereof, 
and  ending  at  the  circumference  on  either  fide,  deuideth  the  circle  into 
tTVo  equall partes , 

As  the  line  B  A  Cm  this  circle  prefent  is  the  diameter,becaufe 
it  paffeth  from  the  point  3,  of  the  one  fide  of  the  circumferece, 
to  the  point  C,on  the  other  fide  of  the  circumference,  &  paffeth 
alfo  by  the  pointed  being  the  centre  of  the  circle.  Andmoreo-  3 
uer  it  deuideth  the  circle  into  two  equall  partes.-  the  one,name~ 

1 y  B  ©  C,being  on  the  one  fide  of  the  line,  &  the  other  namely, 

BE  C,  on  the  other  fide,which  thing  did  Thales  Miletius  (which 
brought  Geometry  out  of  Egiptinto  GreceJ  firft  obferue  and 
proue,  For  if  a  line  drawen  by  thecentre,do  not  deuide  a  circle  into  two  equal  partes: 
all  the  lines  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  Ihould  not  be  equall* 


T> 


IS  A femicircle fis  a  figure  Tvhich  is  contaynedvnder  the  diameter y  andvni 
der  that  part  of  the  circumference  which  is  cut  of by  the  diametret 


As  in  the  circle  ABCTt  the  figure  B  AC  is  a  fcmicircle,becaufe 
it  is  contained  of  the  right  line  B  CC,  which  is  the  diametre,and 
of  the  crooked  line  B  A  C,  being  that  part  of  the  circumference, 
which  is  cut  of  by  the  diametret  G  C.  So  likewife  the  other  part 
of  the  circle,namely  B  D  C,  is  a  fcmicircle  as  the  other  was. 


19  A  fe  Elton  or  portion  of  a  circle ,  is  a  figure  Tvhiche  is  contayned  Vnder  a 
rightly  tie,  and  a  parte  of  the  circumference  0  greater  or  leffe  then  the 
fimicircle. 


As  the  figure  B  C,  in  the  example,  is  a  fedion  of  a  circle, & 
is  greater  then  halfe  a  circlc,and  the  figure  A  2)  C,is  alfo  a  fedi- 
on  of  a  circle,and  is  leffe  then  a  femicircle.  A  fedion, portion,  or 
part  ofa  circle  is  all  one,  and  fignifieth  fuch  a  part  which  is  ei¬ 
ther  more  or  leffe,  thenafemicircle:  fo  that  a  femicircle  is  not  ^ 
here  called  a  fedion  or  portion  of  a  circle,  A  right  lyne  drawen 
from  one  fide  of  the  circumference  of  a  circle  to  the  other,  not 
pfdlyngby  the  centre,  deuideth  the  circle  into  two  vnequall 
partes,  which  are  two  fedions,of  which  that  which  contayneththe  centre  is  called  the 
greater  fedion,and  the  other  is  called  the  leffe  fedion.  Asinthecxamplc,thepart  of 
the  circle^/  B  C,which  containeth  in  it  the  centre  E,  is  the  greater  fedion,beinggrea 
ter  then  the  halfe  circle:  the  other  part, namely  <tA  D  C,  which  hath  not  the  centre  iia 
it,is  the  leffe  fedion  of  the  circle,bcing  leffe  then  a  femicircle. 


20  (bright  lined  figures  are  fuch  tbhich  are  contaynedvnder  right  lynes. 


As  are  fuch  as  followeth,of  which  fome  are  contayned  vndcr  three  right  lines,  fom$ 
vnder  foure,fome  vnder  fiue,and  fome  vnder  mo, 

2 1  Tbre  ftded  figures ,or  figures  of  threfy  desire  fuch  Tvbich  are  contay* 

ned  Vnder  three  right  lines ,  As 


ofSuclides  Elementes . 

As  the  figure  in  the  example  A  B  C,  is  a  figure  of  three  fides, 
becaufeitis  cotamed  vnder  thre  right  lines,  namely,vnder  the 
lines  lABfB  C,CzA. 

A  figure  of  three  fides,  or  a  triangle,  is  the  firft  figure  in 
order  of  all  right  lined  figures ,  and  therfore  of  all  others  it  is 
firft  defined.  For  ynderleffe  then  three  lines,  can  no  figure  be 
comprehended. 


22»  Foure fided figures  or  figures  offoure fides  are finch ,  lehich  are  contained 
ynder foure  right  lines. 

As  the  figure  here  fet,is  a  figure  offoure  fides,for  that  it  is  c5~  .  ^ 

prehqnded  vnder  foure  right  lines,namely,A  B,B  D,D  C,C  A.  — — * - — - 

Triangles,and  foure  fided  figures  ferue  commonly  to  manyv- 

fes  in  demonftrations  of  Geometry .  Wherfore  the  nature  and  L- - - - — - 

properties  of  them, are  much  to  be  obferued,  the  vfe  of  other  ft-  *“ 
gures  is  more  obfeure. 


Foly. 

A 


23*  Many  fided  figures  are finch  "Which  haue  mo fides  then foure. 

Right  lined  figures  hauing  mo  fides  then  fo\ver,by  continual  adding  of  fides  may  be 


infinite.  Wherfore  to  define  them  all  feueralIy,accordingto  the  number  of  their  fides, 
fliould  be  very  tedious,or  rather  impoifible. Therfore  hath  Euchde  comprehended  the 
vnder  one  name,and  vnder  one  diffmition :  calling  them  many  fided  figures,  as  many 
as  hauc  mo  fides  then  foure  :  as  if  they  hauefiuc  fides,fixe,  feuen,  or  mo.  Here  noteye9 
thateuery  rightlined  figure  hath  as  many  angles,asit  hath  fides,&takcth  his  denomi¬ 
nation  afwell  of  the  number  of  his  angles, as  of  the  number  of  his  fides-  As  a  figure  co- 
rained  vnder  three  right  lines,of  the  number  of  his  three  fides, is  called  a  thre  fided  fi¬ 
gure  :  euen  fo  of  the  number  of  his  three  angles, it  is  called  a  triangle.  Likewife  a  figure 
contained  Vnder  foure  right  lines,by  reafon  of  the  number  of  his  fides, is  called  a  foure 
fided  figure  :  and  by  reafon  of  the  number  of  his  angles,  ki$  called  aquadrangled  fi* 
gure,andfo  ofothers. 


24.  Of  three fided  figures  or  triangles }  an  equilatre  triangle  is  that}  -tohich 
hath  three  equall fides. 

• »  » .  :  ,  •  . 

Triangles  haue  their  differencespartlyof  their  fides,  and 
partlyoftheirangles  .  As  touching  the  differences  of  their 
fides, there  are  three  kindes.For  either  all  thre  fides  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  aj-e  eqqalbor  two  onely.are  equall,  &  the  third  vnequal : 

©r  eis  all  three  are  vUea  uali  the  one  to  the  other.The  firft  kind 
of  triangles,namely,that  whichhath  three  equall  fidesfis  molt 

fitnple,andeafieft  to  be  knowemandis  here  firft  defined,  and 

•  •  •  • 

Ban;*. 


Definition  of 
foure fided 
figure! . 


Definition  if 
m.tnj  fided 
figures* 


Definition  of 
a  ntefUtUtSF 
Hrianglt, 


Definition  of 
«m»  t fio fee  let. 


Definition  of 
■i*  ScnUnttm. 


An  Qrtbigoni- 
vin  t<ri,tnfie. 


An  Oxlgont* 
Ifnttrfangie* 


ThefirH'Booke 


•  is  called  an  equilater  triangle, as  the  triangle  *A in  the  example, all  whofe  fides  are  of 
one  length.  .  , 

■"  )  •  ■  .  . 'W-'V-';,'  "  f* 

25 .  Ifofceksjs  a  triangle ftohich  hath  onelj  two  fides  equaU. 

The  fecond  kinde  of  triangles  4 
hath  two  fides  of  one  length, but 
the  third  fide  is  either  longer  or 
ihorter  the  the  other  two,  as  are 
the  triangles  here  figured ,B,C,D 
In  the  triangle  F,the  two  fides 
A  E  and  E  F are  equal  the  one  to 
the  other,and  the  fide  A  F, is  16- 
ger  then  any  of  them  both:Likewifein  the  triangle  Cthe  two  fides  G 
quail, and  the  fide  G  K is  greater.  Alfo  in  the  triangle  D,the  fides  L  MnndAlN3aie «. 
quail, and  the  fide  L  Nis  Ihorter. 

26.  S calenum  is  a  triangle fWbofie  three fides  are  alh>nequaU. 

As  are  the  triangles  E,F,  in  which  there  is  no 
one  fide  equall  to  any  of  theother.For  in  the  tri¬ 
angle  F,the  fide  AC  is  greater  then  the  fide  2?  C, 
and  the  fide  B  Cis  greater  the  thefide  AB.  Like- 
wife  in  the  triangle  F,the  fide  D  H,is  greater  the 
the  fide  B  (?,and  the  fide  D  G}is  greater  then  the 
fide  G  H, 


warn* 


An  Amtligoni- 
am  triangle. 


2  7.  Againe  of  triangles ,an  Orthigonium  or  a  rightangled  triangle s  l 
angle  ’Which  hath  a  right  angle. 

As  there  are  three  kindes  of  triangles,  by  reafon  of  the  diuerfitie 
of  the  fides  Jo  are  there  alfo  three  kindes  of  triangles,by  reafon  of 
•the  varietie  of  the  angles.  For  euery  triangle  either  containeth  one 
right  angle,  &  two  acute  angles :  or  one  obtufe  angle,&  two  acutei 
orthree  acute  angles  :  foritisimpoffiblethatone  triangle  fhould 
containe  two  obtufe  angles,or  two  right  angles,  or  one  obtufe  an. 
gle,and  the  other  a  right  angle.  All  which  kindes  arc  here  defined. 

Fir  ft  a  rightangled  triangle  whichehath  in  it  a  right  angle .  As  the 
triangle  B  CD,of  which  the  angle  B  CDfis  a  right  angle. 

28.  An  ambligonium  or  an  obtufe  angled  triangle $  is  a  triangle  "Which  hath 
an  obtufe  angle. 

A  sis  the  triangle  B,  whole  angle  AC 
I>,  is  an  obtufe  angle,  and  is  alfo  aScale- 
non.hauing  his  three  fides  vnequall :  the 
triangle  £,  is  likewife  an  Ambligonion* 
whofe angle  EG H, is  an  obtufe  angle, 

&  is  an  Ifofceles,  hailing  two  ofhis  fides 
equalbnamelyF  (JandG  H. 

2i).  An  oxigonium  or  an  acuteangled  triangle 3  is  a  triangle  "Which  hath  aU 

his  three  angles  acute . 

<6  _  » 

/te 


mentes. 


Foil. 


juarc* 


As  the  triangles  A, 71, CM  the  example, al 
whofe  angles  are  acute.-of  which  A  is  an  e- 
quilater  triangle,  2?,  an  Ifofccles,  and  C  a 
Scalenon.An  cquilater  triangle  is  moftfim 
pie,  and  hath  one  vniforme  conftrudrion, 
and  therfore  all  the  angles  ofit  arecquall, 
and  neuer  hath  in  it  either  a  right  angle, or 
an  obtufe:  but  the  angles  of  an  Ifofceles  or  a  Scalenon ,  may  di- 
uerlly  vary.  It  is  alfotobe  noted  that  in  comparifon  of  any  two 
fides of a  triangle,  the  third  is  called  a  bafe.  As  of  the  triangle 
ABCin  refpeft  of  the  two  lines  A B and  A C,the  line B  C,is  the 
bafe :  and  in  refpedt  of  the  two  fides  A  C  and  C  B,  the  line  A  B,is 
the  bafe,  and  likewyfe  in  refpedtof  the  two  fides  CB  &  B  A,  tfie 
line  A  C,is  the  bafe. 


5  o  Of  foure  fyded figures,  a  quadrate  orfquare  is  that,  Tthofe  fydes  are  e*  °fs 

quail 3and  bis  angles  right* 

As  triangles  haue  their  difference  and  varietie  by  reafon  of  their  . 
fides  and  angles:  fo  likewife  do  figures  of  foure  fides, take  their  varie¬ 
tie  and  difference  partly  by  reafon  of  their  fides,  &  partly  by  reafon 
of  their  angles,as  appeareth  by  their  definitions.Thc  four  fided  figure 
ABCD  is  afquare  ora  quadrate,  becaufeitis  a  right  angled  figure, 
al  hys  anglesare  rightangles,and  alfo  all  his  four  fides  are  cquall. 

'  •< 

31  A  figure  on  the  otic  fiyde  longer ^or  fiquarelike,  or  as fome  call  it ,4  long  nfo'Aon  of* 
fquare, is  that  ybic h  hath  right  angles, but  hath  not  equall  fydes # 

This  figure  agreeth  with  a  fquarc  touching  his  angles,  in 
that  either  of  them  hath  right  angles,  and  differeth  from  it 
onely  by  reafon  of  his  fides,in  that  the  fides  thcrofbe  not  e- 
quall,as  are  the  fides  of  a  fquare.  As  in  the  example,the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  figure  ABCD ,  are  right  angles, but  the  two  fides 
thereof  A  B ,  and  CD,  are  longer  then  the  other  two  fides 
D. 

3  2  Rhombus  (or  a  diamonde)  is  a  figure  hauing  fioure  equall fydes Jbut  it  is  De^itiott  ^ 

not  right  angled.  Diamond  figure 


t 


This  figure  agreeth  with  a  fquare,  as  touching  the  equallitie  of 
lines,  but  differeth  from  itin  that  it  hath  not  right  angles,  as  hath 
the  fquare  .As  of  this  figure,the  foure  lines  AB,75C,  CD ,  D  A}  be  e- 
quall.but  the  angles  therofare  not  right  angles.  For  the  two  angles 
ABC  and  A  D  C,  are  obtufe  angles,greater  then  right  angles,  &  the 
other  two  angles  B  A  D  and  BCD ,  are  two  acute  angles  leffethen 
two  right  angles.  And  thefie  foure  angles  are  yet  equall  to  foure  right 
angles:  for,asmuchas  the  acute  angle  wanteth  of  a  right  angle.,  fo 
much  the  obtufe  angle  excedeth  a  right  angle. 


a 


ffifiombaides 


'■I  V' 


Definition  of# 
eltamondUke  fi¬ 
gure. 


'Trapezia  or 
tub  la. 


Definition  of 
Turullell/na, 


W fiat  Petici- 
ens-are. 


Thefirsl^oo!^ 

3  |  hombaides(or  a  diamond  like) is  a  figure  ftohofe  oppofite /ides  ate  e* 

quail  find  lehofe  oppofite  angles  are  alfo  equally  but  it  bath  neither  e* 
quail fides  fior  right  angles. 

As  in  the  figure  A B  CT), all  the  foure  fides  are  not 
equall,butthe  two  fides  AB  and  CD} being  oppofite 
the  one  to  the  other,aIfo  the  other  two  fides  A  Cand 
B  Thbeingalfo  oppofite,  are  equallthe  oneto  the  o- 
ther.Likewife  the  angles  are  not  right  angles,but  the 
angles  CAB ,  and  CD  B,  are  obtufe  angles,  and  op¬ 
pofite  and  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  Likewyfe  the 
angles  A  B  ‘Z>,and  A C  D, are  acute  angles,and  oppo- 
fite,and  alfo  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

34  dll  other  figures  of fours  fides  bejides  thejeyare  called  trapezia  fir  tables „ 

Such  are  all  figures,in  which  is  obferued  no  equallitie  of  fides 

nor  angles:  as  the  figures  A  andi?,in  themarget,which  haue  nei-  f  - - f 

ther  equall  fides, nor  equal  angles, but  are  described  at  all  aduen-  \  4  / 

ture  without  obferuation  of  order,  and  therefore  they  are  called  / 

irregular  figures. 

1 5  (parallel  or  equidifi ant  right  lines  are  fuchfitohicb 
being  in  one  and thefelfe fame ftipcr fries,  and pro* 
duced  infinitely  on  both  fides 3  doneuer  in  any  part 
i  concurre. 

As  are  the  lines  A 2?,and  C D, in  the  example. 


5^  Teti cions  or  requejles . 

1  From  any  point  to  any  point, to  dralr  a  right  line . 

After  the  definitions,  which  are  the  firft  kind  of  princip!es,now  follow  petitions, 
which  are  the  fecond  kynd  of  principles:  which  are  certain  general  fentences,fo  plain, 
&  fo  perfpicuous,  that  they  are  perceiued  to  be  true  as  foone  as  they  are  vttered,&  no 
man  that  hath  but  common  fence,can,nor  will  deny  them.  Of  which,  the  firft  is  that, 
which  is  here  fet.  As  from  the  point  ex/, to  the  point  who  wil  de- 
ny,but  eafily  graunt  that  a  right  line  may  be  drawn^For  two  points  -  4 

howfoeuer  they  be  fet,are  imagined  to  be  in  one  and  thefelfe  fame  A  B 

plaine  fuperficies,wherfore  from  the  one  to  the  other  there  is  fome 
fhorteft  draught, whiche  is  a  right  line.Likewife  any  two  right  lines  howfoeuer  they  be 
fet,  are  imagined  to  beinonefuperficies,  and  therefore  from  any  one  line  to  any  one 
line,may  be  drawen  a  fuperficie  s . 

.  :  4 

2  To  produce  a  right  line finite,  fraight  forth  continually , 

M  •  - 

As  to  draw  in  length  continually  the  right  line  AB ,  who  will 
not  graunt.?  For  there  is  no  magnitude  fo  great,  but  that  there  a.  B  c 
maybe  a  greter,nor  any  fo  litkgbut  that  there  may  be  a  kfle.And 

aline 


of  Euclides  Elemdntes .  FoL  6* 

a  line  is  a  draught  from  one  point  to  an  other,  therfore  from  the  point  B,  which  is  the 
ende  of  the  line  zA  2?,may  be  drawn  a  line  to  fome  other  point, as  to  the  point  C,  and 
from  that  to  an  pther,ana  fo  infinitely. 

5  Vpon  any  centre  and  at  any  diJlance}to  defcribe  a  circle . 

A  playne  fuperficies  may  in  compafle  be  extended  infi¬ 
nitely  :  as  from  any  pointe  to  any  pointe  may  be  drawen  a 
right  line, by  reafon  wherof  it  cdmmeth  to  paflfe  that  a  cir¬ 
cle  may  be  defcribed  vpon  any  centre  and  at  any  fpace  or 
diftance  .As  vpon  the  centre  A}and  vpon  the  fpace A  B,ye 
may  defcribe  the  circle  BC,8c  vpon  the  fame  centre,vpon 
the  diftance  A  (Z),ye  may  defcribe  the  circle  D  £,or  vppon 
the  fame  centre  ^according  to  the  diftaunce  A  F,  ye  may 
defcribe  the  circle  F  G,  and  fo  infinitely  extendyng  your 
(pace. 

4  jill  right  angles  are  e quail  the  one  to  the  other. 


v 


E 


B 


■a 


This  pcticion  is  moft  plaine,  and  oftreth  it  felfe  euen  to  the 
fence.  For  as  much  as  a  right  angle  is  caufed  of  one  right  lyne 
falling  perpendicularly  vppon  an  other,and  no  one  line  can  fall 
more  perpendicularly  vpo  a  line  then  an  other:  therfore  no  one 
right  angle  can  be  greater  the  an  othenneither  do  the  length  or 
Ihortenes  of  the  lines  alter  the  grcatnes  of  the  angleJFor  in  the 
example,  the  right  angle  A  B  C,  though  it  be  made  of  much  lon¬ 
ger  lines  then  the  right  angle  D  E  F,whofe  lines  are  much  (hotter,  yetis  that  angle  no 
greater  then  the  other. For  if  ye  fet  the  point  E  iuft  vpon  the  point  B,  then  (hal  the  line 
E  D,euenly  and  iuftly  fall  vpon  the  line  A .5, and  the  line  E  A, (hall  alfo  fall  equally  vpon 
the  line  B  C, and  fo  dial  the  angle  2)  E  F,be  equall  to  the  angle  A  B  £7, for  that  the  lines 
which  caufe  them,are  oflike  inclination. 

It  may  euidently  alfo  be  fene  at  the  centre  of  a  circle.  For  if 
ye  draw  in  a  circle  two  diameters,  the  one  cutting  the  other  in 
the  centre  by  right  angles,  ye  (hall  deuide  the  circle  into  fowre 
equall  partes,of  svhich  eche  contayneth  one  right  angle,  fo  are 
all  the  foure  right  angles  about  the  centre  of  the  circle  equall. 


5  When  a  right  line  falling  Vpon  t'tpo  right  lines  foth  make  on  one  &  the 
Jelfefamefyde ,  the  twoinVoarde angles  lefte  then  nvo  right  angles y  then 
foal  thefe  tHoo  right  lines  heyng  produced at  length  concurreon  that  part, 
in  "frhich  are  the  tibo  angles  lefe  then  two  right  angles . 

As  if  the  right  line  A  5,fall  vpon  two  right  lines, 
namely,C  D  and  E  F, fo  that  it  make  the  two  inward 
angles  on  the  one  fide,as  the  angles  D  HI  Sc  F I H, 
lefle  then  two  right  angles  (as  in  the  example  they 
do)  the  faid  two  lines  C  D,  and  E  F,  being  drawen 
forth  in  legth  on  that  part,wheron  the  two  angles 
being  lefie  the  two  right  angles  con(ift,(hal  at  legth 
concurre  and  meete  together:  as  in  the  point  -D,as 
it  is  eafie  to  fee.  For  the  partes  of  the  lines  towardes  2)  F,are  more  enclined  the  one  to 

C.if*  the 


VFhnt  cammt* 
fentences  tore. 

’Difference  be- 
twerse  petitions 
common [en¬ 
tentes^ 


Thefirfl  Hooke 

the  other,then  the  partes  of  thelines  towardes  CPare.  Wherfore  the  more  thefeparts 
are  produced  .the  more  they  fhall  approch  neare  and  neare.till  at  length  they  fhal  mete 
in  one  point.  Contrariwife  the  fame  lines  drawn  in  legth  on  the  other  fide,fbr  that  the 
angles  on  that  fide,namely,  the  angle  CHB, and  the  angle  El  A,  are  greater  then  two 
right  angles,  fo  much  as  the  other  two  angles  are  lefle  then  two  right  angles,  lhall  ne¬ 
wer  mete, but  the  further  they  are  drawen,the  further  they  fhalbe  diftant  the  one  from 
the  other. 

6  That  two  right  lines  include  not  a  fuperficies. 

If  the  lines  A  B  and  ./IC, being  right  lines,fhould  inclofe 
afuperficies,theymufteof  ncceffitie  bee  ioyned  together  at 
both  the  endes,andthe  fuperficies  mull  be  betwene  the.Ioyne 
them  on  the  one  fide  together  in  the  pointeA,  and  imagine 
the  point.#  to  be  drawen  to  the  point  C,  fo  fhall  the  line  ABi 
fall  on  the  line  A  C,and  couerit,andfo  be  all  one  with  it,  and  neuer  inclofe  a  fpace  or 
fuperficies. 


5-^  Common fentences . 


i  Thinges  equal!  to  one  and  the  felfe fame  thyng:  are  squall  alfo  the  one 
to  the  other* 

After  definitions  and  petitions.now  are  fet  common  fentences,which  are  the  third 
andlaft  kynd  ofprinciples.Which  are  certaine  general  propofitios,  commonly  known 
ofall'men.of  themfelues  moft  manifeft  &  cleared  therfore  are  called  alfo  dignities  not 
able  to  be  denied  ofany  .Peticions  alfo  are  very  manifeft,but  notfo  fully  as  are  the  ed¬ 
ition  fentences.and  therfore  are  required  or  defired  to  be  graunted.  Peticions  alfo  are 
more  peculiar  to  the  arte  whereof  they  are*,  as  thofe  before  put  are  proper  to  Geome¬ 
try:  but  common  fentences  are  general!  to  all  things  wherunto  they  can  be  applied, 
Agayne.  peticions  con fift  in  adions  or  doing  of  fomewhat  moft  eafy  to  be  done :  but 
common  fentences  confift  in  confideration  of  mynde,  butyetoffuch  thinges  which 
are  moil  eafy  to  be  vnderftanded,  as  is  that  before  let. 

As  if  the  line  A  be  equall  to  the  line  B,  And  if  the  line  C  3 

be  alfo  equall  to  the  line  By  then  of  neceffitie  the  lines  y  ' 

^andCjllialbeequaltheonetotheother.Soisitinall  ^  <- 

fuperficielfes,angles,&numbers,&inallotherthings  * - ; - *  1 — - — r* 

(of  one  kynde)  that  may  be  compared  together. 


And  if  ye  adde  equall  thinges  to  equall  thinges:  the  fbhole Jhalhe  equall. 


■B 


E 


V 


F 


As  if  theline  AB  be  equal  to  the  line  C  P>,&  to  the 

line  A  By be  added  the  line  B  p,& to  theline  C2?,be  - - 

added  alfo  an  other  line  E>  Pfoeing  equal  to  the  line  c 

B  E,(o  that  two  equal  lines, namely, 5  P,and  T>  P,be  * - 

added  to  two  equall  lynes  lAB,&  C Pbthen  foal  the 
w  hole  ly  ne  iAEy  be  equall  to  the  whole  lyne  CP,  and  fo  of  all  quantities  generally, 

I  And  if  from  equall  thinges 3ye  take  al&ay  equall  thinges:  the  thinges  re* 

may mng  fl? all  be  equall 


ofEuclides  Elementes  < 


Eolj. 

£  3 


c 


F 


As  if  from  the  two  lines  AB  and  CD,  being 
equal, ye  take  away  two  equalLlhies,namely,£  B 
and  F  D,  then  maye  you  conclude  by  this  com¬ 
mon  fentence,that  the  partes  remayning,name~ 
ly,^  F,and CF are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.’ 
and  fo  of  all  other  quantities . 

4  .And  if from  Vnequall  t  hinges  ye  take  away  equall  thinges :  the  thynges 

which  remayne f mil  he  Vnequall, 


E  3 


F 


As  if  the  lines  A  2?,and  CD,  be  vnequall,the  line  <iA  2?,  beyng  ^ 
longer  then  the  line  C  D,  &ifye  take  fro  them  two  equall  lines,  £~ 
as£F,andFD:thepartesremayning,whichare  thelines  a/FF  *— 
and  C  F,lhall  be  vnequall  the  one  to  the  oth  er,namely,  the  lyne 
%A F,lhall  be  greater  then  the  line  C  F, which  is  euer  true  in  all  quantities  whatfoeuer* 

5  And  if  to  Vnequall  thinges  ye  adde equall  thinges :  the  whole  fhall  he  Vn* 
equali 

Asifyehauetwo  vnequallines,namely,^Fthegreater,and  A  e  B 

C  F  the  lelfe, &ifye  adde  vnto  the  two  equall  lines,  EB  &FD,  ~~ 

thenmaye  ye  conclude  that  the  whole  lines  compofed  are  vn-  £ - — ■£* 

equall :  namely,  that  the  whole  lyne  <sA  2?,  is  greater  then  the 
whole  line  C  D,and  fo  of  all  other  quantities. 

6  Thinges  which  are  double  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  thing:  are  equall  the 
one  to  the  other. 


A. 

.  t — - 


3 


As  if  the  line  &A  B  be  double  to  the  line  E  F,and  if  alfo  the 
lineCD,be  double  to  the  fame  line  EF:  themayyou  bythis 

common  fentence  conclude, that  the  two  lines  vA  i?,&  C  D,  £ _  F 

areequalltheoneto  theother.Andthisistrueinall  quanti-  c  ^ 

ties,and  that  not  only, when  they  are  double,  but  alfo  if  they  - - - - - 

be  triple  or  quadruple,  or  in  what  proportion  foeuer  it  be  of 

the  greater  inequallitie.  Which  is  when  the  greater  quantitie  is  compared  to  thelefle. 


7  Thinges  which  are  the  halfe  of  one  and  the felfe  fame  thing:  are  equal  the 

one  to  the  other. 


A 


F 


As  if  the  line  A  B  ,be  the  halfe  of  the  line  E  F,  and  if  the  lyne 
C  D,  be  the  halfe  alfo  of  the  fame  line  EF:  then  may  ye  con¬ 
clude  by  this  common  fentence,that  the  two  lines  c AB  and 
CD,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  This  is  alfo  true  in  all 
kyndes  of  quantitie,and  that  not  onely  when  ir  is  a  halfe,  but 
alfo  if  it  be  a  third  ,a  q  uarter,  or  in  w  hat  proportion  foeuer  it 
be  of  the  lelfe  in  equallitie.  Which  is  when  the  lelfe  quantitie  is  copared  to  the  greater* 


p 


v, 

8  ThinoesWi 

C3 


jjjm  together:  We  equall  the  one  to  the  other . 


Such  thinges  are  fayd  to  agree  together,whiche  when  they  are  applied  the  one  to 
the  other;  or  fet  the  one  vpon  thfeother,the  one  excedeth  not  the  other  in  any  thyng, 

C.iij,  As 


What  proporti¬ 
on  of the grea¬ 
ter  inetpttalitj  k 


What  proporti¬ 
on  of  the  lejfe 
tnequahue  is , 


Whitt  a  L'ropo- 
Jirien  is. 


Propofitions  of 
two  fortes. 

What  ^  Pro- 
hit  tacit. 


WhaSa  Thee- 
remeis. 


TheftrSlBooke 

As  if  the  two  triangles  ABC,  and  DE  F,  were  applied 
theone  to  the  other, and  the  triangle  AB  C ,  were  fet  v- 
pon  the  triangle 2)  £  F,if  then  the  angle  A ,  do  iuftly  a- 
greewith  the  angle  F>,and  the  angle  S>with  the  angle  E, 
and  alfo  the  angle  C,  with  the  angle  F :  and  moreouer  if 
the  line  A  F,d o  iuftly  fall  vpon  the  line  T>  £,and  the  line 
A  C,vpon  the  line  D  F,  and  alfo  the  line  2  C,  vppon  the 
line  E  E,  fb  that  on  euery  part  of  thefe  two  triangles, 
there  is  iuft  agreement,  then  may  ye  conclude  that  the 
two  trianglesare  equalL 


9  Euery  Thlxple  is  greater  then  his  part. 

As  the  whole  is  equal  to  all  his  partes  taken  together,  fo  is  it  grea¬ 
ter  then  any  one  part  therof.Asif  the  line  CB  be  a  part  of  the  line  A  4 
'5, then  by  this  common  fentenceye  may  conclude  that  the  whole  ~ 
line  A  B,  is  greater  then  the  part,  namcly,the  the  line  CF,And  this 
is  gencrall  in  all  thinges. 


He  principles  thus  placed  tended, now  follow  the  propofitions,  which 
are  fentences  fetforth  to  be  proued  by  reafoningand  demonftrations, 
a  nd  thetfore  they  arc  agayne  repeated  in  the  end  of  the  dem  onftration. 
For  the  propofition  is  euer  the  conclufton,  and  that  which  ought  to  be 
proued.  ,  , ,  , 

Propofitions  are  of  two  fortes,  the  one  is  called  a  Probleme,  the  other  a  Theoreme.1 

AProbleme,is  a  propofition  which  requireth  fome  a<ftion,or  doing:  as  the  makyng 
of  fome  figure, or  to  deuide  a  figure  or  line,to  apply  figure  to  figure,to  adde  figures  to- 
gether,or  to  fubtrah  one  from  an  other ,to  deferibegto  inferib^ to  circumfcribe  one  fi¬ 
gure  within  or  without  another,  and  fuche  like .  As  of  the  firft  propofition  of  the  firft 
booke  is  a  probleme,  which  is  thus:  Vpon  aright  line geuennot  bang  infinite, to  defertbe  an  e-  <■ 
quilater  triangle, or  a  triangle  of  three  equallfides .  For  in  it,  befides  the  demonftration  and 
contemplation  of  the  mynde, is  required  fomewhat  to  be  done:  namely,  to  make  an 
equilater  triangle  vpon  a  line  geuen.  And  in  the  ende  of  euery  probleme,  after  the  de¬ 
monftration,  is  concluded  after  this  manner,  Which  is  the  thing,  Which  Veas  required  tobe 
done* 

A  Theoreme, is  a  propofition,which  requireth  the  fearching  out  and  demonftration 
of  fome  propertieor  pafiion  of  fome  figure:  Wherinis  onely  fpeculation  and  contem¬ 
plation  of  minde,  without  doing  or  working  of  any  thing.  As  the  fifth  propofition  of 
the  firft  booke,which  is  thu  s,zAn  lfofceles  or  triangle  of  typo  e  quail fides,hath  his  angles  at  the 

hafe,e quail  the  one  to  the  other,&c.isa.  Theoreme.  For  in  it  is  req  uired  only  to  be  pro¬ 
ued  and  made  plaine  by  reafon  and  demonftratio,  that  thefe  two  angles  be 
equai!,without  further  working  or  doing.  And  in  the  ende  of  euery 
Theoreme, after  the  demonftration  is  concluded  after  this  ma¬ 
ne  r.  Which  thyng  Was  required  to  be  demonstrated  or  proued . 


ofEuclides  Elementes .  Fol.  8 . 

54^  The  fir  ft  Trobleme .  Ehe fir  ft  Trnpofition » 

* Upon  a  right  line  geuen  notheynginfimtey  to  deficrihe  an  e* 
qnilater  triangle yr  a  triangle  of  three  equall  fide  s. 


qnilater  triangle  ynamely, a  triangle  of  three  equal l 
fdes.'N.o'to  the r fore  making  the  centre  the  point  A 
\and  the /pace  A  Bfefcribe(by  the  third  petition ) 
a  circle  B  C  "D'and  agayne  (by  the fame)  tnakyng 
the  centre  the  point  B  yand  the f pace  Bj{yde/cribe 
an  other  circle  JICB.  Andfby  tbefirfl  petition ) 
from  the  point  C,wherin  the  circles  cut  the  one  the 


-  ,, 

other  firaTb  one  right  line  to  the  point  A,and  an 
other  right  line  to  the  point  B.And  for  af much  e 
as  the  point  J.  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  CBt>^ 
therforefhy  the  if.  definition)  the  line  A  Cise* 
quail  to  the  line  A  B :  Agayne  forafmuch  as  the 
point  B  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  CAB ,  ther* 
fore  (by  the  fame  de  finition)  the  line  B  C  is  e* 
quail  to  the  line  B  A. And  it  is  proued ,  that  the 
line  AC  is  e  quail  to  the  line  A  B :  Tbherfore  ei * 
tber  of  the/e  lines  C  A  and  CBfis  equall  to  the 

line  flBxbut  tbingeslbhich  are  equall  to  one  and  the  fame  things  realfo  equall 
the  one  to  the  other  (by  thefirjl  common fentence)l»her fore  the  line  C  Ay  alfo 
is  equall  to  the  line  C  B ,  VV her fore  thefe  three  right  lines  C  AyA  By  and  B  C 
areequalthe  one  to  the  other.VVher fore  the  triagleA  B  C  is  e  qnilater  yV  her » 
fore  Vppon the  line  ABy  is  defcribed an  equilater  triangle  jdBC.  Wherfore 
Vppon  a  line  geuen  not  heingin finite y  there  is  defcribed  an  equilater  triangle % 
Which  is  the  thing  ftvbicb  'toas  required  to  be  done. 

A  triangle  or  any  other  re&ilined  figure  is  then  faid  to  befet  or  defcribed 
vpon  aline,when  the  line  is  one  of  the  fides  of  the  figure. 

This  firfl:  propofition  is  a  Pro£/<?;»e,becaufe  it  requireth  atte  or  doy ng, name; 
ly,todefcribe  a  triangle.  And  this  is  tobenoted>thateuery  Prop  fit  ion,  whether  it 
be  a  Probleme,oT  a  T  hear  eme, commonly  containeth  in  it  athi»vgenen  ,and  athingreqni* 
red  to  befiarchedont :  although  it  be  not  alwayes  fo.  And  rhe  thing  geuen, is  euer  fet  be¬ 
fore  ihething reejuiredAn  fome  propofitions  there  are  more  things  geuethen  one, 
and  mo  thinges  required  then  onejnfome  there  is  nothing  geuen  at  all, 

Movcoiier  euevy  ‘Problems &Theowtte,  fay ng  perfect  and  abfolute,  ought  to 
haue  all  thefe  partesanamely ,  F irh  the  Tropfimn, to  be  proued. Then  the  expfimn 

^hich 


Cmflruclien. 


Demonttratk® 


Thing  geuen. 

T  hwg  required 


Tropfititm . 
Exgoftten. 


Dacrmin.ttios). 

'Ccnfirucrion. 

Demwfiratiort. 

Cendufion. 


Cafe. 


The  thing  geuen 
■in  this  Pro- 
ileme. 

The  thing 
required. 

The  proportion. 
The  exposition. 
The  de terms  - 
nation. 

The  conjiructso 


The  i temonfira - 
turn. 


T he  particular 
cenclufion. 


The'vniuerfatl 

cenclufion. 

The  note  where 
hj  it  is  kgmvne 
So  he  a  Pro- 
ilcme. 

Mo  cafes  in  thjs 
grope  fit  sen. 


Three  k fades  of 
demottf ration. 


ThefirHTiooke 

which  is  the  explication  ofthe  thing  geuen.  After  that  followeth  the  determination 
which  is  the  declaration  ofthe  thing  required.Thenis  fee  the  conffruclion  of  fuche 
things  which  are  neccffary  ether  forthc  doingofthc  propofitio,  or  for  the  demo 
ftration*Afterwardfolloweththe^w<?»/?r4f/w,  which  is  the  reafon  and  proofe  of 
the  proportion*  And  la.lt  ofall  is  put  the  concluficn,^ hich  is  inferred  8c  proued  by 
the  demonflration,and  is  euer  the  propofition,Butull  thofe  partes  are  not  of  ne¬ 
ed  fit  ie  required  in  cuery  Problems  and  Theoreme,But  the  Propofition,  demon  flra- 
t ion, and conclufon, are  necrilary  partes ,8c  can  neuer  be  abfent:  the  other  partes  may 
fometymesbeaway. 

Further  in  diuerspropofitionsathere  happen  dtuers  cafes:  which  arenothing 
els, but  varictie  of  delineation  and  conftruftioiijor  chaunge  ofpofition,  as  when 
pointes, lines. fuperlicieffes.or  bodies  are  chaunged.  Which  thingeshappen  in 
diuers  proportions.  _  ' 

O  w  then  in  this  Probleme,ihcthinggeuen,\sthe  line  gene:  the  thing  required, to  be 

lerched  out  is,how  vpo  that  line  todefenbean  equilater  triangle.  The  Pro- 
pofitiafi  of  this  'Problems  is  fUpon  a  right  line geuen  not  b  eyng  in  finite  ft  o  defer  ibe  an  equilater  tri¬ 
angle. 

T he  expofition  [sfuppof  that  the  right  linegeuen  be  A B,  and  this  declarech  onely 
the  thing  geuen  ff  \iq  determination  i  s  fit  is  required  vpon  the  line  oA  B,  to  defer ibe  an  equilater 
mangle:  for  therby  as  you  fee, is  declared  onely  the  thingrequired.  The  conflruttisn  be- 
gi  line  th  at  thefe  wo  tds^TYjnV  therfore  making  the  cetret  he  point  A,&the fpacc  A  B,  defiribe 
(by  the  third petkion)a  circle &c, and  continueth  vntil  y  ou  come  to  thefe  wordes, 
forafinuch  as  the  point  A  e^c.For  thetheitoarc  deferrbed  circles  and  lines,  neccffary  e 
both  for  the  doyng  ofthe  proportion,  and  alfo  for  the  demonftration  therof, 
V  vhich  demonfirationhegumeth  at  thefe  wordes:  eAndforafmuche  as  the  point  A  is  the 
centre  ofthe  circle  CB  D  &c:  And  fo  proccdcth  till  you  come  to  thefe  wordes,  PDher- 
fore  vpon  the  line  A  Bis  deferibedan  equilater  triangle  A  B  C.  For  vntlll  y  OU  come  thether 
is, by  groundes  before  fee  and  conftruftions  had>proued,and  made  euident,  that 
the  triangle  made, is  equilater. And  then  in  thefe  wordes, therfore  vpon  the  line  eA% 
is  defribed  an  equilater  triangle  cA  B  C,  is  put  the  firft  conclufon.  For  there  are  common¬ 
ly  ineuery  propofmon  two  conclufions:  theoneperticulcr,the  othervniuerfal: 
and  from  the  firft  you  go  to  thelaft.  And  this  is  the  firft  and  perticuier  conclufi- 
on,for  that  it  concludeth,  that  vpon  the  lyne  AB  is  deferibedan  equilater  tria- 
gle,which  is  according  to  the  expofition*After  it,followeth  thelaft  and  vniuerfal 

conclufon, therfore  vpon  a  right  linegeuen  not  being  infinite  is  deferibedan  equilater  triangle.  For 
whether  the  linegeuen  be  greater  or  leflethen  thys  lyne,  the  fame  conftru&ios 
and  demonftrarions  proue  thefame  conclufion.  Laft  of  ail  is  added  this  claufe. 
Which  is  the  thing  which  'fyas  required  to  be  done:  wherby  as  we  haue  before  noted,  is  de¬ 
clared, that  this  proportion  is  zProblemeandnot  afWw.As  for  varictie  of  ca¬ 
fes  in  this  propofition  there  is  none, for  that  the  line  geuen, can  haue  no  diuerfi- 
ticof  pofition. 

As  you  haue  in  this  Probleme  fene  plainelyefetfoorthe  the  thing  geuen,  and  the 
thing  required,  rn O  r e o u e r  the  propofition, expofition, determination, conslrullion,  demon firation, 
and conchifiorfi  i eh  are  general!  alfo  to  many  other  both  Problemes  and T heorernes ) 

fo  may  you  by  the  example  therof  diftinft  cheai,andfearche  them  out  in  other 

Problemes  ,and  alfo  T  heorernes. 

This  alfo  is  to  be  noted,that  there  are  three  kyndcs  ofdemonftrasion.  The 
one  is  called  Demonflmio  a  priori  ,0V  compofmon.  The  other  is  called  Dmomhmw 

s  g  po ft  mcri* 


ofEuclitles  Elementes.  FoLp, 

.J 

#pofieriori,oT  refoltition.  And  the  third  is  ademonftracion  leadyng  to  animpof- 
fibilirie. 

A  demonftration  a  priori,  or  cofopofition  is, 'when  in  reafoning,  from  the  prin-  Detmnftratu* 
dples  and  firft  groundeSjWepaffedifcending  continually  ,till  after  many  reafons  c°m' 

made, we  come  at  the  length  to  conclude  that, which  we  firft  chiefly  entend.  And 
this  kinde  of  demonftration  vfeth  Euclide  in  his  bookcs  for  the  moft  parr* 


A  demonftration refolution  is,when  contrariwife  in  reafoning,  we 
paffe  from  the  laft  conclufion  madeby  theprcmiffes,andby  thepremtffes  of  the 
premiffesprontinually  afcending,til  we  come  to  the  firft  principles  and  grounds, 
which,  arc  indemonftrable,and  for  they  r  fimplictty  can  buffer  no  farther  refolu- 

tion*  '■  -:<c'  :  " 


D  emcnWratiorx 
a  pc.jlertori  }or 
reflation. 


A  dcmonftration  leadyng  to  an  impoffibilitie  is  thatargumenqwhofe  c5-  Dcmmfiratio ? 
clufion  is  impoffible:  that  is, when  itconcludeth  directly  againftany  principle, 
oragainft  any  propofition  before  proued  by  principles,  orpropofmons  before  ‘ //-7'  ■ 

proued, 

Premiffes  in  an  argument,are  proportions  goy ng  before  the  conclufion  premifes  what 
by  which  the  conclufion  is  proued,  th*j«re. 


Compofitionpaffethfrom  the  caufeto  the  effe£t,or  from  thingcsfimple  to 
thinges  more  compounded. Rcfolution  contrariwifepaffeth  from  thinges  com¬ 
pounded  to  thinges  more  fimple,or  from  the  effect  to  the  caufe. 


Gompofitionorthefirftkyndeofdemonftration,  whichpaffeth  from  the, 
principles,may  eafely  be  fene  in  this  firft  propofition  of  Euclide*  The  demon- 
ftration  wherofbeginneth  thus*  Andforafmuch  a-s  the  point  A  is  the  centre  of 
the  circle  C  B  D,therforetheline  AC, is  equal  to  the  line  AB.This  reaibn(yoa 
fec)takcth  hisbegtnnyng  ofa principle, namely ,ofthe definition  of  acirde.And 
this  is  the  firft  reafon.  Agayneforafmuchas  B  is  the  centreof  the  circle  C  A  E, 
therfore  the  line  B  C  is  equalltothelyne  B  A:which  is  thefecond  reafon.  And 
it  was  before  prouedthat  thelyne  A  C  is  equal!  to  the  line  A  B,  wherforeeither 
ofthefe  lines  C  A  Sc  C  B  is  equal  to  the lyne.A.3 .And  this  is the  third  reafS* .‘But 
things  which  are  equall  to  one  &  the  felfe  fame  thy  ng, are  alfo  equall  the  one  to 
the  other. Wherfore  the  line  CAis  equal.to  the  line  CB.  a  fid  this  'is  the  fourth 
argument.  VVherforethefe  three  lines  C  A,  A  B, and  B  Care  equall  the  one  to 
the  other  which  is  the  conclufion, and  the  thing  to  be  proued. 

You  may  alfo  in  the  fame;  firft  Propofido,eafely  take  an  exaple  of  Refokirid: 
vfing  a  contrary  order  pafify  ng  backward  fro  the  laft  conclufio  of  the  former  de- 
monftration,til  you  come  to  the  firft  principle  or  ground  wheron  it  began,-  For 
the  laft  argument  or  reafon  in  compofitioh.,is  the  firft  in  Refolution:  Zc  the  fir.fi: 
in  compofitlohjis  the  laft  lnxefolution.T  hu$ iherfore  muft  ye  precede*  The  tq 
flAgle  .A  B,C  is  contained  ofthree  equall  ri  ght  lines, namely  j  A  B,A  C,andfi  Cj 
and  therfore  it  is  an  equilater  triangle  by  the  definition  of  an  equilater  triangle: 
and  this  is  the  firft  reafon.  That  the  three  lines  be  equall,  is  thus  proued.  The 
line  s  A  G  and  C  B  are  equall  to  the  line  A  B, wherfore  they  are  equall  the  one  to 
the  other:  and  this  is  thefecond  reafon. That  thelines  AB  andB  C, are  equal  is 
thus  proued:  1  he  lines  A  B  a;id  A'C*  are  draw'en  from  the  centre  of  the  circle  A 
C  E,to  the  circumference .oTpReTame:  wherforethey  are  equall  by  the  dcfinitio 
ofa  circle:  and  this  is  the  third  reafon* Ukewife  char  thelines  A  C  and  A  B,  are 
»  -  ■  ■  D  *  i,  equall 


An  example  of 
conrpeftton  m 
the firji  propoft 
tsen, 

Tirjl  reafon. 
Second  reafn. 
Third  reafon* 
fourth  reafon. 
Conclufion. 


Example  of  re* 
folution  tn  the 
frrft  prcpepciofti 
ftrft  reafon. 


Second  reafo  n, 

T bird  reafon, 

fourth  reafon 
which  ts  the  end 
of  the  tv  hole  rent 
f  inti  on. 


•ft ore  to  deferibe 
txn  ifcjcelei 
£rj/i,<;g:c. 


Hftv  to  describe 
•«t  Sc  Men  urn. 


"  V~hefirftcBoofy 

equall,is  proued  by  the  fame  reafon.  For  the  lines  A  C  and  A  B  arc  draVn  froth 
the  centre  of  the  circle  B  CD:  wherforcthcy  areequallby  the  fame  definition 
oia  circle:  this  is  the  fourth  reafon  or  fillogifme*  And  thus  is  ended  the  -whole 
refolution :  for  that  yon  are  come  to  a  principle.which  is  indemoftrablc.  8£  can 
notberefolued. 


Ora  iemonfirationleadingtoan  impoffibiIitie,orto  anabfurditie,you  may 
hauean  example  m  the  fourth  proposition  ofthis  booke*. 


RVt  nowc  if  vpoft  the  fame  line  geuen,  namely,  tAB^yc  wil  deferibe  the  other  two 
kinds  of  triangles,  namely,an  ififceles  or  atriagleoftwo  equal  fides,&aScv2/f»c’w,or 
a  triangle  of  three  vnequall  hdes.Firfl  for  the  deferibing  of  an  Ifofctln  triangle  produce 
the  line AB  on  ether  fide,vntill  ic  concur  with  the  circumferences  of  both  the  circles 
in  the  pomtes  D  an  d  i^/and  making  the  centre  the  point  .^deferibe  a  circle  H  F  t/ ac¬ 
cording  to  the  quatity  pf  the  line  A  F. 


Likewile  making  the  centre  the  poynte 
i?,defcribe  acircle  HCD  G, according  to 
the  qua n tide  of  theline  B  D  .  Now  the 
thefe  circles  ihaii  cut  the  one  the  other 
in  two  poyntes ,  which  let  be  Hy and  6“: 

And  let  the  endes  of  the  line  geuen  be 
ioyned  with  one  of  the  fayd  factions  by 
two  right  linesjwhich  let  be  *X G  and  B 
G.  And  forafmuc'heas  thefe  two  lines 
AS  and  A  D  are  drawen  fro  the  centre 
of  the  circle  CDE  vntothe  circumfe- 
rece  therof,tberfore  ar  they  eq  ual .  Like 
wife. the  lines  B  A  and  B  A,  for  that  they 
are  drawen  from  thecentre  of  thccir- 
cle  E  <lA  CF  to  the  circumference  ther- , 
of, are  equal, And  forafmuch  as  ether  of 
the  lines  aA  Dznd  B  Fis  cquall  to  the 
line  ^i?,therfore  they  are  equal  theohe 
to  the  otheivWherfore  putting  the  line  A  B  comoto  the  both, the  w  hole  line  B  2)  fhal- 
b’e  equal!  to  the  whole  line  *A  F.V>i\tB  Dh  equal  to  B  G,for  they  are  both  drawen  fro 
the  cetre  of  the  circle  HD  G  to  the  circumferece  therof.Andlikewife  by  the  fame  rea- 
fen  the  line  AFis  equal  to  the  line  tA'  G.  Wherfore  by  the  como  fcntece  the  lines  A  G 
and  B  Cj  are  equal  the  one  to  the  other, and  either  of  them  is  greater  then  the  line  A  B, 
for  that  either  of  the  two  lines  B  Z>  and  Fis  greater  then  the  line  AB,  Wherfore  v?, 

pon  the  line  geuen  is  defcri’bedan  ijhfteks  or  triangle  of  two  equall  (ides. 

Ye  may  alfo  deferibe  vpo  n  the  felfe  fame  line  a  Scaleuon ,  or  triangle  of  three  vne- 
quali  fides,if  by  two  right  lines,  ye  i:oyne  both  the  endes  of  the  line  geuen  to  fome  one 
point  rhatis  in  the  circumference  of  one  of  the  two  greater  circles  ifo  that  that  poynt 
benot  in  one  of  the  two  fections,and  that  the  line  2)  F  do  not  concur  with  it,  when  it 
is  on  either  fide  produced  contlnuallye  and  dire&lyc.For  let  the  poynte  if.be  taken  in 
the  circumfcreace  of  the  circle  HD  G}  and  let  it. not  be  in  any  of  the  lections ,  neyther 
let  the  line  I?  A"  concur  with  it, when  it  is  produced  continually  and  dire&ly  vntothe 
circumfe/encetherof.  And  draw  thefe  lines  A  if  and  i?  if,  and  the  line  zA  K  jhal  cut  the 
circumference  of  the  cixdzHFG  .  Let  it  cut  it  in  the  poynte  L  :  mow  then  by  the 
common  fentence  the  line  B  K fhalbe  equal  to  the  line  aA  L,for(by  the  definition  ofa 
cirdekhelinei?  if  is  equall  to  theline  B  6',and  the  line  A  L  is  equall  to  the  line  A  d 
which  is  equal  to  the  linei?  G.Wherfore  the  line  <lA  if  is  greater  then  the  line  B  K  an  3 
by  the  lame  reafon  maye  it  be  proned  that  the  line  B  if is  greater  then  the  line  a AB. 

Wherfore 


FoLio. 

Wherfore  the  triangle  AB  K  cpnfifteth  of  three  vnequal  fides.  And  fo  haue  ye  vp6n  the 
line  geuen,defcribed  all  the  kiudes  of  triangles.  •  • 

This  fotobe  noted,  that  if  a  man  will  mechanically  and  re,.  ^ 

defy, not  regarding  demonftratson  vpon a  line  geuen  defcf'xbe 
a  triangle  of  three  eqaall  fides,  he  needethhot  to  deferibe  the 
whole  forelay d  circle, but  onely  alirtle  part  of  eche:  namely, 
wherethey  cut  the  one  the  other, and  fo  from  the  point  of  the 
fedion  to  draw  the  lines  to  theendesoftheiinp  g.euen.  as  in 
this  figure  here  pur. 

And  likewife,if  vpon  the  fa  id  line  he  will  d'efcribea  trian¬ 
gle  of  two  equal  l  fydes,  let  him  extende  thecompaffe  accor¬ 
ding  to  the  qnantitie  that  he  will  haue  the  fyde  to  be,  whether 
longer  then  the  line  geuen  orfhortcr*.  andlo.dtaw  onely  a  ii- 
tie  part  ofcchecirclc,where  they  cut  the  one  the  other,  be  fro 
the  point  of  the  fedion  draw  the  lines  to  the  eude  of  the  line 
geuen.  Asia  the  figures  hereput.  Note  that  in  this  the  two 
fydes  muftbc  fuch3thatbeyngioynedtogether3  they  be  lon¬ 
ger  then  the  line  geuen* 

And  fo  alfo  if  vpon  the  fay  d  right  line  he  will  deferibe  a 
triangle  of  three  vnequal  fydes  ,let  him  extend  the  compare. 

Firft,  according  to  thequantitiethathe  will  haue  one  ofrbe 
vnequall  fydes  to  be,  andfo  draw  alittle  part  of  the  circle,sc 
then  extend  it  according  to  the  quantum  that  he  wi!  haue  the 
other  vnequal  fyde  to  be, and  draw  likewyfe'a  little  part  of  the 
circle,  and  that  done,  from  the  point  ofthefedion  draw  the  A  3 
lines  to  the  endes  oftfreline  geuen,as  in  the  figure  here  put.Notethat  in  this  the7 
two  fides  mud  be  Inch, that  the  circles  deferibed  according  to  their  quatitie  may- 
cut  the  one  the  other. 

i^FMficpnd  TroMeme.  cFhefecond  Tmpofition* 

Fro  a  point  geuen  Jo  draw  a  right  Ime  equal  to  a  rightline  geuen* 

ofe  tbat  the  point  geue  be  A let  the  right  linege • 
uenhe'B  CJt 
g  required  fro 
[the  point  A}to 
\drdwe  a  right 
lyne  e quail  to 

_ __  J  he  line  BC\  * 

(Draft  (by  the  fir  ft  pettcio)  from  the 
point  A  to  the  poynte  B  a  right  line  A 
B:  and  Vpon  the  line  A  B  defer ibe(by 
the  fir  ft  propoftt'to )  an  equilater  tri * 
angle  ^and  let  the  fame  be  D  A  B^and 
extedjby  thefecond peticio ythe right 
lines  D  A  &  DB^  to  the poyntes  E 

•£>•*/.  and  i] 


Hew  to  definite 
an  equilater  tri 
angle  redilj 
met  bank allj* 


How  to  deferibe 
an  Ifofceles  tri* 
angle  redilj , 


Hew  to  deferibe 
a  Scalenum  trs-* 
angle  rtdtlj. 


Ctnflruttktt,  ■ 


TPgmenjtratiom 


Two  thiriges  ge- 
'sten  in  this  pro- 

tfcsin 
this  prspoftion. 


portion 
rower  c 


The  fir  ft  cafe. 


The fecond  cafe. 


The  third  cafe. 


TbefirB  cBoo%e 

mdt\(s'(hy  the  third  petkio)making  thecentre  (Band  the/pace  B  Cdefiribea 
circle  CG  H:&  agatne(  by  the  fame  /making  the  centre  !D  and  the fpace  3)  G 
defcribea  circle  G  h\Lt  And  fora/* 
much  as  the  pointe  B  is  the  centre  of 
the  circle C G  H,therfore(by  the  i>, 
definitio)  the  line  BC  is  equal  to  the 
line  B  G'.and  forafmuch  as  the poynt 
3)  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  G  KjL: 
therefore  (by  the  fame)the  line  3)  L 
is  equall  to  the  line  3)  G:of  'tohicbtke 
line  3)  A  is  equall  to  a  line  3)  B( by 
the  propofitio  going  beforefi'rherfore 
the  rejiducyna m elyfhe  line  A  L  is  e* 
qual  to  the  refidue, namely  }to  the  line 
B  G(by  the  third  common  fentence) 

And  itisproucd  that  the  line  B  C  is  e* 
quail  to  the  line  B  GVlf her  fore  eyther  of thefe  lines  ALtr  BCis  equal  to  the 
line  B  GjBut  things  which  are  equall  to  one  and  the  fame  thing  are  alfo  equall 
the  one  to  the  other  (by  the  fir  ft  commo  jentence.)VVherfore  the  line  A  L  is  e* 
qual  to  the  line  B  C.fi /her fore  from  the  poynt  geue  f tamely  yA/s  drawn  a  right 
line  A  L  equall  to  the  right  linegeuen  B  C;  which  l?as  required  to  be  done . 

f  ^  v,  .  J  '  -  *  .  )  ,  *  f  #  '■  r;  .  :  f;  i  - 

,  OfProblemes  and  Theoremes,as  we  haue  before  noted,fome  haue  no  cafes  at  all* 
which  are  thofe  which  haue  onely  one  pofition  and  conftruction:and  other  fome haue 
many  and  diners  cafes:which  are  fuch  propofitions  which  haue  diuers  deferiptions  8c 
coniirudions,and  chaunge  their  pofitions .  Of  which  forte  is  this  fecond  propofition, 
whichis  alfo  aProbleme.Thispropofitionhath  two  thin  ges  geuen  :Natnely,a  pointe, 
and  a  line;  the  thing  required  is,that  from  the  pointe  geuen  wherefoeuer  it  be  put,  be 
d raven  a  ine  equall  to  the  line  geuen. Now  this  poynt  geuen  may  haue  diuers  pofitios 
For  it  may  be  placed  eyther  without  the  right  line  geuen3or  in  fome  point  in  it.  If  it  be 
without  it,  either  itis  on  the  fide  of  it,fo  that  the  right  line  drawen  from  it  to  the  ende 
of  the  right  line  geuen  maketh  an  angletor  els  it  is  put  directly  vnto  it,  Co  that  the  right 
line  geuen  being  produced  lhallfall  vpon  the  point  geuen  which  is  without,Butif  it  be 
in  the  line  geuen,theneitherit  is  in  one  of  the  endes  orextreames  thereof :  or  in  fome 
place  betwene  the  extremes.So  are  there  foure  diuer  s  pofitions  of  the  poynt  in  relpedfc 
of  the  line.  Wher  upon  follow  diuers  delineations  and  conltruftions,  and  confequent* 
iy  varietie  of  cafes. 

For  the  firfl;  cafe  the  figure  before  put,feructh. 

To  the  fecond  cafe  the  figure  hereon  the 
fidefetbelongeth.  And  as  touching  the  or¬ 
der  both  of  conftru&ion  and  of  demonftra- 
tion  it  is  all  one  with  thefirft. 


The  third  cafe  is  eafieft  of  all,name!y,whe 
the  poynt  geuen  is  in  one  of  the  extreames. 

As  for  exaple.,ifit  were  in  the  point  C,  which 

is 


o/Eudides  Elementes  *  Fol.n. 


is  one  of  the  extreames  of  the  line  B  C .  Then 
making  the  centre  the  poynt  C,and  the  fpace 
C£  defcribeacirclei?  L  G\ and  from  the  cen¬ 
tre  C  drawe  a  line  vnto  the  circumference, 
which  let  the  CZ,,which  by  the  definition  of 
acircle^lhalbe  equall  to  the  line  geuen  B  C. 

The  fourth  cafe  as  touching  conftru&ion 
herein  differeth  from  the  two  firfte  ,  for  that 
whereas  in  the  you  are  willed  to  draw  a  right 
line  from  the  poynt  geuen,namely ,  A, to  the 
poynt  B  which  is  one  of  the  endes  of  the  line 
geuShereyou  fhal  not  nede  to  draw  that  line, 
for  that  it  is  already  drawemAs  touching  the 
reft,both  in  conftru&ion  and  demonftration 
you  may  proceede  as  in  the  two  firfte.  As  it  is 
manifefte  to  fee  in  thys  figure  here  on  the  fide 
put. 

This;  propofition  for  the  playnes  &  cafi- 
nes  thcreofifeemeth  to  be  as  it  were  a  princi¬ 
ple, and  may  eafly  mechanically  be  done.  For 
opening  the  compafle  to  the  quantitve  of  the 
line  geuen ,  and  fetting  on  foote  of  it  fixed  in 
the  poynt  geuen  and  marki  ng  with  the  other 
another  poynt  wherfoeueritfall,  &  fo  by  the 
firft  peticion  drawing  a  right  line  fro  the  one 
of  thofe  poyntes  to  the  othcr,the  fayd  righte 
line  fhall  beequall  to  the  right  line  geuen :  yet 
in  deede  is  it  no  principle,  for  that  it  may  by 
demonftration  be  proued:  but  principles  can 
not  be  proued,as  we  haue  before  declared. 


5^  The  3,  Trobleme.  T  he  \fPropofitm. 

T wo  unequal  right  lines  beinggeuenjto  cut  of  from  thegrea* 

ter,a  right  lyne  equall  to  the  lefle. 

\Vppofe  that  the  tipo  Unequal  right  linesgeuen  be  AS  O' 
Cy  ofiphich  let  the  lyne  AS  be  the  greater.  It  is  requi * 
red  from  the  line  AS  beinv  the  greater  yto  cut  of  a  right 
line  equal  to  the  right  line  Cyphic-h  is  the  lejle  HneAralPf 
m(hy  the Jecond  propofition) fro  the  point  A  a  right  line 
equall  to  the  line  Cyand  let  the  fame  be  A  D:and  making 

_ \the  centre  Aland  the  fpace  AD  deferibe  (by  the  third 

peticion)  a  circle  DEF.  And  forafmuche  as  the 
point  A  is  the  centre  ofy  circle  ID  E  F,  therfore  A 
E  is  equal  to  A  Dfut  the  line  C  is  equal  to  the  line 
A  DyVherfore  either  of  the fe  lines  A  E  andC  is 
equall  to  A  Dy  therfore  the  line  A  E  is  equall  to 
the  line  Cypher  fore  tlvo  Pne  quail  right  lines  being 
geuen  gamely,  A  S  and  Cohere  is  cut  of  from  AS 
being) greater,  a  right  line  A  E  equall  to  thelejfe  b/ 
ljne3  namely %  to  C:  yphicb  Spas  required  to  be  done.  aih\  This 


) 


The  fourth  tafe. 


T his  prspeftian 
though  it  be 
rj  eafte  to  be 
done  mechanic 
tally, jet  isn« 
principle. 


/ 


Sfjpo  tbinges  ge- 
teen  tn  this  pro- 
paftion. 

Diners  cafes  in 

it. 

viW  v-.vVC 


The  frfl  cafe. 

T he feeond  cafe. 


Th  e  third  cafe „ 


"TheJirHTSoo^e 


This  pro.pofitionpwhich is  a  Probleme,hath  two  thinges  getter),  namely, rare* 
vnequali  right  lines:  the  thing  required  isyfrorrithe  greater  to  cut  of 'a  line  equal 
to  the  idle.  It  hath  alio  diuerscafes.FoTtheliites  geuen  either  are  diflin&th’onc 
from  the  other:  or  are  ioyned  together  at  orieb'ftheir  endes:  or  they  cut.  the  one' 
the  otber,orthe  onecutteth  the  other  in  one  of  the  exxreames.  V  Vhich  may  be 
two  way  es.  For  ether  the  greater  cutteth  the  lefTejOr  the  ieifethe  greater.If  they 
cut  the  one  the  other, eitherech  cuttcth  th’other  into  equali  partes  ?  or  into  vne- 
quall  partes  :  or  the  one  into  equali  parses  ,and  the  other  into  vnequali  partes. 
V  V’hieh  may  happen  i n  two  forts*  for  the  greater  may  be  cut  into  equali  partes,, 
and  the  idle into  vnequali  partes:  or  contrariwife* 

j  *  ‘  ,  TO  \>  07  v  .  lor  V’  ■  .• 

Wh  en  the  vnequali  lines  geuen  are  diftind  the  0ne  hom  the  other ,  the  figure  be¬ 
fore  put  ferueth. 

If  they  be  ioyned  together  at  one  of  their  ‘ 
ends,itis  eafieto  do. For  making  the  centre  that' 
end  where  they  are  ioyned  together ,  &  the  fpace 
the  le{feline,defcribe  a  circle:  whiche  fhall  of  ne- 
ceffitiefby  the  definition  of  a  circle )  cut  offiom 
the  greater  line  a  line  eq nail  to  the  lefie  line ,  as  it ' 
is  playne  to  fee  in  the  figure  here  put.  . 

But  if  theonecut  the  other  in  one  of  the  ex-* 
tremes.  As  for  exaple  :  Suppofe  that  the  vnequali 
right  lines  geuen  be  A  B  and  CD, of  which  Jet  the  . 

line  CD  be  the  greater  :  And  let  the  line. CD  cut 
the  line  A  B  in  his  extreameC.  Then  making  the 
centre  A  and  the  fpace  A  i?,defcribe  a  circle  B  F. . 

An4  vpon  the  line  AC  describe  an  equilater  tri-  , 
anglefby  the  firfljwhich  let  be  A  E  C:8c  produce 
the  lines  E  A  and  E  C,  And  againe  making  the  ce- 
tre  E  and  the.fgacevE  £  defcribe  a  circle  G  £.I,ike«  -  1 
wife  making  the  centre  C and  the  fpace  C<j,def-  ' 
cpibe  a  circle  G'  Z-.Now  forafmuch  .as  theJine'A  F,  , 
is  eq  hah  to  the  litre  £  G  (For  Eis  the-  centre)  of  f 
which  the  line  EA  is  equali  to  the  iine£'C  :  ther 
fore  the  refidue  A  F  is  equals  to  the'  refidue  C  G. 

Bps. the  line ist equali  tothq.  line  ABfov  A 
is  the  centre, wherefore  alfo  the  line  CCj  is  equal) 
tothe1me.i4£.Butthe  line  C  G  is  alfo  eqn'all  to 
theline  C  L^ot  the  point  Cis  the  centre. Where-  . 


The f earth  cafe 

The fifth  cafe* 
The  f  set  cafe. 


But  now  let  CD  be  IefTe  then  A  B,znd  let  it  cut  A  B, 
y  his  extreameC !  Now  then  cythe-rit  cuttein  ltiq  the  - 
in  iddeft  or  not  in  the  middelt.Frrft  let  it  cut  itin  the  niid 
deibthen CDis ether  the halfe q£A,B& fo is ./fCequal 
to  CD. 


Or  it  is  leffe  then  the  halfe :  and  then,  mahiqg  th? 
centre  C&  the  fpace  C  D  defcribe  a  cH!Fe?eiwhich  fhTll;  cut1 
of  from  the  linear/  B  a  line  equ^t.b^j^be'.lifte.C^.nHsi':  r .  ■ 
Or  it  is  greater  then  the  half.  And  the  vntp  the  point  J 
A  put  the  line  A  F  equali  to  the  line  CDyby  thbiiecotid.  ’  ’ 
And  making  the  centre  A  &  the  fpace  A  F  deferibe  a  cir¬ 
cle,  which  ihallcutoffrom  the  line  A  B  a  line  equal!  to 
the  line -^F.thatisvvnto  the  line  CD,  T  £u£ , 


i<n 


"t 


0, 


Fol.n. 


But  if  the  line  C  D  do  not  cut  the  line  AB  in 
the  midft:  C  D  fell  either  be  the  hake  of  the  line 
J.B\ or  greater  then  the  halfe,  or  leffe .  If  C  D  be 
the  halfe  of  A  B,  or  leffe  then  the  half  of  A  2,the 
making  the  centre  C,and  the  fpace  C  D  deferibe  A 

a  circle  whiche  fhall  cut  of  from  the  VmeABa. 
line  equal  to  the  line  CD. 

But  if  it  be  greater  then  the  halfe,then  againe 
vnto  the  point  tA  put  the  line  A  F  equal  to  the 
line  C  ©  (by  the  fecond  propofitio:  )  &  making 
the  centre  A,  and  the  fpace  A  F  defer ibe  a  ctr  chr 
which  {hall  cut  of  from  the  line  AB  a  line  equal! 
to  the  line  iA  F, that  is,to  the  line  C  D . 

But  if  they  cut  the  one  the  other  as  the  lines  C 
D8zAB  do.The  making  the  cetre  B  &  the  fpace 
B  A  deferibe  a  circle  A  F,&  draw  a  line  from  the 
point  B  to  the  point  C,&  produce  it  to  thepoint 
F.And  forafmuch  as  the  two  right  lines  B  F  and 
CD  are  vnequalband the  lined)  cutteththc 
line  BF  by  one  of  his  extreames,  therefore  it  is  ^ 
poffibleto  cut  of  fromCD  aline  equall  to  the 
line  BF. For  how  to  do  it  we  haue  before  decla- 
red,wherefore  it  is  pofllble  from  the  line  C  Dto 
cutofaline  equall  totheline  AB:o:AB  and 
BF a,te equall  the  one  to  the  other. 


ftrufhon  and  demonirracion,proccde  as  in  the  hr  it  cale.  ror  it  1?  ^ 

pofition  to  put  to  the  ende  of  the  greater  lyne  a  line  equal!  to  the  leffe  lvne ,  and 
fo  maky  ng  the  centre  the  fay  d  eude,and  the  fpace  the  leffe  linc,to  deferibe  a  cir* 
cle, which  iliall  cut  of  fro  tOc  greater  lyne  a. lyne  equall  to  the  line  put ,  namely, 
to  the  leffe  line  geuen,as  it  is  manifeft  to  feei'h  the  figures  partly  fiere  vnder  fee. 


The feuentk  QT 
eight  cafes. 


The  ninth  exfi. 


The  tenth  e*fe. 


InnUthefee** 
fes  the  conflru* 
it  ton  end,  demo* 
ft  ration  of  the 
frfl  cafe  wiH 
feme t 


-1  A  4 

: .  tt 

/ 

7 

\  \ 

l-  -  _« 

•5.  '  .  «  .  i  i 

/:  ■ 

'  ’  > 

.v. 

* * 

\ 

-  N, 

'  •  V  - 

'  /  -• ;  v.;  - 

i  *  • 

o 

D.iiii. 


B 


If 


I 


.5\v.1  Jv.Vil  v'.  r; 


TUs PropoJ!-  man  mc- 

tio»,thoHghe  chanically  and  redis 
aifoit  ie  ly  do  this  propofm* 

•/noli  eafie  t*  1  r  r  t 

is  done me-  on>  noc  regardyng 
ehanicatly.  demonftration,  hec 
jet  it  noprin  may  extende  his  co- 
€i*le'  paffe  accordyng  to 
the  quantitie  of 
lefTclyne  geucn, 
fo  feton  foote  there¬ 
of  in  ohe  of  the  ends 
of  the  greater  lyne 
geuen,andwith  the 
other  foote  marke  a  pointe  in  the  faid  greater  lineywhich  fhall  ctittcof  from  the 
greater  line  a  line  equaU  to  the  lefle.The  eafines .of  doing  wherof  may  caufe  this 
m-opofition  alfo  to  feeme  vnto  fome  to  berathera  principlesthena  proportion. 


But  to  that  we  haue  before  in  the  former  propoiitionaunfwered. 


\  . ■:  • .  *,  v\  ^  ^ 

^vbv-..i  ,  ,\  <  i  rj  u 


>  v:.  rr,j  -; 


t  ^  r,  c  ri  •* r 
%  .  l  J  -  i  j  .  * 


i  j  y  ji  qi  ax]  j  l  • 


(W 

5  hv'li  f .  ,  ; 


03  v 


tJt 
'iiOCJ 


{ 

\ 


i .  SvWgr[l  Theorem.  The  \fPropfimn. 

ff there  be  two  triangles  ,of which  twojides  oftldone  he  equal 
to  twojides  of  the  other, eche  fide  to  his  correfpondentfide,and 
loaning  aljo  on  angle  of  the  one  equal  to  one  angle  of  the  other , 
namely,  that  angle  which  iscontayned ynder  the  equall  right 
lines :  the  bafe  aljo  of  the  one  fhall  be  equall  to  the  baje  of  the 
other, and  the  one  triangle fhall  be  equal  to  the  other  triangle-, 
and  the  other  angles  re/nayningfhal  be  equall  to  the  other  an~ 
gles  remayning,the  one  to  the  other,  vnder  which  are fubt en¬ 
ded  equall fides . 

.iiiKCt  c  , 

^  ouffofi 


ofEiitlides  Elemefiteh 


FoLq. 


Vppofetbat  there  be  two  triangles  A  B  C&  ©  E  Fyhd* 
uing  t  wo  fides  of  the  one, namely  A  Byand  A  C,  equall to 
two  fides  of  the  other , namely ,to  ©  E  and  T)Fythe  one  to 
the  other, that  isyA  Bto(D  E,andACto  1 'DFibauyng  al * 
.jo  the  angle  B  A  C, equall  to  the  angle  £©F.  Then  I fay 
| that  the  ha/e  alfo  BC  is  equall  toy  bafe  E  F:  &j  the  tru 
|pj  jangle  A  B  Cjs  equall  to  the  triangle  ©  E  F:andy  the  o * 

'  tber  angles  rematnyng  are  equall  to  the  other  angles  re* 

mayningfbconeto  the  other  yonder  which  are  fubtended  equall  fyder.tb  at  is,y 
the  angle  ABC  is  equall  to  the  angle  ©  E  F,  andj  the  angle  ACB  is  equall  to 
to  the  angle  ©  £  E.For  the  triangle  A  B  C  ex* 
aclly  agreyng  with  the  triangle  ©  £F,  and  the 
point  A  being  put  Vpo  the  point  TEpr  the  right 
Ime  A  B  Vpon  the  right  line  ©  Ey  the  point e  B 
alfo  pall  exaBly  agree  'With  the  pointe  E:for 
float  ( by  fuppofitionjtbe  line  A  B  is  equal  to  the 
line  ©  E.  Jnd  the  line  A  B  exaBly  agreeyng 
• with  the  line  ©  Eythe  right  line  alfo  A  C  exaB* 
ly  agreeth  'With  the  right  line  T>  F,  for  that(by 
Juppofitionjthe  angle  B  A  Cis  equall  to  the  an* 

gle  £©  F .And  for  a] much  as  the  right  line  A  Cisqlfofby  j uppofition )  equall  to 
the  right  line  T>F,  i  her  fore  the  point  e  C  exaBly  agreeth  With  the  pointe  F.  A* 
game  forafmuch  as  the  pointe  C  exaBly  agreeth  with  the  poynte  F,  and  the 
point  B  exaBly  agreeth  with  the  point  E :  therefore  the  bafe  B  CjJoall  txaBly 
agree  with  the  bafe  E  F.For  if  the  point  S  do  exaBly  agree  With  the  point  £, 
and  the  point  C  with  the  point  Fyand  the  bafe  B  C.  do  not  exaBly  agre  Wytb  the 
bafe  E  F,  then  two  right  lines  do  include  a  fuperfcies:  which  (by  the  io.  com  on 
Jentencefis  impoffbk.VV  berfore  the  bafe  B  C  exaBly  agreeth  the  bafe  E  F, 
and therforeis  equallvnto  it.  VFherfore  thewhole  triangle  ABC  exaBly  a* 
greet h  with  the  whole  triangle  ©  EFy<zsr  tberfore(by  the  8,  common  Jentence ) 
is  equall  Vnto  it.  And  (by  the  fame)  the  other  angles  remay  ning  exaBly  agree 
With  the  other  angles  remay  ningyind  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  that  is, the 
angle  A  BC  to  the  Angle  ©  E  Fy  and  the  angle  ACB  to  the  angle  ©  F  £t  If 
therfore  there  be  two  triangles, of  which  two  fides  of  the  oney  he  equall  to  two 
fydes  of  the  other, eche  to  his  correfpondent  fide, and  hailing  alfo  one  angle  of  the 
one  equall  to  one  angle  of  the  other }  namely, that  angle  which  is  ckntayntd  y>n* 
der  the. equall  right  lines:  the  bafe  alfo  of  the  one  pall  be  equall  to  the  bafe  of  the 
other, and  the  one  triangle  Jhall  be  equal  to  the  other  triangle, and  the  other  an* 
gles  remainyng  f hall  be  equall  to  the  other  angles  remay  mngy  the  one  to  the  a* 
ther  fender  which  are fubtended  equall  fydes:  whiche  thing  was  required  to  be 
demonfirated. 

This  Proportion  which  is  aThcorerae^hath  two  things  geuen,*  namely,the 

.  E.i.  equality 


Demonstration, 
leading  io  an 
abfirditie. 


T tvs  t  htngts 
»en  in  this  post 
go  ft  son. 


r&w  thingn  e<laa^ty  of  two  fides  of  the  one  triangle,  to  two  fides  of  the  other  triangle^  and 

retired  in  it .  the  equaiitie  of  two  angles  contayncd  vnder  the  equall  fydes,  In  it  alfo  arc  thre 

thinges  required.Thc  equality  ofbafe  to  bafe:  the  equality  of  field  to  field:  and 
the  equality  of  the  other  angles  of  the  one  triangle  to  the  other  angles  of  theo* 
ther  triangle,  vnder  which  are  fubtended  equall  fides, 

*  •  '  . 

Hove  one  fide  it  r\  r  r  r  t  r 

equniito  an  t-  u ne  Ime  ol  a  play  nc  figure  is  equall  to  an  other,  and  fo  generally  one  right 

ther,  &  fo  gene  iync  is  equall to  an  other ,  when  the  one  being  applied  to  the  other,  theyrex- 
r*fitfahe-  £rearnes  agree  together .  For  otherwife  euery  righte  line  applied  to  any  right 
dtTJno-  lyne,agreech  therwith:but  equall  right  lines  only,agree  in  the  extremes. 

ther, 

Hom one reniih  ^nc  re'^rl^nc^  angle  is  equall  to  an  other  reftilined  angle,  when  one  of  the 

wed  angle  is  e~ "  fides  which  comprehendeth  theoneangle,beingfetvpon  oneof  the  Tides  which 
qu*t  to  an  other  comprehendeth  the  ocher  angle, the  other  fide  of  the  oneagreeth  with  the  other 
fyde  ofthe  other.  And  that  angle  is  thegreatcr,whofe  fyde  falleth  without:  and 
that  the  lefle, whole  fydefalieth  within. 


Whj  this  parti* 
ele,ech  to  hts 
correfpondent 
fidefs  put. 


Horn  one  triaH  - 
gtc  is  equall  to 
-an  other . 

What  the  fields 
er  area  of  a  trt- 
angle  ss  , and  fo 
vfanjrcBilined 
figure. 

What  the  cir¬ 
cuits  or  copajfe 
af  a  triangle  is, 
and (o  alfo  of  a- 
nj  reHilmed  fi¬ 
gure. 


Where  as  in  this  propofition  is  put  this  particle  echetohis  correfpondent  fide,  (ia 
ftede  wherof  often  times  afterward  is  vfed  this  phrafe^  one  to  the  other  jit  is  ofne- 
ceffity  fo  put.  For  otherwife  two  fydes  ofone  triangle  added  together,may  bee- 
quail  to  two  fydes  ofan  other  triangleadded  together,5 and  the" angles  allocon- 
tayned  vnder  the  equall  fydes  may  be  equall:  and  yetthe  two  triangles  may  not- 
withltandingbe  vnequall*  Where-note  that  a  triangle  is  faydtobe  equall  toaa 
other  triangle, when  the  field  or  area  of  rheone  is  equall  to  the  areaof  the  others 
And  the  area  of  a  triangle, is  that  fpace, which  iscontayned  within  the  fydes  ofa 
triangle,  Andchecircuiteorcompafleofatriangleisalinccompofed  of  all  the 
fides  ofa  triangle. And  fo  may  you  think  ofali  other  reftilined  figures.  And  now 
to  proue  that  there  may  be  two  triangles, two  fydes  ofone  of  which  being  added 
together, may  be  equall  to  two  fy  des  ofthe  other  £>  „ded  together, and  the  angles 
contained  vnderthe  equall  fydes  may  be  equall,  and  yet  notwithftanding  the 
two  triangles  vnequall,  Suppofe  that  there  be  two  rcftangle  triangles:  namely, 
A  B  C,andD  £  Fvandlet  their  right  angles  be  B  A  CandE  D  F.  And  in  the  tri¬ 
angle  A  B  C  let  the  fyde  A  B  beg.  and  the  fyde  A  C  4,  which  both  added  toge¬ 
ther  make  7. 

And  in  the 
triagle  D  E 
F,let  the  fide 
DEbe2.and 
the  fide  D  F 
foe  5*  whichc 
added  toge¬ 
ther  make  al 
fo  7*8do  the  B 

fy  des  ofthe  one  triangle  added  together,are  equall  to  the  fides  of  the  other  ?m# 
pdeadded  together, Y etare  both  the  triangles  vnequall,and  alfo  their  bafts.  For 
the  area  ofthe  triangle  A  B  C  is  6  and  his  bafe  is  5.  And  the  area  ofthe  triangle 
D  £  F  is  V-  and  his  bafettfp  2.9.  So  that  to  haue  the  areas  oft  wo  triangles  co  be  c- 
quali,  it  is  requifite  that  all  the  fydes  of  the  two  mangles  be  equall,  eche  tohys 
correfpondent  fyde. It  happenethalfo  fometymes  in  triangles,  that  the  areas  of 
them  bey  ugcqua.ll,  their  fydes  added  together  fhall  be  vnequall.  Andconccan- 


ofEuclides  Elements. 


Foil fa 


wife^hcir  Tides  beyng  equall,thrir  areas  be  vnequalUs  in  theCe  figures  hcrepuc 
it  is  plaine  to  fee*  In  the  firft  *  ^ 

example  the  areas  of  the  two 
triangles  arc  equal, for  they  are 
eche  i2»and  the  fides  inech  ad¬ 
ded  together  are  vnequall,  for 
in  the  one  triangle  the  fides  ad¬ 
ded  together  make  18.  and  in 
the  other  they  make  16.  But  in 
the  fccondexaple  the  areas  of 
the  two  triagles  are  vnequal, 
for  the  one  is  i2*and  th’other 
is  l§*Butthe  fides  added  tos 
gethcr  in  eche  are  equall,  for 
in  eche  they  makeiS. 

That  angle  is  faid  to  fub- 
tend  a  fide  ofa  triagle, which 
is  placed  dire&ly  oppofite, 

8c  againfi:  that  fide.That  fide 
al  fo  is  fay  d  to  fubtend  an  an¬ 
gle, which  is  oppofite  to  the  angle. For  eucry  angle  ofa  triangle  is  contaynedof 
two  fy  des  of  the  triangle,and  is  fubtended  to  the  third  fide* 

This  is  thefirfi:  Propofition  in  which  is  vfed a  demonft  ration  leading  to  an  Thisfrofofatien 
abfurdicie,oran  impoffibilitie,Vyhich  is  a  demonftration  that  proueth  not  di-  tr,uefjky* 
redly  the  thing  emended,  by  principles,  or  by  thinges  before  proued  by  thefe  hZgtolTaifar 
principles:but  proueth  thecontrary  therof  to  be  impoffiblc,&:  fo  doth  indirect-  dity, 
iy  proue  the  thing  emended, 


A*  % 

AL — t — 4 — 

5  X 

— , — i 

* 


Hti®  an  angle 
is  fayd  to  fainted 
a  fade  sand  a  fade 
an  angle. 


\  i. 


k 

ty&The  i.T  heoreme.  Tbej.Trofo/ttion. 

(tJn  lfofcelesjr  triangle  of two equal ' fide sjhath  his  angles  at 
the  bafe  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  <iAnd  thofe  equal  fides  be- 
ing produced jhe  angles  which  are  Under  the  bafe  are  alfo  e* 
quail  the  one  to  the  other. 

. 


*  ^  • 

mVppofetbdt  ABC  lea  triangle  ‘of  tn>o 

equall  fy  des  called  Ifofcelesy  hauing  the 
!  [fade  A  B  equall  to  the  fide  A  C .  And 
}  (by  the  fecond peticio)produce  the  lines 
A 'Bo*  AC  directly  toy  points  (DoEpThe  I  fay, 
that  y  angle  ABC  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACB:andy 
ji  angle  C  B  2)  is  equal  to  tj?  angle  B  C£,Tdke  in 
the  line  B£)a  point  at  all  aduentures,  and  let  the 

fame 


J  w  *  V 


/ 


fTbejirBcBookg 

fame  be  F }and(by  the  third propofttion)from  the  greater  line,  namely %  AE9 
cut  of  a  line  equall  to  A  F  being  the  lefle  lineyand 
let  the  fame  be  A  G :  and  draw  a  right  line  fro  the 

pfmt  F t0  l!je  Pomt  C>af1^  an  0t^er from  the  point 

G  to  the  point  BJN.OW  then  for  as  muche  as  AF  is 
equall to  A  G^and  A  B  is  equall  to  A  C,  therefore 
thefe  tWo  lines  F  A  and  A  C  are  equall  to  thefe  two 
lines  G  A  and  ABfthe  one  to  the  other ,  and  they 
containe  a  common  angle, n am ely,that  which  is  co* 
tained  Vnder  FA  G:  w  her fore  (by  the  fourth  pro » 
poftion)the  bafe  F  C  is  equall  to  the  bafe  G  <B:  and 
the  triangle  A  F  C  is  equall  to  the  triangle  A  G  Byand  the  other  angles  rental* 
ning.are  equall  to  the  other  angles  remaining  the  one  to  the  other  yVnder  which 
are  fubtended  equall fdes :  that  is,tbe  angle  ACFis  equall  to  the  angle  ABG , 
and  the  angle  AFC  is  equall  to  the  angle  A  G  (B,  And  for  af much  as  the  whole 
line  A  F is  equall  to  the  whole  line  A  Gyof  which  the  line  A ‘B  is  equal  toy  lyne 
A  C,  tberfore  the  ref  due  of the  line  A  F ^namely  ythe  line  B  Ffs  equal  to  the  re * 
fidueofthe  line  AG ^namely, to  the  UneCG  (by  the  third  common  fentence ) 
And  it  is  proued  that  C  Fis  equal  to  B  G .  Not*  therfore  thefe  tWo  BF&FC 
are  equall  to  thefe  two  CG  and  G  B  the  one  to  the  other,  and  the  angle  B  FCis 
equall  to  the  angle  C  G  B,and  they  haue  one  bafe, namely, B  Cycommon  to  them 
both:  w  her fore  (by  the  4.  propofttion)  the  triangle  B  FCis  equall  to  tin  trU 
angle  CGBy  and  the  other  angles  remaynyng  are  equall  to  the  other  an* 
gles  remaining  eche  to  other y  Vnder  which  are  jubt ended  equall  fides.Wher* 
fore  the  angle  F  BC  is  equall  to  the  angle  GCBy  and  t  he  angle  B  C  Fis  equall 
to  the  angle  CBG .  ISloW  forafnuch  as  the  whole  angle  ABG  is  equall  to  the 
“whole  angle  AC  F(  as  it  ha  th  bene  protied)of which  the  angle  CBG  is  equal  to 
the  angle  B  CF:  therfore  the  angle  remayning:  namely ,A  B  C  is  equall  to  the 
angle  remaining3namelyyto  A  C  B(by  the  third  common  fentence)  And  they  ar 
the  angles  at  the  bafe  of the  triangle  A  B  C.a  nd  it  is  proued  that  the  angle  FB 
Cis  equall  to  the  angle  G  C  Byand  they  are  angles  Vnder  the  bafe .  W her  fore  a 
triangle  of  two  equall  (1 ides  hath  his  angles  at  the  bafe  equall  the  one  toy  other # 
And  thofe  equall  Jides  being  producedy  the  angles  which  are  Vnder  the  bafe  art 
alfo  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  which  Was  required  to  be prou  ed. 

for  that 


of EuclidesElementes.  Fd.\ 

fides  of  the  triangles  A  FC  and  AGB&  alfo  thefy  des  of  the  triagles  B  F  C  SC 
C  G  B  run  fo  one  withinan  other,thcrforc  I  hauc  here  put  the  diftin&iy,name* 
ly,the  triangles  F  A  C  and  B  t  C  on  one  fyde  of  the  figure  of  the  propofitio  SC 
the  triangles  A  GB  and  C  G  B  on  the  other  fydc.-fo  thatyou  may  with  Idle  la¬ 
bor  fee  the  demonftracionplayncly, 

ir 

That  tn  an  Ifofceles  triangle,thetwo  angles  aboue  the  bafe  arcequall,may 
Cuherwife  be  demonftrated  without  drawing  lines  beneath  the  bafefomwhac  ab 
tering  the  conftru&ion.Namely, drawing  the  lines  within  the  triangle  jwhiche 
before  were  without  it  after  this  manner. 


Suppofethat^-ffCbe  an  Ifofceles  trianglc:andinthclinc 
A  B  take  a  point  at  all  aduentures.and  let  the  fame  be  D ,  And 
from  the  line  AC  cut  of  a  line  eqnalltothe  line  AD.  Which 
let  be  A  £,And  draw  thefe  right  lines  B  E,D  C, and'D  E ,  Now 
forafmuch  as  in  the  triangles,^  B  E, znd  AC  D>  the  fifie  AB  is 
equall  to  the  fide  A  C, by  fuppofition ,  and  the  fides  A  D  and 
A  E  are  alfo  equall  by  conftrudion,and  the  angle  at  the  poynt 
A  is  common  to  them  both :  therfore.by  the  fourth  propofiti- 
on,the  bale  B Eis  equall  to  the  bafe  D  C. And,by  the  fame,  the 
angles  remayningofthe  one  triangle  a  re  equall  to  the  angle  s 
remay  ning  of  the  other  triangle.  Wherefore  the  angle  A  B  Eis 
equal  to  the  angle  A  CD.Againe  forafmuch  as  in  the  triangles 
B  'D  £,and  CED  the  fide  DBis  equall  to  the  fide  £  C,  and  the 
fide  B  E  to  the  fide  D  C, and  the  angle  DB  E  is  equal  to  the  an¬ 
gle  £  C  D, and  the  bafe  D  E  being  common  to  both  triangles  is  equall  to  it  felfe: there¬ 
fore  the  angles  remayningofthe  one  triangle,  are  equall  to  the  anjgles  remayningof 
the  other  triangle.  Wherfore  the  angle  ED  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  D  EC:  8c  the  angle 
DEB  is  equal  to  the  angle  £  D  C.And  forafmuch  as  the  angle  E  D  B  is  equal  to  the  an 
gle  DEC,  fro  which  are  taken  away  equall  angles  D  E  B,&  E  D  C ,  therfore  by  the  co- 
mon  fentence  the  angles  remayning,namely,B  D  C  and  CEB  are  equall;  And  as  it  was 
before manifeft  the  fides  B  D  and  D  Care  equall  to  the  fides  C E  and  £  B  the  one  to  the 
other,thatis,echtohiscorrefpondentfide  :  and  the  bafe  BCis  common  to  both  the 
triangles :  wherfore  the  angles  remayning  are  equall  to  the  angles  remayning  the  one 
to  the  other,vnder  which  are  fubteded  equall  fides. Wherfore  the  angle  D  B  Cis  equall 
to  the  angle  £  C  B. For  the  line  D  C  fubtendeth  the  angle  D  B  C,and  the  line  £  B  fubte- 
deth  the  angle  £  C2:which  two  lines  are  as  we  haue  before  proued  equall.  Wherfore 
in  an  Ifofccics  triangle,the  angles  at  the  bafe  are  equall  ,  though  the  right  lines  be  not 
produced. 

To  prouethis  alfo, there  is  an  other  dcmonflration  of  Pappus  much  fhor* 
ter  which  needeth  no  kindofaddition  ofany  thing  at  all:as  followeth. 

Suppofe  that  ABC  be  an  Ifofceles  triangle  ,&  let  the  fide 
A  B  be  equall  to  the  fide  zA  C.Now  then  vnderftand  this  one 
triangle  to  be  as  it  were  two  triangles.  And  thus  reafon  •  For¬ 
afmuch  as  in  the  two  triangles  A  B  C and  A  CB,<tA B  is  equal 
to  AC  &  AC  to  A  £,therfore  two  fides  of  the  one  are  equall 
to  two  fides  of  the  other,  ech  to  his  correfpondentfide,  &  the 
angle  Cis  equall  to  the  angle  C./££,  for  it  is  one  and  the 

felfefameangle.Wherforeby  the  4.propofition  the  bafe  CB 
is  equal!  to  the  bafe  B  C ,  and  the  triangle  zA B  C  is  equall  to 
the  triangle  A  CB',  and  the  angle  AB  Cis  equall  to  the  angle  q 
ACB, and  the  angle  AC B  to  the  angle  AB  C.-for  vnder  them  ^ 
are  fubtended  equall  fides  ,namely, the  lines  AB  Sc  A  C.  Wher 
fore  in  an  Ifofceles  triangle,the  angels  at  the  bafe  are  equall. 

E,iH,  Tlx<? 


An  ethtr  dema- 
ft ration  tnuen- 
ted  by  Proelut . 


An  ttkerdemf* 
ftration  inuen- 
tedby  Pnppnt. 


Mtlepus 
•the  invent  or  of 
thit propofition. 


Demonffration 
leading  to  an 
dmpojfibthtj^ 


¥:6i  thief  efi  and 
tn  ift  proper  kind 
tsfczmterfon., 

.\c.-wp  \  ,■  %  s'« 


TbefirJb'Bookg 

The  old  Philofophcr  Thales  Milefius  was  thefirft  inuenrer  of  this  fifth  propofiti- 
on,as  alfo  of  many  other. 

^tefThe  third  Theoreme .  'The fixtTmpoJitwn. 

If  a  triangle  haue  two  angles  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  the 
fdes  alfo  of the famejtohich fubtend  the  equall  angles 7(halbe 
equall  the  one  to  the  other . 


ppofe  that  ABC  he  a  triangle ,  hauing  the  angle  ABC 
equall  to  the  angle  AC  3.  Thenlfay  tbattbejUe  AB 


i  ^  f  —  "  *  /  7  -  J - 

I h  equall  to  the  fide  A  C.For  if  the  fide  A  B  he  not  equal 
\to  tbejide  A  C3tben  one  of  them  is  greater  .Let  A  3  he 
■the greater,  And  by  the  third propofticn  Ofom  A  B  he* 
fing  the  greater  cut  of  a  line  equal  to  the  lefie  line  fvhich 
Cj\h  AC And  let  the  fame  be3)B  tAnd  draTbe  a  line front 


thepoynt  3)  to  the  poynt  C.lSloStf forafmuchas  the 
fde  3)  3  is  equall  to  thefyde  A  Cyand  the  line  3 
C is  common  to  the  both  therefore  thefe tlbofydes 
ID  Band  3C  are  equall  to  thefe  Wo  fydes  AC&> 

CB  tbeonetotbeotber  .Andtbe  angle  3)3  Ch 
h  fuppofytion  equall  to  the  angle  AC  3.  VVher • 
fore( by  t  he  4  proportion  )  the  hafe  3)Ch  equall 
to  the  hafe  A  3  :&(by  the  fame)the  triangle  !DB 
C  is  equall  to  the  triangle  AC  3:namelyy  thelefe 
triangle  Vnto  the greater  triagleywhicb  is  impofi 

hle.W  before  the  fyde  A Bis  not  Unequal  to  the  fide  AC .  VVher  fore  it  he* 
qual.If  ther fore  a  triangle  haue  Wo  angles  equall  the  one  to  the  other:the  fydes 
alfo  of  the  fameffohich  ftihtende  the  equall  angles }  fall  he  equall  the  one  to  the 
other *  spbicb  Tl>as  required  to  he  demon flrated. 


’J'.jL  ( 


In  Geomecrieis  oftentimes  vfcdconucrfionofpropofitions.As this  propo.' 
fition  is  the  conuerfeof  the  propofition  next  before.The  chiefeftandmoftjprOC 
per  kind  ofeonuerfion  is,when  that  which  was  the  thing  fuppofed  in  the  formpr 
propofmon}is  the  conciuilon  oftheconuerfeandfecond  propofition  :  and  con? 
trai-fwife  that  which  was  concluded  in  the  firft:, is  the  thing  fuppofed  in.tHc  fe- 
cond  as  in  the  fifth  propofition  it  was  fuppofed  the  two  fides  ofa  triangle  to  be 
equal, the  thing  concluded  is, that  the  two  angles  at  thebafe  are  equall  Sc  in  this 
propofition, which  is  the  conuerfe  therof  is  fuppofed  that  theangles  at  the  bafe 
be  equalftWhich  in  the  former  propofition  was  the  conclufion*And  the  con- 
ciufion  is,that  the  two  fy  des  fubtending  the  two  angles  are  equall, which  in  the 
former  propofition  was  thefuppofition.This  is  the  chiefeft  kind  of  cpniierfiofi 
^oiforraeansUcirayne* 


0, 


T  jpg  conelufont 
in  the  fifth  pro¬ 
pofition. 

T he  fxt  prgpo- 
ftion  ts  the  con-' 
uerfe  as  tea¬ 
ching  the  ftp 
tonclufon  caefye 
The  conuerje  at 
touching  thefe ■» 
send  cotsclufotti 


jl  wfojy* 

Thereis  an  other  kind  ofconuerfion,bur  not  To  full  a  conuerfion  norfo  per-  Another  hind  of 
kSt  as  the  firft  is*  Which  happeneth  in  compofed  propofitions,that  is,  in  fueh, 
which  haue  mo  luppofttions  then  onejandpafife  from  thefe  fuppofitions  to  one 
conclufion.  In  theconuerfes  of  filch  propofiti6s, you  palfefrom  the  conclufion 
of  the  firft  propofition,  with  one  or  mo  of  the  fuppofitions  of  the  lame:  Sc  con¬ 
clude  fome  other  fuppofition  of  the  felfe  firft  propofition:  of  this  kinde  there 
are  many  in  Euclide.Therofyou  may  hauC  an  example  in  the  S.propofition  be¬ 
ing  the  conuerle  of  the  fourth.Thisconuerfion  is  not  fo  vniforme  as  the  other, 
but  more  diuers  and  vneertaine  according  to  the  multitude  of  the  things  geuen^ 
or  fuppofitions  in  the  propofition. 

Bucbecaufe  in  the  fifth  propofition  there  are  two  conclufions,  the  firft,  that 
the  two  angles  atthebafe  be  equall:  the  fecond^that  the  angles  vnder  thebafe  are 
cquall:  this  is  to  bcnoted,that  this  fixe  propofition  is  the  conuerfe  of  the  fame 
fifth  as  touching  the  firft  conclufion  onely .  You  may  in  like  mancr  make  a  con- 
uerfe  of  the  fame  propofition  touching  thefecond  conclufion  therof.  And  chat 
after  this  maner* 

CV  He  ttyo  fides  of  a  triangle  beyng  produced \if the  angles  vnder  the  bafe  be  ecjualfthe  J aid  triangle 
*  jhatl  be  an  Jfofceles  triangle  Jn  which  propofmo  the  fuppofition  ls.that  the  angles 
vnder  the  bafe  are  cquall :  which  in  the  fifth  propofition  was  the  conclufion:  6c 
the  conclufion  in  this  propofition  is.that  the  two  fides  ofthe  triangle  are  equal, 
which  in  the  fife  propofition  was  the  fuppolition.Butnowfor  proofeof  the  laid 
propofition: 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  triangle  AB  C,  &  let  the 
fides  s^^andix/C* be  produced  to  the  poyntesU 
and  G ,  and  let  the  angles  vnder  the  bafe  be  cquall, 
namely,the  angles  D  B  C,and  GCB .  Then  I  fay  that 
the  triangle  ABC  is  an  Jfofceles  triangle .  For  take  ii* 
the  line  AD  a  point  which  let  be  E,  And  vnto  the  line 
BE  put  the  line  CF  equallfby  the  3  .propofitio  ^).And 
draw  thefe  lines  E  C,B  F,and  E  F.  Now  forafmuch  as 
BE  is  equall  to  C  F,  and  BC  is  common  to  the  both , 
therfore  thefe  two  lines  B  E&B  C*,are  equall  to  thefe 
two  lines  C  F  and  C  B  the  one  to  th e  other,  &  the  an¬ 
gle  E  B  Cis  equall  to  the  angle  FCF  by  fuppofition. 

Wherfore(by  the  4,propofition )  the  bafe  of  the  one 
is  equall  to  the  bafe  of  the  other,and  the  one  triangle 
is  equal  to  the  other  trian  gle ,  &  the  other  angles  re- 
mayning  are  equal  vnto  the  other  angles  remayning, 
theone  to  the  other,vnder  which  are  fubtended  equall  fides,  Wherfore  the  bafe  ACis 
equall  to  the  bafe  FF,and  the  angle  B  EC  to  the  angle  CEB  ,  and  the  angle  CB  Ft  o 
the  angle  B  C  F.Bqt  the  whole  angle  EBCis  equal!  to  the  whole  angle  F  CB ,  of  which 
the  angle  F  B  Cis  equall  to  the  angle  ECB  :  wherefore  the  angle  remayning  EB  Fisc-* 
quail  to  the  angle  remayning  F  C  F.But  the  line  B  Eis  equall  to  the  line  C  F,Sc  the  line 
B  F  to  the  line  CE} and  they  contayne  equall  angles:  wherfore  by  the  fame  fourth  pro¬ 
pofition  the  angle  B  E  Fis  eq uall  to  the  angle  C F  F.  Wherfore  by  this  fixt  propofition 
the  fide  <iA  Eis  equall  to  the  fide  A  F: of  whiche  B  E  is  equall  to  C  F,  by  conftru&ion : 
wherforefby  the  third  common  fentence) the  refidue  A  B  is  equall  to  the  refidue  A  C 
Wherfore  the  triangle  A  B  Cis  an  Jfofceles  triangle. if  therfore  the  two  fides  of  a  trian¬ 
gle  being  produced, the  angles  vnder  the  bafe  be  equall,the  fayd  triangle  fhall  be  an  /- 
fifieUs  triangle:which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

This  moreouer  is  to  be  noted, that  in  this  propofition  there  may  be  an  other  cafe*  a*  other  cafe  its 
for  in  taking  an  equall  line  to  eA  Cfrom  A  B,  you  may  take  it  from  the  poynte  cA  and  thufxtpropof. 

E»iiij.  not  <  tnn. 


iionJiruiiioffa 

Demtnpiratiotii 


Thefirft'Bookp 


Mvt  from  the  poynt  ,  And  yet  though  this  fuppbfition 
aifo  be  put  the  felfe  fame  abfurdity  will  follow. 

For  fuppofe  that  A  C  be  equall  to  A  D  :aiid  produce 
the  line  CiA  to  the  poynt£:  and  put  the  line  AE  equal! 
to  the  line  TO  Z?(by  the  third  propolitionjwherefore  the 
whole  line  C  E  is  equall  to  the  whole  line  AB  (  by  the  fe- 
cond  common  fentece )  Draw  a  line  from  the  poynt-E  to 
the  point  jB.Andforafnuich  as  the  lineaxf  B  is  equall  to 
the  line  £C,  and  the  line's  Cis  common  to  them  both, 
and  the  angle  <sA  CB  is  fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  an¬ 
gle  SC:  Wherfore  (by  the  fourth  propofition )  the  tri¬ 
angle  EBCis  equall  to  the  triangle  AB  C,  namelye,the 
whole  to  the  part:  which  is  impoffible. 


t 


Qtman’lrdt'tcn 
le*dmg  to  An 
abjnriittfe'. 


The  4..  Theoreme.  The  7.  Tropofition - 

fffrom  the  endes  of  one  line,  be  drawn  two  right  lynes  to  any 
pomteithere  can  not  fro  the felffame  endes  on  the fame  fide, be 
drawn  two  other  lines  equal  to  the  two  firjl  lines ,  the  one  to  the 
other gonto  any  other point. 

Or  if  it  be  pofitble:  then  from  the  endes  of one  &  the  felf 
fame  right  line ,  namely, A  <3,  from  thepointesf  I fay)  A 
and  3, let  there  be  drawn  tspo  right  lines  A.  Cand C3to 
the  point  C;  and  from  the  fame  endes  of  the  line  A  3,  let 
there  be  dr  assert  tSbo  other  right  right  lines  A3)  and  3) 
3  equall  to  the  lines  A  Cand  C  3  the  one  to  the  other # 

_ _ _ js,eche  to  his  eorrefpondent  fme^and on  one  and  the fame 

fide, and  to  an  other  point e 3  namely ,  to3):fo  that 
let  C  A  be  equall  to  3)  A  beyng  both  drawen  from 
one  end,that  is,A:&  let  C3be  equall  to  3)  3,be» 
yng  hothalfo  draw  from  one  ende,that  isfi.And 
(by  the  firjl  peticion)  draSP  a  right  line  from  the 
point  Cto  the  point  3).Kow  for aj much  as  A  Cis  e* 
qual  to  A  3),the angle  A  C3)alfo  is(by  the  i.pro* 
pofition)e quail  to  the  angle  A3)C:  Therfore  the 
angle  A  C3)  is  lefie  the  the  angle  3  3)  C,  Wher* 
f ore  the  angle  3  C  3)  is  much  le fie  then  the  angle 
3  3)  C.  Againe  forafmuch  as  3  C  is  equall  to  3  3),  and  tier  fore  dlfo  the  angle 
3  C  D  is  equall  to  the  angle  3  3)  CtAnd  it  is  proued  that  it  is  much  lefie  then  it: 
which  is  im pofitble  Jf tber fore from  the  endes  of  one  line ,  be  drawen  two  right 
lines  to  any  point  et  there  can  not  from  the  felfe  fame  endes  on  the  fame  fide  be 
drawn  ftoo  other  lines  equall  to  the  two firjl  lines ,  the  one  to  the  other  jvnto  a* 
ny  other  point:  Which  ip  as  required  to  be  demonfir  at  ed^  In 


of Eudides  Elements .  FoLij . 

In  this  propofition  the  conclufionisa  negation,  which  very  rarely  happe-  Negative  and* 
neth  in  the  mathematical!  artes ,  For  they  euer  for  the  moft  part  vfc  to  conclude 
affirmaciuely,&:  not  negatiuely .  bora  propofitio  vniuerfallalfirmatine is  moft  uLttartgt!™ 
agreahlc  to  lciences,as  faith  AnDotle^nd  isofit  felfeftrong,  and  nedeth  no  nega- 
due  to  his  proofe.Butan  vniuerfall  propofition  negatiue  muftof  necefiitie  haue 
to  his  proofe  anaffirmatiue,For  of  oncly  negatiue  propofitions  there  canbeno 
deniormrations.Aiid  therfore  fciences  vfingdemonftracion,  conclude  affirraa- 
ciuely^and  very  feldome  vfe  negatiue  conclufions. 

S&dJn  other  demonjlration  after  Campanus . 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  line  A B ,  from  whofe  ends  A  a ndl?, 
let  there  be  drawen  two  lines  A  C  and  B  C  on  one  fide ,  which  let 
concur  in  the  poynt  C.Then  I  fay  that  on  the  fame  fide  there  can¬ 
not  be  drawen  two  other  lines/rom  the  endesof  the  line -4  2?, 
which  Hull  concur  at  any  other  poynt, fo  that  that  which  is  drawe 
from  the  point  A  fhall  be  equall  to  the  line  A  C,and  that  which  is 
drawen  from  the  point  3  flialbe  equall  to  the  line  BC.  For  if  it  be 
poflible,let  there  be  drawn  two  other  lines  on  the  felfe  fame  fide, 

which  let  concurrent  the  point  D,and  let  the  line  AD  be  equall  to  the  line  ACy8c  the  Dtuers  carts 
line  B  D  equall  to  the  line  B  C.  Wherfore  the  poynt  D  fhall  fall  either  within  the  trian-  thts  gems„j}r^ 
gle  ^  5  C,orwithout,For  it  cannot  fall  in  one  ofhhefides,for  then  a  parte  fiiouldbe  e-  tl0„, 
quail  to  his  whole. If  therfore  it  fall  without:  then  either  one  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B 
fhall  cut  one  of  the  lines  A  C  and  Chords  neither  fhall  cut  neyther  .Firfte  let  one  cut  firfieafe. 
the  other  and  draw  a  right  line  from  CtoD.  Now  forafmuch  as  in  the  triangle  ACDr 
thetwofides^4Cand^4DareequaIl,therforetheangle  <•//  CD  is  equall  to  the  angle 
A  DC}by  the  fifth  propofitio:  likewifc  forafmuch  as  inthetriagle5Ci),thetwo  fide* 

2?  Cand  B  D  are  equall,therfore  by  the  fame,  the  angles  BCD  ScBDC  are  alfo  equall. 

An'4  forafmuch  as  the  angle  B  DC  is  greter  the  the  angle  ADC ,  F 

it  followeth  that  the  angle  B  CD  is  greater  then  the  angle  ACD , 
namely  ^the  part  greater  then  the  whole  -.which  is  impolTible. 

But  if  the  point  D  fal  without  the  triangle  ABC  Jo  that  the  lines 
cut  not  the  one  the  other,draw  a  line  from  D  to  C.  And  produce 
the  lines  B  D8c  BC  beyond  the  bafe  CD,  vnto  the  points  E8cF. 

And  forafmuch  as  the  lines  A  C and  AD  2 re  equall,  the  angles  A 
C  D  zndA  D  C  fhall  alfo  be  equall,  by  the  fifth  propofition  :  like- 
wife  for  afmuch  as  the  lines  B  Cand  B  D  are  equal,  the  angles  vn- 
der  the  bafe,namely,the  angles  F  D  C and  E  CD  are  equall ,  by 
the  feconde  part  of  the  fame  propofition  .  And  for  as  much  as  the  angle  ECDis  lefle 
then  the  angle  ACD :  It  followeth  thattheangle  FDCislefie  the  the  angle  ADCi 
which  is  impoffible.’for  that  the  angle  A  DCis  a  part  of  the  angle  F  D  C.  And  the  fame 
inconuenience  will  follow  if  the  poynt  D  fall  within  the  triangle  <lA  B  C, 


c  p  > 


SbfThe,  fift  Theoreme.  "The  8.  Trnpofition* 

Jftxto  triangles  haue  two fdesoftloone  equall  to  two  fides  of 
the  other ,ecbe to  his  correspondent fide haue  alfo  the  bafe 
of  the  one  equall  to  the  bafe  of  the  other :  they  fhall  haue  alfo 
the  angle  contained  vnder  the  equall  right  lines  of  the  one,e-» 
quail  to  the  angle  contayned  vnder  the  equall  right  lynes  of 
the  other.  Fa*  Suppofe 


sv  A 


Demonftrarion 
'teAding  to  an  | 
omfofjlbthtj , 


•>\j 


Tbefir'sl'Booke 

V ppofe  that  there  he  two  triangles  A  B  C and  V  E  F:& 
let  thefe  two  /ides  of  the  one  AB  and  A  CJbe  equal!  to 
theft  two  (ides  of  the  other  ID  E,and  D  Fyechto  his  con 
ref  pendent  fide. that  is ^A  BtoV  E, and  AC  Jo  D  F.Zsr 
'let  the  bafe  of  the  one  jiamely ,B  C  be  equal  to  the  bafe  of 
the  other .namely  jo  E  F.Then  lfay  jbat  the  angle  (BA 
,C  is  e quail  to  the  angle  EDF.For  the  triangle  ABC  ex* 
aftly  agreing  With  the  triangle  DE 
F.and  the- point  B  being  put  Vpon  the 
point  E^and  the  right  line  BCvpon 
the  right  line  B  F :  the  point  C  Jhall 
exactly  agree  la ith  the  point  F  (for 
the  line  B  Cis  equal l to  the  line  EF) 

And  B  C  exaftly  agreeing  With  E  F 
the  lines  alfo  B  A  and  A  C  frail  ex* 
aftly  agree  With  the  lines  E  D&D 
F4  For  if  the  baft  B  C  do  exaftly  a* 
gree  With  the  bafe  F  F.  but  the  (ides 
\B  A  fjr  A  C  doo  not  exaftly  agreed 
the  (ides  E  2)  &  DEJbut  differ  as  F 

G  esrG  Fdce.  the  frornji  endes  of  one  r  j 

dyne  fhalbe  drawn  two  fight  lines  to  a  poynt,&  from  the  felf fame  endes  on  the 
fame  fide  (halbe  drah?h  two  other  lines.equal  to  the  two  fir (l  lines. y  one  to  the  o« 
ther„and  vnto  an  other  poyntibut  that  is  impofttblefby  the  feuenth  propofitio) 
V  F  her  fire  the  bafe  B  C  exaftly  agreeing  with  the  bafe  EFjbe  (ides  alft  BA 
and  AC  do  exaftly  agre  With  the  (ides  ED  and  D  F.W her  fore  alfo  the  angle 
B  .AC Jhall  exaftly  agre  lb  the  angle  E  D  Fyand  therfore  (hall  alfo  be  equal  to 
it. If  the  /  fore  two  triangles  bane  two  (ides  of  the  one  equallto  two  fide  s  of  the 
othenyech  to  his  cor  refpbndent fideyand  haue  alfo  the  baft  off  one  equallto- the 
haft -vf the  other.they  j hall  haue  alfo  theanglecantayitedwdierthe  eqrnll  right 
lines  of the  dne/qUaUto  the  angle  contayhed  Vnder  thefquall  right  linesofthe 
othenwhich  Was  re c 


:  'H*  f\ 


r“>  *r\ 


.  •  i  ; 

Tft i s T heorcme  is  theconuerfe  of tfre  fourth ,  biiti'cisflOtthe  chiefeftand 


,/x 


This  proposition 
is  the  conuer fe 
of  the  fourth, 
but  not  the  chts 
feji  hnd  of  con- 
nerfiott. 


■pofttio  .Whole  conu  erfe  t  h  is  is  ,i  s  a  copound  rheorcm^hariingt^o  tb«%$  gcue 
or  iqpp.o fed,  which  arethefe:  the  one,tharaWq  fides  of  the  one  triagle  be  equal  to 
t  wo Mes  of  the  other  frugie:  th’othefjthat  the  anglecbtaintfd  bf  the  tWo  tides  of 
ttfo^fs'cqUalrothe-angfeoo'nta_ined'oi'Chctwoii’des^.t’h'one:buclwth^foon- 
geft  mhes  one  thing  required,  whiche  is,  that  thebafe^of  the  one,is  equal  to  the 
bale' of  the  other*  No^  th  this  S^propofftio.bdhg  the 

bafeHf.tlie  one  is  equal  to  phebafe  ofth’other.is  thefuppofitionsorthe  thing  ges  ■ 
ne;  which  in  the  former  propofitio  was  the  conclufib.  And  this, that  two  Odes  of 


ft 


Fobs. 


tkeonc  areeqqaH  to  two  fidesof  the  other,  is' in  this  proportion  alfo  afiip^ 
pofkion i, like  as  it  was  m  the  former  propofitionifo  that  it  is  a  thing  geuen  ineis 
ther  proportion.  The  conclufionofthis  proportion  is  that  the  angle  enclo fed 
of  the  two  equal!  fidesof  the  one  triangle  is  equalltothe  angle  enclofed  of  the 
two  equall  fides  of  the  other  triangle:  which  in  the  former  propofiuon  was  one 
of  tbe  things  geuen. 

Philo  and  hisfcholas  demonftrate  this  proportion  without  thehclpe  of  the 
former  propefition,in  this  maner. 


•■'4 

Suppofe  that  there  be  tw©  triangles  A.B.  C  and  D  E  F,  hauing  two  fydes  of  the  one 
equall  to  two  Cycles  of  the  other7namely,v4  B  and  A  C  equall  to  D  E  and  D  F  ,  the  one 
to  the  other,  &  the  bafe  B  C equal  to  the  bafe  E  F .  And  for  that  the  bafe  2?  Cis  equall 
to  the  bafe  E  F,therfore  the  one  being  applied  to  the  Other  they  agree  Place  the  two 
triagles  ABCScDEFi  n  one  &  the  felf  fame  plaine  fuperficies.,&  apply  the  bafe  of  the 
one  to  the  bafe  of  the  other  :But  yet  fo  that  the  triagle  A  B  C  be  fet  one  the  other  fide  of 
the  right  line  £  F,that  the  top  of  the  one  may  be  oppofite  to  the  top  of  the  other .  And 
in  {lead  of  the  triangle  AS  C  put  the 
triangle  E  F  G  as  in  the  figure.  And  let 
D  E  be  equall  to  E  <7, and  F)  F  to  F  G. 

Nowe  then  by  this  meanes  (hall  hap¬ 
pen  diners  cafes  ♦  For  the  line  F  G  may 
fall  diredtly  vpo  the  line  D  F,orit  may 
fo  fall  that  it  may  make  with  the  line 
15  F  an  angle  within  the  figurejor  with 
out.  ,  . 

'  j  /  *  .  1  -  =1  ? 

Firft  let  it  fall  dire&lye .  And  fqraf- 
mqche  as  the  line  D  E  is  equall  to  the 
line  E  6’,anclD  FG,  is  one rightc line: 
therfore  DEG  is  an  Ifofcelcs  triagle: 
and  fo,by  the  fifth  pt-opofition,the an¬ 
gle  at  the  point  D  is  equal  to  the  angle 
at  the  poynt  G :  which  was  required  to 
beproued. 


But  ifit  fall  not  dire&ly ,  but  make  with  the  lineD 
F  an  angle  within  the  figure,  drawe  a  line  from  D  to  G. 
Now  forafmuch  as  E  D  and  E  G  are  equall ,and  the  line 
D  G  is  the  bafe’therfore  by  the  fifth  propofitio,  the  an¬ 
gle  E  D  G  is  equall  to  the  angle  E  G  D  .  Agayrte  foraf¬ 
much  as  D  F  is  equall  to  F  G,and;D  G  is  the  bafe :  ther- 
fore  by  the  fame,the  angle  F  D  G  is  equal  to  the  F  GD: 
and  it  was  proued  that  the  angle  E  D  G  is  equall  to  the 
angle  E  G  Diwherfore  the  whole  angle  ED  F  is  equal  to 
the  whole  angle  FGB  :  whione was  required  to  bepio- 
ueeb 


yin  other  detitt* 
firation  itutend 
ted bj  Philo. 


But  if  the  line  FG  make  with  the  line  D  F  an  angle 
without  the  figure.-draw  a  right  line  without  the  figure 

V.ij.  from 


After  this  de~ 
monftrsstio  thre 
safes  in  this  fr& 
fitters* 


Thefirft  cafiti 


T he fieetsd  cafiti 


The  third  cafi* 


from  thepoyirt  D  to  the  poynt  G.  And  forafmuch  as  D  E  and  E  G  are  equall,  and  DG 
is  the  bafe,therfore  by  the  fifth  propofitioiuhe  angles  E  D  G  and  D  G  E  are  cquall.A- 


-gaine  forafmuch  as  D  F  is  equall  to  F  G,and  D  G  is  the  bale,  therfore,by  the  fame, the 
angle  F  D  G  is  equal!  to  the  angle  F  G  D  .  And  it  was  proued  that  the  whole  angles  E 
3>G  &  D  G  E  are  equall  theonc  to  the  other:  wherfore  the  angles  remayning  E  D  F  & 
EG  F  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


i  5 


ZmBrn&im* 


DetMOu&ration. 


c>  "  J  ‘  '  -  -•  -  -  i  i  1  ‘  l'.* 

^&The  ^.fP  roblcme.  T  he  p.Propojitton, 

sot  EuA ni  ?:;■?, '  :  nsttt 

To  deulde  a  rcBiline  angle geuenfinto  trn  equal l partes, 

v- t  ■  ■  ‘(y  -  .  ...  ri  ,  . *. .  .  . . ■ , 

V ppofe  that  the  reftiUne  angle  geuen  he  B  A  C  It  is  re* 
qutredto  deuide  the  angle  IB  A  C  into  two  equal  partes. 
In  the  line  A  B  take  a  point  at  ad  aduentures,  let  the 
fame  he  D.And(by  the  third  proportion) from  the  lyne 
1  A  C  cutte  of  the  line  A  E  equall  to  A  ID,  And  (by  the 
firft  petition)  drast  aright  line  from  thepoint  fDto  the 

_ _ _ !  point  E.Andfhy  the  fir  ft  propofitm)vpon  the  line  ID  S' 

defcribe  an  equilater  triangle  and  let  the  fame  be  DFEy  and(by  the  fir  ft  peti • 
cion)  draSoe  a  right  line  from  the  poynte  A  to 
the  point  F.  Then  l fay  that  the  angle  BAG  is  by 
y  line  AF  deuided  into  two  equal  partes. For  for* 
afmuchas  A  V  is  equall  to  A  Ey  and  A  F is  canton, 
to  them  hotktherfore  thefe  noo  D  A  and  AF^are 
equall  to  thefe  two  FA  and  A  Fythe  one  to  the  o* 
ther!But(hy  thefirftpropopfm)the  bafe  D  Fis 
equall  to  the  bafe  EF‘Merfdre(hy  the  ft.propo* 

/ition)the  angle  D  AF  is  equal  to  the  angle  FAE.  & 

Wherfore  the  reBiline  angle  geuen  y  namely  yB 

AC  is  deuide  d  into  tioo  equal  partes  by  the  right  lint  A  F\ Which  ms  requU 
red  to  be  done . 


i .  -  ^  . 


In  this  propofition  is  not  taught  to  deuidc  a  right  lined  angle  into  mo  partes 
then  tw.  albeit  to  demde  anangle/o  it  be  a  right  angle, into  three  partes,  it  it 

L  ‘  >.  not 


ofEmlidesElementes.  FoLip. 

It  is  tmpof 

doc  hard.  And  it  is  taught  of  Vitellio  in  liis  firft  bokc  ofPerfpe£h'ue,tbe  2S,Propo-  fileta  deuide 
fition.Por to  deuide an  acuteangle  into threeequal  partes  ,is(as  faith Proclus)\m-  *2-1CHtere‘,  ■ 
poffible:vnlesttbe  by  the  helpc^orothcr  lines  which  are  ora  mixt  nature, Which  to  three  equail 
thing  Tfjcomedes  did  hy 'fuch  lines  which  are  called  Concoides  linear  ho  fir  ft  ferched  partes  without 
out  the  inuemion,nacurc,&:  properties,  of  fuch  lines.  And  others  did  itby  other  are 

meanes:as  by  the  helpe  of  quadrant  lines  indented  by  Hippies  &  jy/«*w/^«tOther$  0Ja 
by  Helices  or  Spiral  lines  indented  of  Archimedes  .B  ut  thefe  are  things  of  much  dif-  tme. 
ficulty  and  hardnes,and  nothere  to  be  infreated  oft 


Hereagainft  this  propofition  may  ofthe  aduerfary  be  brought  an  -Jfinftance.  *j„-tnfiaKce  ;t 
For  he  may  cauill  that  the  hed  ofthe  equ’i'latertriangle  (hall  not  fall  betwene  the  an  obieftion  or  a 
two  right  lines ,but  in  one  ofthem^or  w  ithout  them, both.  As  for  example.  doubtjvherbj  u 

1  letted  or  trots- 


Suppofe  that  the  angle  to  be  deuided  into  two 
equail  partes  be  B  A  C ,  and  in  the  line  *B  <tA  take  A 

the  poynt  D  , and  vnto  the  line  ©  A  put  the  line  l 

A  E  equalfby  the  third  propofition . )  And  draw  a 
line  fro  D  to  E,  And  vpon  the  line  DE  defcribe(by 
the  firft)  an  equilater  triangle, which  let  be  DEE. 

Now  then  if  it  be  poffible  that  the  point  F  do  not 
fal  betwene  thelines  ABScA  C,then it ihal fal  e- 
ther  in  the  \it\eAB  or  AC,  or  without  them  both. 

Suppofe  that  the  point  F  be  fall  vpon  line  AB,  fo 
that  let  D  F  E  be  an  equilater  triangle.?  Wherfore 
the  line  D  F  is  equal  to  the  line  F  E:  &  the  angles 
at  the  bafe  are  equail,  namely,  the  angles  EDF 
and  D  E  F.  Wherefore  the  whole  angle  D  E  (7  is 
greater  then  the  angle  EDF.  Againe  foraftnuch  as  zA  D  is  equal!  to  A  £,  therefore 
AD  E  is  an  Ifofceles  triangle.  Wherefore  ( by  the  fifth  propofition  )  the  angles  vn¬ 
der  the  bafe  are  equall.Wherfore  the  angle  D  E  Cis  equail  to  the  angle  ED  B  .  But  it 
was  alfo  greatertwhich  is  impoffible.  Wherfore  the  top  ofthe  equilater  triangle  canot 
be  in  the  right  line  A  2?.  And  in  like  fort  alfo  may  we  proue  that  it  canot  be  in  the  right 
Vine  A  C.Wherforefuppofethat  it  be  without  them  both, if  it  be  poffible.  Andforaf* 
much  as  D  F  is  equal  to  F  E,the  angles  at  the  bafe  are  equal,namely,the  angles  DEF  & 
E  D  F. Wherfore  the  angle  D  E  F  is  greater  then  the  angle  E'DV -Wherfore  the  angle  D 
EC  is  much  greater  then  the  angle  E  D  F.But  it  is  alfo  equal  vnto  it.  For  they  are  angles 
vnder  the  bafe  DE  of  the  Ifofceles  triangle  AD  E.  Which  is- impoffible .  Wherfore  the 
poynt  F  (hall  not  fall  without  the  two  right  lines  on  that  fide  .  And  in  like  forte  may  we 
proue  that  it  (hall  not  fall  without  them  on  the  other  fide .  Wherfore  it  fhali  of  neceffi- 
ty  fall  betwene  them :  which  was  required  to  be  proued* 


hied  the  con- 
fins  ft/on ,  or  de¬ 
mon  ftrat  son, 
contajnsth  an 
9 nruth ,  and  an 
impoffibihtj: 
and  ther  fore  it 
mvft  of nece fifty 
be  anfrered  \>n~ 
to, and  the  fill fe- 
hode  thereof 
made  manifefi. 


Theremayalfo  in  this  propofition  bedmers  cafes. (fit  fo  happen  that  there  Diners  cafes  in 
be  no  fpace  vnder  the  bafe  D  E  to  deferibe  an  equilater  triangle, but  that  of  necef-  this  propofition, 
fitie;youmuft  deferibe  it  on  the  fame  fide  that  the  lines  AB  and  A  C  are.  For 
thenthefides  ofthe  equftater  triangle  either  exa&ly agree with  the  lines  AD 
and  A  H,  if  the  faid  lines  A'D  and  AE  beequall  with  the  bafe  D  E.  Or  they  fail 
without  thera'jifthe lines  A D  and A E  beleffe  then  the  bafe  DE-  Or  they  fall 
within  them, if  the  faid  lines  be  greater  then  the  bafe  D  E. 

>  ’  y  r 

-s:n:  o-  rmn  ■  "  a  ::r  :  •-  , 

Firft  let  them  exactly  agree,  And  let©  A  E  be  an  equilater  triangle.  And  in  the  fide  The  firft  cafe, 
A  D  take  the  poynt  G ,  And  from  the  fide  A  E  cut  of  a  line  equal  to  the  line  A  G(  by  the 
third  propofition  Jwhich  let  be  A  fi, And  draw  thefe  right  lines  (j  E,HD  and  GH, and 
AF.Now  forafmuch  as  AD  is  equal  to  AEfzndA  G  vnto  A  /ifttherfore  thefe  two  lines 

F-iift  DAmd 


sjn he  peon  d  cafe. 


TbejirB'Boofy 


A  and  A  Hare  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  £.4 
and  A  Grand  they  contaync  one  and  thefelfe 
fame  angle,  Wherfore  by  the  fourth  propofi- 
tion,the  angle  G  D  H  is  equal  to  the  angle  H  E 
G.  And  the  bafe  ‘D  H  is  equall  to  the  bafe  E  G. 
But  the  line  D  G  is  equal  to  the  line  E  H:wher 
fore  againe  by  the  fourth  propofition ,  the  an¬ 
gle  EGHr  equall  to  the  angle  2)  HG.  Wher¬ 
fore  by  the  fixt  propofition,  thebafeGFise- 
qual  to  the  bafe  H  F  And  forafinuch  as  A  His 
equall  to  A  G,and  A  F  is  connnonjto  the  both, 
and  the  bafe  G  F  is  equall  to  the  bafe  H  F,  ther 
fore  the angleGAF  is  equall  to  the  angle  HA 
F. Wherefore  the  angle G  AH  is  deuided  into 
two  equal!  partes :  which  was  required  to  be 
done. 


B  ut  if  the  fides  of  the  equilater  triangle  fall  without  the  right  lines  BA&A  C,as  do 
the  lines  F  &  £  F,the  draw  a  line  from  F  to,  A  &  produce  the  line  F  A  to  the  point  G. 
Now  forafinuch  as  the  lines  D  F  and  F  E  are  equal. 

Sc  the  line  F  A  is  common  to  them  both,  &  the  ba- 
fes  D  A  and  A  E  are  equall:  therfore(by  the  eight) 
the  angle  D  F  A  is  equal  to  the  angle  E  F  A.  Agatne 
forafinuch  as  D  F  and  F  E  are  equall ,  and  F  G.  is 
common  to  them  both,  and  they  containc  equall 
angles  (as  it  hath  bene  proued )  therefore  (by  the 
fourth)  the  bafe  D  Gis  equall  to  the  bafeGE.  And 
forafinuch  as  A  D  is  equall  to  A  E,and  A  G  is  com-  ; 
mon  to  them  both,  Therfore(by  the  eight)the  an¬ 
gle  PAG  is  equall  to  the  angle  E  A  G  .wherefore 
the  angle  D  A  E  is  deuided  into  two  equall  partes :  0 
Which  was  required  to  be  done. 


•S the  third  cap. 


T<4  dcaide  a. 
re&tiine  angle 
■onto  two  equall 
farts  Mechani- 
Jtatlj. 


Butif  the  fides  of  the  equilater  triangle  fal  with¬ 
in  the  right  lines  B  A  and  A  C,  as  do  the  lines  D  F 
and  F  E,then  againe  draw  aline  from  A  to  F.  And 
forafinuch  as  D  A  is  eq  uall  to  A  E,and  A  Fis  com¬ 
mon  to  them  both,and  the  bafe  D  F  is  equal  to  the 
bafe  F  E: ther fore  the  angle  D  A  F  isf  by  the  eight) 
equall  to  the  angle  E  A  F,  Wherefore  the  angle  at 
the  point  Ais  deuided  into  two  equall  partes,how 
foeucr  the  equilater  triangle  be  placed:  which  was 
required  to  be  done. 


Tbi  s  is  to  be  noted/that  if  a  man  will  me¬ 
chanically  or  readily,  not  regatdyng  demon'-, 
ft  rati  on,  denude  the  forefaid  reftilincangle  B 
AC  ,and  Co  any  other  re<fhlirreanglegeuenwhatfoeii£f, 
into  two  equall  partes3he  {hall  needeonely  with  one  o£ 
peaing  of  the  compafle  tafcen  at  all  adtientures  to  markc 
the  two  pointes  D  andE,  which  cult  of  equal  partes  of  the 
lines  A  B  and  A  C,howfoeuerthey  happen,  and  fo  ma¬ 
king  the  centres  the  two  points  Dand  E,  to  deferibe  two 
circles  according  to  the  openyng  of  the  compafle  .*  and 
fcom  the  point  A  to.  their  interfe&ion,  which  let  be  the 
point  F  to  draw  a  rightline:  which  fliall  deuide  the  an¬ 
gle  B  A  C  into  two  equall  partes.  Add  here  note, 'that 
youfhall  not  nede  to  draw  the  circles  all  whole^but  one* 


of Euclides  Elelnentes . 


Folio. 

ly  a  portion  where  they  cut  thbbiib  the  o'tftttY  As  m  thehgote  here  in  the  end  of 

the  other  fide  put. 


&!  H  £  Vr  V., 


S-. 


...  ;  .  i  n  r  „  ••  •  ^  (  :  ^  ^ 

The  sfProhleme.  f  The  iQ.Tropofition u 


,  VC 


3  von-. 


-  :iU 


T o  deuide  a  right  line  getten  being  finite  (into  tm  equall 

^  !  "vai  31 

partes. 


V/.i  J. 

nt 

.3UO  510; 


Vppofe  that  the  right  linegeuenbe  A  <B  .It  is  required  to  deuide  the 
line  A  B  into  fWo  equal partes.Defcribe( by  the firjl propo/ition)vp * 
on  the  line  AS  an  equila  ter  triangle  and  let  the  fame  he  A  BC.  And 
^  (by  the  former  propofitiohfdeuide  the  angle  AC  B  into  tyi>o  equal l 
partes  by  the  right  line  CD.TbenI fay  that  the  i  > 

right  line  A  B  isdeuided  into  two  equall partes  in 
the  poynt  D.For forafnuch  as  (  by  thefrfipropo* 
ftion)A  C  is  equall  to  CB ,  and  C  D  is  common  to 
the  botktherfore  thefe  two  lines  AC  <&  CD  at e  e* 
qua  l  to  thefe  two  lines  BC<jr  £D(y  one  toy  other, 
and  the  angle  AC Dis  equaUto the  angle  BCD.  t 
VVbetf&re(by  the  ^propofition  )  tfy  bafe  AD  is  :  /  • 
equqll  to  the  bafeBDAVhere fore  the  righte  line  JC~'  p  3 

geuen  A  B,is  deuided  into  VWoe  quail  partes  in  the 
poynt  Dibich  'Was  required  to  be  done 4  .  '  v 

Apollonius' 'teacheth  to  deuide  a  rightlinebeihgfinite  into  two  eq«aih|)4[|tes 
after  this  manner,  1. 

c  r  „u  ....  ,  .  :  vjdi*  0*  ran  *1  /l  J  a 

Suppoie  that  the  right  line  being  finite  ,,  ^  , 

be  AB: which  it  ii  required  to  deUirle  ih?Ji  ■ 
to  two  equal  parts .  now  the  makingthCv .cr; ;•  A  .  vt y 
centre  the  point  A  &  the  fpaoe  A  B  de- 5  t  / 

Icnbe  a  circle.  Again  making  the  centre  ,  .. . 

the  poynt  B  &  the  {pace B  A  defcribeah  'V“ 1  '  ’A”' 

orthetdrclsiand  froxnths rfc,  5  ' 


f£^thitthenl^ht  find  ^ 

othe^fbrthat  they  frd 

the  centres  to  the  circumferences  of  equall  circles.And  forafmuch  as  the  lines  C^AM^ 
A ‘Dare  equall  to  the  lines  C  B  and  B  D.and  the  line  CP  is  common  to  either  of  them: 


-V-  mis 

■••i-  \  oUva-  '  , 

l  .  * 

v  "d  1  -tvi  a'-. 


C  on  ft  ruction* 


Demon^ratioji, 


,nsVtWn\:..i 


■ 

An  other  way  ft 
deuide  a  right 
line  being fnit<t, 
inuented  bj  A* 
pellontus. 


By  this  way  ofdeuidinga  rightline,  into  two 
equall  parts  inuented  by  Apollonius,  it  is  manifcft, 
that  if  a  man  wil  mechanically  ,or  redeIy,not  confi- 
dering  the  demonftrati5,deuicje  the  faid  rightline, 
andfo  any  Tight  line  geuen  whatfoeuer, into  two  e- 
quall:  partes  he nedeonely  to  marke  the  poyntsof 
the  rnterfe&ions  ofthecirc'les,  8C  to  draw  adinefrS 
the  fa/d  interfe&ions, which  fhall  deuide  the  right 
line  gcuen  into  two  equall  partes  :  as  in  the  figure 


X 


X 


5^  The  6.KProblemc.  The  IvTropoJitim. 


Vpm  a  right  tme geuen,  torayfe  tyfrom  a  poynt geuen  in  the 
Jameltne  a  perpendicular  line. 


:  -  Vi  j 


V Dpofe  that  the  right  line  geuen  he  A  '!*>><&  let  the  point 
in  it  geuen  be  Clt  is  required ftotn  the  poynte  C  to  rayfe 
Vp  Vnto  the  right  line- A  a  perpendicular  line  .  Take 
in  the  line  A  C  a  poynt  at  all  aduentures3  &  let  the  fame 
beD>and(bythe$ipr.6pojition  )  put  VntoDC an  equall 
j  line  C  E.And  by  the firftpropofttionftpon  the  line  D  E 
fteferibe  an  equilater  triangle  FID  E*  ^dra'W  a  line  fro 


FtoC4  Then  I  fay  that  Vnto  the  right  Untgeuen 
A  'Bgmdfrom  the  poynte  in  itgeuen ,  namely jC  is 
ray/edvp  a  perpendicular  line  FC.  For fora/much 
as  DChequalto  CE the  lineC  F  iscom&n  to 
them  botkeherfore  thefe  ttto  DC  and  C  F^are 
qua l  to  thefe  nto  EC  ejr  C Ffthe  one  to  the  other : 
and(hy  the  fir  ft  propofition)the  bafeD  F  is  equal 
to  the  bafe  E  F :  wherefore  (by  they  tpropo  fit  ion) 
the  angle  DCF  is  equaUto  the  angle  ECF:  and  ^ 
they  be  fide  angles&ut  lphe  a  right  line  ftanding 
ypona  right  line  doth  make  the  two  fide  angles  equall the  one  to  the  other ^ether 
of tboje  equall  angles  if  {by  the.\o,definition)a  right  angleg^r  the  line  ftanding 
Tpon  the  right  line  is  called  a  perpedicular  Ime.VVherfore  the  angle  D  C 
wangle  F  C  E  are  right  angles.VVherfore  Vnto  the  right  line geue  A  fro 

Cjtxayifedjrp  ttotCffcp.bfcb  "teas  required  to  be 

done  4  '■  ■ ' 

:m3iihlppr  h  -  no > nmoa zi U 3 &oH silt inu..C  . ■,  ;Unpv.-ifiG?K 

Although  thepoynte,  geuen  flipuld  be  fet  in  one  of  the  endes  of  the  rightc 
fihe 'jgeufci)»it  is'  eafy  fp  tfdt  it^s  it,  Was-heforc  ;  For  producing  the  line  in  length 
iiqpithe  poynt  by  tfie  fecorid  peticuphjy  pfirnay  wprkeas  you  did  before.  But  if 
one  require  to  ereft  ^  r%^t  line  pcrpendicjqlarly  from  thepoy  nt  at  the  end  of  tfi e 

■  ;  iotfisiifipet  tr  rbidwia. ai gsjiiq Ifcu  i|*“* 


ofEnclides  Elementes. 


FoUu 


Ivne,  without  producing  the  rightlyne,  thatalfo  may  well  bee  done  after  thy* 
raaner,  '  ■  ■  •  -  l  i  ■ 


Suppofe  that  the  right  line  geuen  be  A 2?,&  let 
the  point  in  it  geuen  be  in  one  of  the  endes  theroB 
namely  ,in  A  .And  take  in  the  line  A  B  apoint  at  all 
aduenturcs,andletthefamebe  C.  And  from  the 
faidpoint  raifevp(by  the  fore  Paid  propdution)vn- 
toABa  perpendiculer  Iine,which  let  be  CEt  And 
(by  the  3  .propofition)from  the  line  CE  cut  of  the 
line  C  D  equal!  to  the  line  C  A,  And  (  bythe  9  .Pro- 
pofitionjdeuide  the  angle  AC  D  into  two  equall 
partes  by  the  line  CD,  And  from  the  point  D  raife 
vp  vnto  the  line  CE  a  perpediculerline,D  F,which 
let  concurre  with  the  line  C  Fin  the  point  F,  And 
drawe  a  right  line  from  F  to  A ♦  Then  I  fay  that  the 
angle  at  the  pojnta^  is  a  right  angle.  For,  foras¬ 
much  as  D  Cis  equall  to  Ce^f,  and  CF  is  common  to  them  both3and  they  containe  e- 
quall  angle§(for  the  angle  at  thepoint  Cis  deuided  into  two  equall  partes )  therefore 
fby  the  4.  Propofition)  the  line  D  F  is  equall  to  the  line  F  A,  and  fo  the  angle  at  the 
point  A  is  equal  to  the  angle  at  the  pointD,  But  the  angle  at  the  point  D  is  a  right  an¬ 
gle.  Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  at  the  point  zsfisa  right  angle.Wherefore  from  the  point 
A  vnto  theline  raifed  vp  a  perpendiculer  line  ^F,withoiitproducingthe  line  A 

B .  Which  was  required  to  be  done. 


F 

D 

\ 

L 

3 


An  other  cafe  m 
this  proportion* 

Ctnsimffkn,  ; 


Demonftration, 


Appollonius  teacheth  to  ray  fe  vp  vnto  a  line  geuenjfrom  a  point  in  it  geuen, 
a  perpendiculer  line^fter  this  maner*  : 

•  v  *.  .W--C  D  '  •  •  : 

Suppofe  that  the  right 
line  geuen  be  A  B.  And 
let  the  point  initgeue, 
be  C,  And  in  theline  a A 
C,take  a  point  at  all  ad- 
uetures,&kt  the  fame 
beD.  Andfrothelyne 
CSjCMtofaline  equall 
to  the  line  CD,  whiche 
let  be  C £.-  and  makvng 
the  centre  D, and  the 
{pace  D  E,  deferibe  a 
circle.  Andagaine  ma¬ 
king  the  centre  C,&  the 
fpace  E  P ,  deferibe  an 
other  circle,  and  let  the  point  of  their  interfedion  be  F,  And  draw  a  right  line  from  F  to 
C  .Then.  I  fay  that  the  line  F  C  is  creded  perpendiculerly  vnto  the  line  o 4  B.  For  drawe 
thefe  lines  F  D  and  FF-.  which  flial  by  the  definition  of  a  circle  be  either  of  them  equal 
to  theline  D  E.  and  thcrforc  (by  the  firfi:  common  fentcncc)  are  equall  the  one  to  "the 


- - 

y  > 

A 

i  / 

f 

v  ■ 

\A  P\  -  C 

Another  Way 
to  ereli  a perpf- 
dictriar  Itnc  its* 
vented  by  Ap» 
palon'mt. 
Ctnftruttknp 


■  -c . 


D  wjafefj'ssJ 


wherfore  they  are  right  angles,  Wherfore  the  line  CF  is  eroded  perpendiculerly  vnto 
theli^^£fromthepointC(4.whichwasrequiredtobedone- 


-  !  v 


By  tltis  wav  oferedii?ga  perpendi^uletiineinuented  by  Appollonius,  it  is 
ilfpmanifc'ft,fhai;  if  a  man  y  ill  mechamcaliy.withoutdemonftration  xreci  vnto 

‘  -  *  . t  '  G-h  ‘  Mk 


Hovtto  trtff  a 

ferpendietilatt 
ttne  meehmi* 


Cexfir&ftian. 


Ztcmonjlration. 


TbefirH'Boofy 

a  line  geuen  from  a  point  gcue  in  ita  perpendi- 
culeriine:  he  needeonely  on  either  fide  of  the 
pointe  geuen, to  cut  of  equall lines  :  andfo  ma¬ 
king  either  of  the  cndes  ofthe  faid  lines  (either 
ofth’endes  I  fay  , which  haue  not  one  point  cos 
mon  tothemboth)  the  centres,  and  thefpace 
both  the  lynes  added  together,  or  wider  then 
both,or  at  the  left  wider  the  one  ofthem,to  des 
fenbethofe  portions  ofthe  circles  wherethey 
cutthe  one  the  other,  andfromthepoint  ofthe 
interfc&ion  to  the  point  geuen^o  drawalync, 
which  {hall  be  perpendicular  rntothe  lync  ges 
tie:  as  in  the  figure  here  put  it  is  manifeft  to  fee« 

T'heyfProbleme .  7 he  iiSPropofition. 

V Mo  a  right  line  geuen  being  infinite ,  andfroM  a  point geuen 
not  being  in  the  fame  line  Jo  draw  a  perpendicular  line • 

Et  the  right  line  geuen  he* 
ing  infinite  he  JBjjr  let y 
point  geuen  not  being  in  the 
faid  line  A  (B,be  Ct  It  is  re* 
quiredfrom  the  point  gene, 
namely, C Jo  draVe  Vnto  the 
fright  line  geuen  A  B,a  per * 
pendiculerline.Take  on  the  a 
other fyde  ofthe  line  jfB  ( namely ,  on  that  fide 
therein  is  not  the  pointe  C)  a  pointe  at  alladuen* 

tures,and  let  the  fame  be  S).  Und  making  the  centre  C,and  the /pace  C  de* 
fcribe( by  the  third peticion)a  circle, and  let  the fame  heEF  Gjohich  let  cutte 
the  line  A  B  in  the  pointes  E  and  G.And  (by  the  x.propofition )  deuide  the  lyne 
E  G  into  two  equal  partes  in  the  point  ELAnd(by  the  fir/l  peticion)draTV  thefe 
right  lines, C  G,C  H,and  C  E.Thenl fay, that  Vnto  the  right  line  geuen  A  Bjsr 
from  the  point  geuen  not  being  in  it, namely,  C,  is  dralven  a  perpendiculer  lyne 
C  H-Forforafinuch  as  G  His  equall  to  HEy^dAiCis  commonto  them  both: 
the r fore  thefe  two  fydes  G  Hand  HC,are  equall  to  thefe  Ctoo  fydes  EH&H 
£  the  one  to  the  other:  and  (by  the  if  definitio)the  bafeCG  is  equal  to  the  baft 
C Either fore  (by  the  $.propofition)the  angleCHGis  equall  to  the  angle  C 
HE:  and  they  are  fide  angles i  butis/hen  aright  line  (landing  Vpon  aright  line 
maketh  the  tTVofyde  angles  equall  the  one  to  the  other, either  of  thoft  equall  an* 
Aes  is(  by  the  \ot definition )  a  right  angle ,  and  the  line  (landing  Vpon  the  fay  de 
right  hne  is  called  a  perpendiculer  Une.Wherfore  Vnto  the  right line  gene  A(B , 
and  from  the  point  geuen  Cftobicb  is  not  in  the  line  A  BfisdraTMi  a  perpendicu* 
let  fine  C  H:  T&hich  as  required  to  be  done ,  Thiy 


>c 


x 


of  Enclitics  Elementes. 


Fol.zz. 


Thi  s  probleme  did  Oenopides  firft  fictde  out,confidering  the  neceflfary  yfe  thers 
of  to  the  ftudy  of  Aflronomy  ♦ 

There  are  two  kindes  ofperpendiculer  lines:  wherofonc  is  a  plaine  perpen* 
diculer  lynCjthe  other  is  a  folide*  A  plaine  pcrpendiculer  line  is  , when  the  point 
from  whence  the  perpendiculer  line  is  drawer),  is  in  the  fame  plaine  fuperficies 
with  the  line  wherunto  it  is  a  perpendicularv  A  folide  perpendiculer  line  is,  whe 
the  point, from  whence  the  perpendiculer  is  drawne,is  onhigh,and  without  the 
plaine  fupcrficics.So  that  a  plaine  perpendiculer  line  is  drawento  a  right  line:  8c 
afolide  perpendiculer  line  is  drawn  to  a  fuperficies*  A  plaine  perpendiculer  line 
caufeth  right  angles  with  one  oriely  line,  namely,  with  that  vpon  whome  it  fal- 
leth.But  a  folide  perpendiculer  line  caufeth  right  angles, not  only  with  one  line, 
but  with  as  many  lynes  as  may  be  drawn  in  that  fuperficies, by  the  touch  cherof* 
This  propofition  teachcth  to  draw  a  plaine  perpendiculer  line,  for  it  is  drawn  to 
one  line,  andfuppofed  to  bc  in  the  fclfe  fame  plaine  fuperficies. 


f  There  may  be  in  this  propofition  an 
other  cafe.For  if  it  be  fo,  that  on  the  o- 
ther  fide  of  the  line  cA  B ,  there  be  no 
fpace  to  take  a  pointe  in  butonely  on 
that  fide  wherein  is  the  point  C .  Then 
take  fome  certaine  point  in  the  line  s A 
2?,which  let  be  D.And  making  the  cen¬ 
tre  the  pointC,  and  the  fpace  CD,de- 
feribeapart  of  the  circumference  of  a 
circle, which  let  beD  E  F.-which  let  cut 

the  line  A  Bin  the  two  pointesD  and  _ 

F.And  deuide  the  line  D  F  into  twoe-  A 
quail  partes  in  the  poyntH.  And  draw 
thefe  lines  C  D,  C  H  and  C  F,  And  for- 
afmuch  as  D  H  is  equal  to  H  F,and 
C  H  is  common  to  them  both,  and 
CD  is equall toCFfby  the  iy.de- 
finition:)therfore  the  angles  at  the 
point  H  are  equal  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther(by  the  8, propofition:)  &they 
are  fide  angles,  wherefore  they  are 
right  angles  .Wherfore  the  line  C 

H  is  a  perpendiculer  to  theline  D  _ _ 

F.  But  if  it  happen  fo  that  the  circle  A 
which  is  deferibed  do  not  cutte  the 


lyne,  but  touche  it,  then  takyng  a 
point  without  the  point  E,name- 

ly,thc  point  G,and  making  the  centre  the  poiht  C,and  the  fpace  CG,dcfcribe  a  part  of 
the  circumference  of  a  circle:  which  fhall  of  neceflkie  cut  the  line  AB:  andfomay  you 

proceede  as  you  did  before.  As  you  fee  in  the  fecond  figure. 


$■&?  The  6 . 1‘heoreme.  The  1 3.  Tropofotion - 

W  hen  a  right  line  founding  ypon  a  right  line  ma^eth  any  an - 
gles:  thofe  ang les  jhall  be  either  two  right  angle  s3or  equall  to 
two  t  ight  angles* 

Supfofi 


Oenopides  tha 

firjl  in u  enter  of 
this  probleme. 

Two  ktndes  of 
perpendiculer 
lines, namely  y<t 
plaine  perpends ■» 
culer  line  andst 
folide .  ■' 


This  propoftson 
teacheth  to 
draw  a playne 
perpendiculer 
line. 

*in  other  cafe  m 
this  propofition » 


ConftuHim^ 


Demotfrntsossh 


.\SV,v. : 

AA» 


<FbeJir$cBoo%e 

Vppofe  that  the  right  line  A  B flanging  Vppott  the  right 
line  CD  do  make  thefe  angles  C  BA  and  ABD.  Then 
l fay,  that  the  angles  CBA  and  AB  D  are  eyther  two 
right  angles, or  els  e quail  to  two  right  angles  Jf  the  angle 


(by  the  n  propoption )Vnto  the  right  line  CD, and  front 
the  pomtegeuen  m  it,  namely,  B,a  perpendiculer  line  B  \E. W her  fore n 


Conpruclio#^  .  . 

Demonstration 

x. definition)  the  angle  C  B  Eand  E  BD  are  right  angles , ISloTfr  forafmuch  as 
the  angle  C  B  Efts  equall  to  thefe  Etoo  angles  CBA  and  ABE,  put  the  angle 
EBD  common  to  them  both\'it>her fore  the  angles  CBE  and  E  B  D,are  equal 
to  thefe  three  angles  C  B  A  A  B  E,and  E  B  D.Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  angle 
DB  A  is  equall  vnto  thefe  two  angles  D  B  E  and  E  B  A,put  the  angle  A  BC 
common  to  them  both^herfore  the  angles  DBA 
and  A  BC,are  equal  to  thefe  three  angles, DBE, 

E B  A, and  ABC.  Audit  is proued that  the  an* 
gles  CBE  and  EBD  are  equal  to  the  felfefame 
three  angles:  but  thinges  equall  to  one  &  the  felf 
fame  thing, are  alfo(by  the firU comma  fentence) 
equall  the  one  to  the  otbe.VVberfon  the  angles  C 
B  Eand  E  B  D  are  equall  to  the  angles  DBA  & 

A  B  C,  But  the  angles  C  B  Eand  EBD  are  two 
right  angles^berfore  alfo  the  angles  D  B  A  and 
A  BC  are  equall  to  two  right  angles .  Wherfore'^hen  a  right  line  j landing  Vo 
pon  a  right  line  maketh  any  angles:  thofe  angles  jhalbe  either  ttoo  right  angles , 
or  equall  to  right  angle si^hich  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 

An  othet  demonftration  after Telitarius. 

Suppofe  that  the  right  line  A  B  do  {land  vpon  the  right  line  CD.  Then  I  fay,that  the 
jn  other  Je-  tnrQ  ang{es  J.  g  C  and  ABD,  are  either  two  right  angles,Or  equal  to  two  right  angles, 

man$ram»afz  Fq„  bfi 

perpedicuJervntoC2):  the  is  it  manifeft,  that  they  are  right  an  glesfby  the 
ter PeiturtfM.  conuerfion  0f thc  definition JButifit  incline  towardesthe  end  C,thenfby  the  i i.pro- 

pofitionjfrom  the  point  £,ere<5l  vnto  thelineCDaperpcndiculerline5£,By  whiche 
conftruftion  the  propofitio  is  very  manifeft.For  forafmuch  as  the  angle  A  B  D  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  right  angle  D  B  E  by  the  angle  AB  E,  and 
the  other  angle  ABC  is  leffe  then  the.  right  angle  C 
BE  by  the  felre  fame  angle  ABE  :  if  from  the  greater 
bee  taken  away  the  excelfe,  and  the  fame  bee  added  to 
the  leffe,they  Hull  be  made  two  right  angles.  That  is,if 
from  the  obtufe  angle  ABD  be  taken  away  the  angle 
tAB  E,  there  Ihal  remaynethe  rightangle‘X>££,  And 
then  if  the  fame  angle  ABE  be  added  to  the^cute  an¬ 
gle  CB*A,  there  {hail  bee  made  the  right  angle  CB  E. 

Wherefore  it  is  manifeft,that  the  two  angles,  namely, 
the  obtufe  angle  oAB  D,8c  the  acute  angle  <>AB  C, are 
equall  to  the  two  right  angles  CB  E  and  DBE'  which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 


. 

>1 

/ 

/ 

I 

C 

FoLip 

The  7.  Theoreme.  The  14..  Tropojition • 

fffvnto  a  right  line*  and  to  a point  in  the fame  linefbe  dram 
Wo  right  lines,  net  both  on  one  and  the  fame  fide, making  the 
fide  angles  equall to  Wo  right  angles  :  thofe  Wo  right  lynes 
\e  directly  one  right  line. 


rs:v  :^-y= 

Kto  the  right  line  A®,&  ^ 

t-o  j>  point  in  it  ®,  let  there 

be  drawn  two  rightlines  ® 

C,and®®,  Vnto  contrary 

.fides,  making  the fy  dean* 

\gles, namely  ,A ®  C&A® 

®}equall  t<r  two  rbbt  an* 

rrh>  r  'VliPti  T  f/Muth/it  ii  ri.O'frt  C  £> 

x> 


lines®®  and  ®C  make  both  one  right  line.  For 
ifC  Band®®  do  not  make  both  one  right  line  Jet 

the  right  line  ®  E  befo  drawn  to  ®  Cjhat  they  both  make  one  right  linegfoW 
forafmuch  as  the  right  line  A  ®  / Undeth  Vpon  the  right  line  C  ®  Esther  fore  the 
angles  A®  C  and  A®  E  are  equall  to  two  right  angles  (by  the  1 $  propofition) 
®ut  (by  fuppofition )  the  angles  A  ®C  and  A®®  are  equall  to  two  right  an? 
gks:Wherfore  the  angles  OBJ, and  A  ®  E,are  equall  to  the  angles  C®4,and 
A®®',  takeaway  the  angle  A®  C, which  is  common  to  them  both ,W her fore 
the  angle  remay  ning  A®  EJs  equall  to  the  angle  remaining  A®  ®y  namely , 
the  lefie  to  the greater  which  is  impofiiblc. Where  fore  the  line  ®E  is  not  fo  di * 
reftly  drawen  to  ®  Cy  that  they  both  make  one  right  line.  In  like  forte  may  we 
prone, that  no  other  line ,  be  (ides  ®  ®,  can  fo  be  draWne.VF h  erf  ore  the  lines  C 
®  and  ®  ®,make  both  one  right  line, If therfore  Vnto  a  right  line,<&  to  a  point 
in  the  fame  line, be  drawn  two  right  lines. pot  both  on  one  and  the  fame fidejna  » 
king  the  fide  angles  equall  to  two  right  angles:  thofe  two  lines Jhal  make  dire  ft* 
ty  one  right  line:  which  Was  required  to  be  proued.  . 

An  other  deraonftrati on  after  Pelitariiis. 

Suppofc  that  there  be  a  right  line  A  B,  vnto  whofe  pointe  B,  let  there  be  drawen 
two  right  lines  C  B  and  BD, vnto  contrary  fides : and  let  the  two  angles  C  3  A, and  D  3 
Ay be  either  two  right  angles.,  or  equall  to  two  right  angles  »Then  I  fay  ,  that  the  two 
lines  CB  and  BD ,  do  make  dire&ly  one  right  line, 
namely0CZ>.  Forifthey  do  not,th6  let  be  fo  drawn  . 

vnto  CB,  that  they  both  make  dire&ly  one  right  line  Ai 

CB  E:  which  ihallpaife  either  aboue  the  line  2?  Dy  or 
vnder  it .  Firft  let  it  pafTe  aboue  it.And  for  as  much  as  j 

the  two  angles  CB  A  and  ABE3avc(  by  the  former  pro-  j  -E 

pofition^  equall  to  two  right  angles,  and  are  apart  of 
the  two  .angles,  CB  A  and  A3  X>:but  the  angles  C3A 
and  A  B  D  are  by  (fupp  o  fi  tio  n)  e  q  u  a  1 1  alfo  to  two  right 
angles:  therefore  the  parte  is  equall  to  the  whole  which  ___ 
is  impoffible.  And  the  like  abfurditie  will  follow  if  CB  ^ 

G,iii,  E 


leading  ta  jin 
alfurdtue. 


Another  (ltd 
mor.Firatjanaf* 
ter  Pehtarim.r 


a 


o 


pemtnftratioH. 


'Thales  MilepUi 
the  firf  trtn  en¬ 
ter  of  this  pre¬ 
pays  ion. 

No  ean$ruci  'fon 
in  this  propof- 
lion. 

What  hedan- 
pits  are. 


The  eonnerfeof 
this  prepoftio  of 
ter  Peis  tart  as. 


Thefirjl^oofy 

E  pafle  vnder  the  line  2  D.-namcly^that the  whole  Ihalbe  equall  to  the  parttwhich  is 
alfo  inipoflible.  Wherefore  CD  is  one  right  line:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

T he  8.  Theoreme.  The  ijSPropojttion* 

fftwo  right  lines  cut  the  one  the  other:  the  bed  angles Jhal  be 
equal  the  one  to  the  other* 

Vppofe  that  the/e  Wo  right  lints  A  B  and  CD,  do  cat  the  one  the  00 
ther  in  the  point  Et  Then  I  fay  y  that  the  angle  A  E  Cjs  equall  to  the 
angle  IDEE.  Eor  fora/much  as  the  right  line  AEJlandeth  Vpon  the 
right  line  l D  Cy  making  thefe  angles  C  E  A, and  A  E  D:  therefore(hy 
the  1 3 *  propo(itio)the  angles  C  E  A, and  A  E  D,are  equall  to  Wo  right  angles ♦ 
Agayneforafmucb  as  the  right  line  D  E,flandeth 
Vpon  the  right  line  A B,  making  thefe  angles  A 
E  Dyand  D  E  (B:therfore(  by  the  fame  propofti • 
on) the  angles  A  E  D,and  D  E  B,are  equall  to 
Wo  right  angler,  audit  is prouedy  thatthe  angles 
CEA,and  A  ED,  arealjo  equall  to  Wo  right  an* 
gles.  VVherfore  the  angles  CEA,and  A  E  D,are 
equall  to  the  angles  A  ED,and  D  E  BtTake  a • 

Way  the  angle  A  E  D  ffchicb  is  common  to  them 
hath.  Wherefore  the  angle remayning  CEAyis 
equall  to  the  angle  remayning  V  E  B,  And  in  like  fort  may  it  he  proued  ,  that 
the  angles  C  E  ByandDE  A%are  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  If  therefore  Wo 
right  lines  cut  the  one  the  other y  the  hed angles  jhalbe  equall  the  one  to  then* 
ther :  Which  Was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

Thides  Mtkfws  the  Philosopher  was  the  firft  inucntcrof  this  proportion,  as 
but  yetit  was  firft  demonftratedby  Euclide.  And  in  it  there  is 
no  confl ruction  at  all*  For  the  expoiltion  ofthe  thing  gcue,is  fufficientinough 
for  thedemonftration*  - 

//^^/^areappofite  angles, caufcd  ofthe  interfe&ion-of  two  right  lines: 
and  are  to  called,becaufe  the  heddes  of  the  two  angles  are  ioyned  together  ia 
one  pointe* 

The  conuerfe  of  this  proportion  after  Telitarius . 

Iff  after  right  lines  being  dr  Often  from  one  point,  do  make  fofter  angles,  offthtch  thetfto  oppo- 
fite  angles  are  equall;  the  two  oppofite  lines Jhalbe  dr  often  direttly,  and  make  one  right  line . 

Suppofe  that  there  be  fower  right  lines  A  B,  A  C,  A  D,  and  AE,  drawen  from  the 
poyntA,makingfower  angles  at  the  point  A:  of  which  let  the  angle  BAG  be  equall  to 
the  angle  DAE,  and  the  angle  B  A  D  to  the  angle  CAE.  Then  I  fay,  thatB  E  and  C  D 
are  oneiv  two  right  lines:  that  is^the  two  right  lines  BA  and  A  Bare  drawen  dire&ly, 

and 


0 


mentes • 


FoLi\. 


anddco  make  one  right  line,  andlikewfie  the  two  right 
lines  C  A  and  A  D  are  drawen  diredtly  ,and  do  make  one 
right  line.  For  otherwife  if  it  be  poiTible  ,  let  £  £  be  one 
right  line,  and  iikevvife  let  C  G  be  one  right  line.  And  for- 
almuch  as  the  right  line  £  A  dandeth  vpon  the  right  line 
C  G ,  therefore  the  two  angles  EAC  and  EA<j>  are  (  by 
the  13  proportion )  equall  to  two  right  angles.  And  for- 
afmuch  as  the  right  line  G  A  dandeth  vpon  the  right  line 
£ £:  therefore  (by  the  felfe fame )  the  two  angles  EAG 
&ndF  A  G,zre  alfo  equall  to  two  right  angles.  Wherefore 
taking  away  the  angle  EAG ,  which  is  common  to  them 
both, .the  angle  £  A  Cdhall  (  by  the  thirde  common  fen- 
tence)  be  equall  to  the  angle  £  A  G:  b  ut  the  angle  £  A  C 
is  fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  angle  BAD.  Wherefore 
the  angle  BAD  is  equall  to  the  angle  FAG ,  namely  a 
part  to  the  whole:  which  is  impoffible .  And  the  felfe 

fame  abfurditie  will  follow,  on  what  fide  foeuer  the  lines  be  drawen.  Wherefore  B  £  is 
one  line,and  CD  alfo  is  one  line:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Demouffratim 
leading  to  a>» 
abfurditie. 


The  fame  comer fe  after  T  rocks. 


If  vnto  a  right  line ,  tend  to  a  point  thereof  he  drawen  two  right  lines ,  not  on  one  and  the  fame  fide , 
in fitch  fort  that  they  make  the  angles  at  the  toppe  equall:  thofe  right  lines Jhalhe  draWen  dir  Ally  one 
to  the  other ,  and  jhalmake  one  right  line. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  right  line  A  B,and  take  a  point  in  in  C.  And  vnto  the  point 

in  it  C,  draw  thefe  two  right  lines  CD  and  CE  vnto  contrary  fides,  making  the  angles 
at  the  hed  equal,  namely,  the  angles  A  CD  and  B  CE.  Then  I  fay,  that  the  fines  CD 
and  C  E  are  drawen  dire&ly,  and  do  make  one  right  fine .  For  forafmuCh  as  the  right 
line  CD  Handing  vpo  the  right  fine  A  B,d  oth  make  the  angles  D  C  A  and  DC  B  equall 
to  two  right  angles  (by  the  1 3  propofition  :)and  the  angle  DC  A 
is  equall  to  the  angle  £  C£:  therefore  the  angles  DCB  and  B  fiE 
are  equal  to  two  rightangles.  And  forafinuch  as  vnto  a  certayne 
right  line  £  C,and  to  a  point  thereof  C,are  drawen  two  right  fines 
not  both  on  one  and  the  fame  fide,  making  the  fide  angles  equall 
to  two  rightangles,  therefore  (by  the  1 4, 'propofition  j  the  lines 
C  D  and  C E  are  drawen  dire&ly,  &  do  make  one  right  line,which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 


The  fame  cbm - 
eterfe  after  Peli*> 
tariusgvhtch  it 
demonflratid 
dirt  Illy, 


The  fame  may  alfo  be  demonftrated  by  an  argument  lea¬ 
ding  to  an  abfurditie.  For  if  CE  be  not  drawen  dirc&ly  to 
C D,  fo  that  they  both  make  one  rightline,  then  (if  it  bee 
poffible)  let  CF  bee  drawne  dire&ly  vnto  it.  So  that  let  D 
CF  be  one  right  line.  And  forafinuch  as  the  two  ri"ht  lines 
AB  and  £>£docutte  the  one  the  other,  they  make^the  hed 
angles  equall  (by  the  1 5.  propofition)  Wherefore  the  an¬ 
gles  A  CD  and  B  C Fare  equall  j  but  (byfuppofition)  the 
angles  A  CD  and  B  C  S  are  alfo  equall .  Wherefore  (by 
the  firft  common  fentencej  the  angle  B  CS  is  equall  to  the 
angle  B  CF:  namely,the  greater  to  the  lefle :  which  is  im- 
polfible.  Wherefore  no  other  rightline  befidtes  C£is  dra¬ 
wen  dire<% to  CD.  Wherefore  the  fines  C D  andCFare 
dram*  di.re£tly,andmake  one  right  fine;  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  beproued. 


The  fame  ct7t* 
uerfe  after  Pro* 
tlut  demonflra- 
tedindirehlj. 


The  fir fl  ^Boo^e 

Ww*Corrol-  ,  Of  this  fiuetenthPropofition  followeth  a  Corrollary.  Where  note  that  a- 
*??"•  CVc/%  is  a  Proportion,  whofedcmonfkation  dependeth  of  the  demonftration 
of  an  other  Proportion,  and  it  appeareth  fodenly,as  it  were  by  chance  offering 
it  felfe  vnto  vs:  and  therefore  is  reckoned  as  lucre  orgayne.  The  Corollary  which 
followeth  ofthis  propofition,  is  thus* 


A  Corrollary 
fi  Mowing  ofthis 
progefittan. 


If fetter  right  lines  cut  the  one  the  other:  they  make  fitter  angles  equall  to  finer  right  angles. 

This  Corollary  gauc  great  occafion  to  finde  out  that  wonderful  propofition  in* 
uented  of  pithagdras, which  is  thus. 


A  TVonderfull 
propofitien  in- 
■uented  by  Pi- 
thagoras . 


Only  three  kindcs  of figures  of  many  angles ,  namely ,an  eqmlater  triangle ,  a  right  angled  figure, 
ofj  ottcrfid.es>  and  a  figure  of fixefidesjoaumg  e quail fiides  and  equal  angles }  canfill  the  ttholefpate 
■about  a  point gheir  angles  touching  the  fame  point.  .  -■ 


Euery  angle  ofi 
an  equiUter  tri 
angle  is  equal  to 
fwo  third  partes 
of  a  right  angle 


Euery  angle  ofi 
a  fixe  angled  fi¬ 
gure  is  e quail  to 
a  right  angle, 
nnd  to  a  third 
part  of  a  right 
angle. 


xj-  •  •»  v* vovV  \ 
-  v  <  \  N  *.i  V‘>  ^ 

-}.  »  *. V/  *  WiYVU  ♦,  Y  » Y 

.  •  lir,'  s* V* 


Euery  angle  of  an  equilater  triangle  contay- 
neth  two  third  partes  of  a  right  angle  ;  fixe  ty  roes 
two  thirdes  of  a  right  angle  make  fower  nghc  an? 
gles.  Wherefore  fixe  eqmlater  triangles  fill  die 
whole  fpace  about  a  point  which  is  equal  to  fower 
right  angles,as  in  the  i, figure.  Alfo  euery  angle  of 
are&angle  quadrilater  figure  is  a  right  angle:wher 
fore  fower  of  them  fill  the  whole  fpaceas  in  the  2. 
figure*Eue«y  angle  otafixe  angled  figure,  i's.equal  ' 
to  a  right  angle,  and  moreouertoathirdparcofa 
tight  angle.  But  a  right  angle,and  a  third  part  of  a 
right  arigkjtake  thre  times,make  4,right  angles: 
wherefore  three  eqmlater  fixeangled'figufes.fill 
the  whole  fpaee  about  a  point:  which  fpace (by 
this  Corrollary)  is  equal!  to  fower  right  angles:  as 
in  the  third  figure.  Any  other  figure  of  many  fids, 
howfoeueryou  ioyne  the  together  at  the  angles, 
flial  either  want  of  tower  anglesjor  exceede  them . 
By  this  Corrollary  alfo  it  is  manifefi  that  • 
sf  mo  then  two  lines,  that  is,  three*  or 
fower,  or  how  many  feeuer  do  cut  the 
one  the  other  in  one  point,  all  the  an¬ 
gles  by  them  made  at  the  point  fhalbe 
equal! ,  to  fower  right  angles., For  they  r. 
fill  the  place  of  fower  right.angl.es.  And 
it  is  alfo  manyfeft,  that  the  angles  by 
thofe  right  lines  made  are  double  in 
number  to  the  right  lines  which  eutte 
the  one  the  other.  So  that  if  there  be 
two  lines  which  cut  the  one  the  other, 
the  are  there  made  fower  angles  equal! 
to  fower  rightanglcs;  but  if  thre,  theta 


•jt:u 


ar 


there  made  fixe  angles ;  if fowetjeightanglesjand  fp  infinitly,Eor  euer  th« 
mukicu.de,  or  number’  of  ofthcangles  is  dubled  to  the  multitude  of  the  rq*hf 
lines  which  cut  the  one  the  other.  And  as  theaogles  increafe  in  multitude,  £0 

diminifii 


Of  nuciian  jzimemes .  FoL  25. 

dimmififi  they  is  cteuided  is  alwayes  one  and 

thefelfeia'mle'thing;,  natndyyfbyer  rijghc’aiigtes,  ' 

l .  :  ’  .  u  ' 

cfke  9  SI  heoreme.  The  i6SPropofition. 


Whenfoeuer  in  any  triangle,  the  lyne  of  one  fyde  is  drawn 

„  ,  .  «  >  »  r  .  1  /»  11  *  1 


forth  in 
one  of  the  Wo 


reater 


vni- 


Vppofe  that  4  ®  C  be  4  triangle: 

&  let  one.  of  )  fides jfierof ,  namt*  p 
\ly  M C he prqducedMto  the  point  ~ 

IDfThen  I fay,  that  the  outwarde 
angle  A  CD }ts greater  then  any  one  of  J  ttoo 
inward  and  opposite  angles  fat  is  fen  the 
angle  CB  A,or  then  the  angle  B  A  CJDeuide 
the  line  A  C (by  the  io .propofition)  into  two 
equall  partes  fin  the  point  E.Anddra'fr  a  line 
from  the  point  B  to  the  point  E:  And  (by  the 
2.  petition)  extend  BE  to  the  point  E.jfnd 
(by  the  z,  propofition)  onto  the  line  B  Eput 
an  equall  Ime  E  F.  And(by  the  fir fl  petition) 
dra'toa  line  from  F  to  C.and  (by  the  z.petici * 
on)  extend  the  line  AC  to  the  point  G.MoTo  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  E, is  equall 
to  the  line  E  C,  and  B  E  is  equall  to  E  E:  therfore  thefe  nvo  fide  s  A  Eand  E  B, 
are  equall  to  thefe  neo  fides  C  £  and  E  F,  the  one  to  the  other,  and  the  angle  ft 
E  Bfis  (by  the  i  5,  propofition)  equall  to  the  angle  F EC,  for  they  are  hedan* 
gles:  therefore  (by  the  4.  propofition)  the  bafeA  B  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  C: 
And  the  triangle  ABEis  equall  to  the  triangle  F  E  C:and  the  other  angles  re* 
mayning  are  equall  to  the  other  angles  remaymngfe one  to  the  other  fnder 
Tfihicb  arefubtended  equall  fides,  VEherefore  the  angle  B  AE  is  equall  to  the 
angle  E  C  F„  But  the  angle  E  C  ID  Js  greater  then  the  angle  E  C  FyVherefore 
the  angle  A  C  £)}is  greater  then  the  angle  B  A  C.  In  like  fort  alfo  if  the  line  B 
C  be  deuidedinto  two  equall  partes , may  it  be  prouedfat  the  angle  B  C  &3tbat 
is,  the  angle  A  GAD,  is  greater  then  the  angle  ji  B  C.VVhenfoeuer  therfore  in 
any  triang  ley  the  line  of  one  fide  is  dr  awen forth  in  length :  the  outward  angle 
fbalbe greater  then  any  one  o  f  the  ttao  inward  and  oppofite  angles :  ’tobich  l#a$ 
required  to  be  demonstrated. 

jin  other  demonjlration  after  Telitarius, 

Suppofe  that  the  triangle  geuen  be  A  *B  C,  Whofe  fide  AB  let  be  produced  vnto 

H*j*  the 


Cgnftr&aim. 


Demsnftrdtiem. 


An  other  D&* 
wonfiratian  af-* 
ter  PslitHriut, 


tire  point  D.  Then  I  fay,  that  the  angle  D  B  Ck  greater  then  either  of  the  angles  BAG 
an dA  CB* For  forafmuch  as  the  two  lines,  A  C and  B  C do  concurre  in  the  point  C,and 
ypon  them  faileth  the  line  A  B:  therefore  (by  the  conuerfe  of  the  firftpeticionjthe  two 
inward  angles  on  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide,are  leffe 
then  two  right  angles.Wherefore  the  angles  A  B  Cand 
CAB  are  leffe  then  two  right  angles :  but  the  angles  A 
B  C and  DBC arc  (by  the  1.3  proportion)  equal  to  two 
fight  angles .  Wherefore  the  two  angles  A  B  C and  2?  B 
C  are  greater  then  the  two  angles  «A  B  Cand  B  AC. 

Wherfore  taking  away  the  angle  zA  B  C,which  i s  com¬ 
mon  to  them  both,  there  {hall,  be  left  the  angle  B)B  C 
greater  then  the  angle  B  AC .  And  by  tlie  fame  reafon, 
forafmuch  as  the  two  lines  B  A  and  CA  concurre  in  the 
point  A, and  vppon  them  faileth  the  right  line  C2?,the 
two  inward  angles  ABC  and  ACB  are  leffe  then  two 
right  angles.But  the  angles  zA  B  Cand  B)  B  C are  equall  to  two  rightangles.  Wherfore  - 
the  two  angles  ABC  and  D  B  C,are  greater  then  the  two  angles  AB  C  &.AC  B.  Wher¬ 
fore  taking  away  the  angle  zA  B  C, which  is  common  to  them  both,  there  fhal  remaine 
the  angle  DBC  greater  then  the  angle  ACB-.  whichwasrequiredtobeproued. 

Here  is  to  be  noted,that  when  the  fide  of  a  triangle  is  drawen  forth,  the  angle 
ofthe  triangle  which  is  nexttbe  outward  angle,  is  called  an  angle  in  order  vnto 
it:  and  the  other  two  angles  of  the  triangle  are  called  oppofite  angles  vnto  it* 

UCotniUrj  Of  this  Propofition  followeth  this  Corrolkry ,  that  ft  is  not  poffible  that  from  one  & 

of  this  the  felfe  fame  point  fhould  be  drawen  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  right  line,  three  equall 

frspojsuot*.  right  lines.  For  from  one  point,  namely,  A,  if  it  be 
poffible,let  there  be  drawen  vnto  the  right  line  BB), 
thefe  three  equall  right  lines  zA B,A  C,8cA  D. And 
forafmuch  as  A  Bis  equall  to  A  C,the  angles  at  the 
bafe  are  (by  the  fifth  propofition Jequall. Wherfore 
the  angle  AB  Cis  equal  to  the  angle  ^  C.Z? .Agayne 
forafmuch  as  A  Bis  equall  to  A  D,  the  angle  ABB) 
is  (by  the  fame)  equall  to  the  angle  ADB  :  but  the 
angle  A  B  Cwas  equall  to  the  angle  ACB.  Where¬ 
fore  the  angle  ACB  is  equall  to  the  angle  tAB)B : 
namely,the  outward  angle  to  the  inwarde  &  oppo¬ 
site  angle:  whichisimpoffible.Wherforefrom  one 
and  the  felfe  fame  point,can  not  be  drawn  to  one  &  B 

the  felfe  fame  tight  line  three  equall  right  lynes: 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


c 


A&  other  Cor - 
r&lLsrj follo¬ 
wing  alfa  of  the 

ftme. 


By  this  propofition alfo  may  this  be  demonftratcd,that  ifaright  line  felling 
\'pon  two  right  lines, do  make  the  outward  angle  equall  to  the  inward  and  oppo- 
fice  angle,thofe  right  lines  fhallnot  make  a  triangle, neither  flial  they  concurre. 
For  otherwife  one  St  the  felfe  fame  angle  fliould  be  both  greater,and  alfo  equal: 
which  is  impoffible*As  for  example. 


Suppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  AB  and  C  D,  and  vpon  them  let  the  right  line 
B  E  fall,  making  the  angles  ABB)  and  CDE  equall.Then  I  fay,that  the  right  lines  AB 
andCDfhallnotconcurre.Foriftheyconcurre,theforefaide  angles  abidyng  equall, 
name!y,the  angles  C‘Z>£  and  >2.5  D  :  Then  forafmuch  as  the  angle  CDE  is  the  out¬ 
ward  angle  it  is  of  neceffitie  greater  then  the  inward  and  oppofite  angle,  &it  is  alfo  e- 
qual  vnto  it :  which  is  impoffible.  Wherfore  if  the  feid  lines  cocurre,the  fhal  not  the  an¬ 
gles  remayne  equalgbut  the  angle  at  the  point  B)  ihall  be  encrcafed.For  whether  zA  B 

abiding 


ofjzucmes  memenm.  FoLz6« 

abidirt^fixedyou  fuppofe  the  line  CD  to  be  moued 
vnto  itjfo  chat  they  concurre, the  fpace  and  diftaiice 
in  the  angle  will  be  greater :  for  liow  much  more  C 
X>approcheth  to  eABJo  much  farther  of  goethjt 
from  D  E.  Or  whether  C D  abiding  fixed,you  ima¬ 
gine  the  line  tA  B  to  be  moued  vnto  it,  fo  that  they 
concurre,the  angle  °X  B  ‘D  will  be  leffe,  for  there¬ 
with  all  it  commeth.ne  re  vnto  the  lines  CD  &BD, 

Or  whether  you  imagine  either  of  them  to  be  mo¬ 
ued  the  one  to  the  other,  you  ihall  findc  that  the 
line  sA  B  camming  neere  to  C  23  ,  maketh  the 
angled B  E  ldTe,and  C D  going  farther  from  DE 
by  reafon  of  his  motion  to  the  line  B  ^maketh  the 
angle  CDE to  increafe.  Wherefore  it  followeth  of 

neceffitie,thatif  it  be  a  triang!e,and  that  the  right  lines  *A  B  and  C D  do  concnrre,the 
outward  angle  alfo  {hall  be  greater  then  theinward  and  oppofite  angle.  For  either  the 
inward  and  oppofite  angle  abiding  fixed,the  outward  is  increafed:  or  the  outwardea- 
biding  fixed,the  inward  and  oppofite  is  diminifhed:  or  els  both  of  them  being  moued 
till  they  concurre,the  inwarde  is  diminilhed,  and  the  outwarde  is  more  inereafed: And 
the  caufe  hereof  is  the  motion  of  the  right  lines  the  one  tending  to  that  parte  where  it 
diminifheth  the  inwarde  angle,  the  other  tending  to  that  part  where  it  inereafeth  the 
outward  angle. 


B 

A 

C 

D 

E 

be  io.  Fheoreme.  cTheiy9  Trogojition* 

<^n  euery  triangle gwo  angle s>  Vahich  mo  foemr  be  taken^  art 
lejie  then  Wo  righ  t  angles. 


2$ ^PP(sfe  ‘that 'A  B  C  be  a 
gy 1 1 f triangle,  Then  I [aye  that 
^  two  angles  of  the  fay  d  tri* 

mm  -  -  ■  i a 


Icjkihi  mo-. right  angles 
!  &xtend(  by  the  Z-peticio) 

-A  the  line  BC\  to  the  point 

''  v  •  *  £  ~  ’  'Q 

ID.  And  fora  [much  as  (by  the  propoftion going 

before)  the  outward  angle  of  the  triangle  A  BC^  namely  the  amle  A  CD  is 
greater  then  the  inward  and  oppofite  angle  A  B  C: put  the  angle ACB comma, 
to  them  both  therefore  the  angles  AC  D  and  AC  B  'are greater  then  the  an * 
gksABCand B  C  A  .But  (by:  the  13  propoftwiftheangies  A C  -Dana  AC  B 
are  equal!  to  mo  right  angles ,  VC ’here} ore  the  angles  ABC  and  B  CAare 
left  then  m/rigU  angles .  hi  like  fort  alfo  maygpe  prone  y  that  the  angles  B  A 
Cand  AC  £  are  left  then  mo  right- angles  l  andaljo  that  the  angles ,C  AB  <(3* 
ABC  are  left  'then.  mo  right  angles.  Wherefore  in  euery  triqngftmo  cm* 
gles  Tthicb  mo  foeuer  be  taken ^re  lejfe  then  mo  right  angiesmhsch  Iras  re* 
quindtoheproMd,  "f  '  V  - 

. H.ii.  '  Tins 


Gtnjtrfi8i$%a 

DemenftrutmS, 


■A.. 


ThefirftHookp 

This  may  alfo  be  demonftrated  without  thchelpe  ofthe  former  proportion, 
by  the  conuerfe  ofthe  fifth  petition,  and  by  the  i$.propoficion  as  you  faw  was 
done  in  the  former  after  Pclittrm. 


It  may  alfobe  demonftrated  without  producing  any  of  thefides  ofthe  tri* 
angle, after  this  maner. 

Another  demt-  '  SuPPofe  that  there  a  be  triangle  ABC  And.  in  the  fide  B  C  take  apointatalladuen- 

ftrxtion  tnuen-  turessand  let  the  fame  be  D,  and  draw  the  line  A  D.  And  forafmuch  as  in  thetriangle 
sedbj  Proclus .  A  ^  D*  the  fide  B  D  is  produced,  therefore  (  by  the  former  proposition )  the  outward 
angle  D  C,is  greater  then  the  inward  and  oppofitc  angle  A  B  D. Agayne  forafmuch 

as  in  the  triangle  A'D  C,  the  fyde  CD  is  produced, thereforefby  the  fame)the  outward 
angle  A  D  B,is  greater  then  the  inwarde  and  oppofitc 
angle  D  :  but  the  angles  at  the  point  Darcequall 

to  two  right  anglesfby  the  xj.propofition:  jwherforc 
the  angles  A  BCznd  A  CB  are  lefle  then  two  right  an¬ 
gles.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  we  proue  that  the  an 
gles  B  AC  and  B  C  A  are lefle  then  two  right  angles, if 
we  take  a  poynt  in  the  line  <sA  C,  and  draw  a  right  line 
from  it  to  the  point  B  :  and  fo  alfo  may  it  be  proued 
that  the  angles  CtAB  and  *A BC  are  lefle  the  two 
ryght  angles  ,if  there  be  taken  in  thelyne^^apoint, 
and  from  it  be  a  line  drawen  to  the  point  C. 


Corrolltry 
following  this 
Progojitson, 


ConrtrHthon . 


-v 


By  this  proportion  alfo  maybe  proued  this  Corrollary,  that  from  oneand 
the  feite  fame  point  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  right  line, can  not  be  drawen  two 
perpendicular  lines. 

For  ifitbepoflible,  from  the  point  ^,Iet  there  be  drawen 
vnto  the  right  lrae2?C,two  perpendicular  lines  AB^  and  ACz 
wherefore  the  angles  A  B  Cand  CB  are  right  angles.  But 
forafmuch  as  A  B  Cisa  triangle,  therefore  any  two  angles  ther- 
of  are  (by  this  propofition )  lefle  then  two  right  angles.Where- 
fore  the  angles' Af  J?  C and  A  CB  are  lefle  then  two  right  angles: 
but  they  are  alfo  equall  to  two  right  angles.by  reafon  A  B  and 
<tA  C  arc  perpendicular  lines  vpon  B  C:  which  is  impofllble. 

Wherefore  from  one  and  the  felfe  fame  point  cannot  be  drawc 
to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  line  two  perpendicular  lines  j  which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  ii.  Theoreme .  The  i  SJPropofition. 

In  euery  triangle ,  to  the  greater  fide  is  fubtended  the  grea* 


Vppofe  that  ABC  be  a 
triangle ,  bauing  the  fide  A 
C greater  then  the  fide  A 
B.  Then  l  jay  that  the  an* 
vie  A'BC  is  greater  then 
the  angle  B  QA .  For  for* 
afmuch  as  A  d  is  greater 
the  A  Bfput(by  the  3 .pro - 
pojition)  Vnto  A  B  an  equall  line  A  &  •  And  (by 


of  buckoes  blementes .  roLij* 

the  firfl  petition)  draw  a  tine  from  the  point  B  to  the  point  (D.  And  forajmnch 
as  the  outward  angle  of  the  triangle  IDBC,  namely }  the  angle  aB>B  isgrea* 
ter  then  the  inittardand  oppo/ite  angle  VCB  (by  the  16.  propo/ition))but  (by 
the )-.  propofition)  the  angle  AB)[ B  is  e quail  to  the  angle  A  B  B)Jor  the Jyde 
A  B  is  equal!  to  the  jyde  A  ID;  therefore  the  angle  A  BID  is  greater  then  the 
angle  ACB.  Wherefore  the  angle  ABC  is  much  greater  then  the  angle  A  C 
B.  Wherefore  in  euery  triangle,  to  the  greater  Jyde  isfubt  ended  the  greater 
angle:  trhich  Snas  required  to  be  proued , 

You  may  alfo  proue  the  angle  at  thepoint  B  greater  then  the  angle  at  the  point  C 
(the  fide  A  C being  greater  then  ti  elide  AB Jif from  the  line  ACyou  cut  of  a  linee- 
quall  to  the  line  sA  2?,beginning  at  the  point  C, as  before  you  beganne  at  the  point  Ax 
and  that  after  this  manner.  Let  the  line  D  C  be  equall  to  the  line 
*A  B  and  draw  the  line  B  D:  and  produce  <iA  B  to  the  point  E :  A 
and  put  the  line  "B  E  equal  to  the  line  A  D.  Wherefore  the  whole 
line  AEis  equall  to  the  whole  line  A  C:draw  aline  from  E  to  C, 

And  forafmuch  as  AEis  equal  to  A  C,  therfore  the  angle  A  E  C 
is  alfo  equall  to  the  angle  A  fE  ("by  the  5. propofition.’)  but  the 
angle  ABCis  greater  then  the  angle  cA  E  C.For  one  of  the  fides 
of  the  triangle  CB  E,  namely,  the  fide  B  E  is  produced  ,  and  fo 
the  outward  angle  <tA  B  C  is  greater  then  the  inward  and  oppo- 
fite  B  EC  (by  the  1 6  propofition.-)wherefore  the  angle  c A  BC  is  & 
much  greater  then  the  angle  &A  C B  r  which  was  required  to  be 
proued. 

Notethat  that  which  is  here  fpoken  in  this  propofiti. 
bn* is  to  be  vnderftanded  in  one  and  the  felffame  triangle.  For  itispoffiblcthat 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  angle  may  be  fubtended  ofa  greaterline,and  ofa  Idle  line: 
and  one  and  the  felfe  fame  right  line  may  fubtend  a  greater  angle ,  and  a  ldfe  an- 
gl e. As  for  example , 

Suppofe  that  there  be  an  Ifofceles  triangle  AB  C,  & 
in  the  fide  AB  take  the  point  D  atall  aduentures:  &  fro 
the  line  A  C  cut  of(by  the  5  .propofition)  the  lyne  A  E 
equall  to  the  line  AD.  And  draw  a  right  line  from  D  to 
.E.Wherfore  the  right  lines  DE  and  BC  do  fubtend  the 
angle  at  the  point  A,  &  of  them  the  one  is  greater,  and 
the  other lefle.  And  after  the  felfe  fame  manner  a  man 
may  putinfinite  right  lines  greater  &  lefle,  fubtending 
the  angle  at  the  point  A, 

Agayne  fuppofe  that  ABC  be  an  Ifofceles  triangle. 

And  let  B  C  be  lefle  then  either  of  the  lines  BA  and  AC . 

And  vpon  B  C deferibe  (by  the  firfl: Jan  equilatcr  trian¬ 
gle  i?  C D.And  drawaline  from  A  to  2);  and  produce  it 
to  the  point  E.  And  forafmuch  as  in  the  triangle  A  B  A 

X>,the  outward  angle  B  D  E,is  greater  rhen  the  inward 
&  oppofxte  angle  BAD  (by  the  i  ^.propofition  )And  by 
the  fame  in  the  triagle  ACD,tbe  outward  angle  CDE,is 
greater  then  the  inward  &r  oppofiteangleCAZ>:ther- 
fore  the  whole  angle  BDCis  greater  the  the  whole  an¬ 
gle  B  AC .And  one  and  the  felfe  fame  right  line  fubten- 
deth  both  thefe  angles,namelv,the  greater  angle  &  the 
lefle.  And  itis  alio  proued, thatgreatcr  rightlines 
Sc  lefle  fnbtende  one  and  the  icIfefamcangle,Bntm 

K»uj*  one 


Dcmonfratk#* 


An  other  da- 
menftrntnn  af¬ 
ter  Prophjrms* 


That  which  ti 
fpoken  to  thus 
Props fisen  is  re 
be  Vnderftanded 
to  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  tri¬ 
angle. 


Dtmwjlratsott 

leading  to  an 
impoffibiliti-e. 


This  fropofition 

is  A  c  Conner  ft 
ibe former-. 


9 An  Affumpt  is 
a.  Propoftion  tn 
kya  of  neceffitie 
to  the  helps  of  a 
demon f ration, 
the  certainty 
te  here  of  ss  not 
Jo  plabie,  and 
■thsrfore  nedeth 
st  felfefrfl  to  be 
d-cmossfirated. 
Art  affumpt  pu-t 
by  Proclnsfor 
S  he  demonflra- 
tien  of  this  Pro- 
psfstssn. 


\  cThejtrBcBoo%e 

<3neandthc  fclfe  fame  triangle  one  right  lincfubtendeth  one  angle. and  the  great 
zn^the great  angleaand  the lcITc  the  ldTe,as  it  was  proued 

ThenfiTheoreme.  The  ipfPropoJilion* 
fn  euery  triangle ,  vnder  the  greater  angle  ujubtended  the 
‘greater  fide* 

Appofe  that  A  B  Cbea  triangle,  hauyng 
t be  angle  A  B  C greater  then  the  angle  B 
C  AT  ben  I fay  that  the  fide  AL  is  greater 
then y  fide  A  BT 'or  if riot. fife  the fide  AC  is  ether 
equal  toy  fide  AByr  els  it  is  lejfie  theitXbe fide  A 
C  is  not  equal  to  y  fide  ABfior  then( by  the  $,pro* 
pofition  )y  angle  ABC  fhould  beequall  to  the  an * 
gle  A  C  B:  but  (by fufipofitio)  it  is  not,  Where* 
fore  the  fide  A  C  is  not  equal!  to  the  fide  A  B.  And 
the  fide  A  C  can  not  be  lefie  then  the  fide  A3^  for  then  the  angle  A  B  Cfhoulde 
be  lejfie  then  the  angle  A  C  B(by  the  prop ofitim  nextgoyng  before).  But  (by 
flip  pofition  it  is  not)  Wherefore  the  fide  AC  is  not  lefie  then  the  fide  AB„ 
Wherefore  the  fide  A  C  is  greater  then  the  fide  A  B.  VAherefore  in  euery  tri* 
angle  r  'vndpr  the  greater  angle  is  fnbtended  the  greater fide :  'tohich  Taasreqm* 
red tg  be  demon fl rated.  . 

-  isi  r  5  Da 

This  propofition  is  the  conuerfeof  thepropofition  next  goingbeforc.VV,^ler-, 
fore  as  you  fee.* that  which  was  thecondufion  in'theforroer,is  m  this  the  fuppo- 
iitionjor  thing  geuemand  that  which  was  there  the  thing  geuen,is  here  the  thing 
required  or  concluiion.  And  it  is  proued  by  ah  argument  leading  to  an  impoffis 
biikieyis  commonly  all  conucrfes  are. ' 

Twins,  demon  jlrateth  th  is  proportion  after  an  other  way :  butfirftheputteth 
this ^AiTumpt following*  -,n.  ,  ;.q..y  . 


:A1 


If  an  angle  of  a  triangle  be  deuide  din  to  ttyo  eefnallpartes,  and  if  the  HneXvhich  dettideth  it  being 
dradren  to  the  baff  do  deuide  the  fame  into  t\ho  vneefuaH  partes :  the fides  'd’hich  contaynt  that  angle 
jhalbe  vneqttaH,  and  that  fiialbe  the  greater  fide,  tyhicbfalleth  on  the  grater  fide  of  the  bafc,andtha£ 
the  lefie  whtcbftHeth  on  the  lefie fide  of  the  baje.  M  ;  -  \ 

Cf  y  v  .  '  ••  -xilJ  ✓ill  n: ....  *•>  rA.  ,  ■ .  i  isVij 

Suppofe pA B  C  to  be  a  triangle,and(by  the  p .  proportion)  deuide  the  angle  at  the 
point  A,m\p  two  equall  partes,by  the  rightfitfe  A  jD.  And  let  the  line ^tD  deuide  the 
bafe  B  Quito  two  vnequailpartes^  andle.t  thbpart  CD  be  greater,  then  the  parteiMfc. 
Then  I  fay  .that  the  fide  AC  is  greater  thenthe  fide  B.  Produce  the  fine  A  D  to  the 
point  Qand(by  the  third  Jput-the  line  D  i? ’equal!  to  the  fine  D  A.  And  forafinuch  as 
DC  is  by  fuppoikion  greater  then  DA,  put  (by  the  3  .propofitionjD  Fequal  to  ADS 
and  draw  a  line  fro  E  to  Qand  produeeitto  thepoint  G ,  Now  forafinuch  as  .^Dise* 
quali  to  ED  and  D  A  is  equall  to  D  Ft  therfore  in  the  two  triangles  AB  D.and  EFD* 
two.fides  of  the  one  are  .equal!  to  two  fides  of  the  other ,  eche  to  his  correfp.ondenj 
fide’;  and  ( by  the  1 5 ■.  proportion)  they  contayae  equall  angle$5  nameiy3  the  hed  ari-- 


ofEucUdes  Elementes.  Fo!.i2* 


gies  :  wherfore  f  by  the  fourth  propor¬ 
tion  )  the  bafe  B  A  is  equall  to  the  bale 
£  F: and  the  angle  D  E  F  is  equall  to  the 
angle  D  A  B.  But  the  angle  DAG  is  by 
conftru&ion  equall  to  the  fame  angle  D 
zA B:  wherefore  (by  the  firft  common 
fentence )  the  angles  EA(j  and  AE  G 
are  equall.  Wherefore  (by  the  6.  propo- 
fion  )  the  fide  AG  is  equall  to  the  fide  E 
(7,Wherfore  the  fide  A  Cis  greater  then 
the  fide  £  G .  Wherefore  it  is  much  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  fide££.Butthe  fide  ££i$ 
equall  to  the  fide  A  3,  as  it  hath  bene 
proued. Wherefore  the  fide  A  Cis  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  fide  A  £j  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  proued. 


This  aifumptbeing  put,this  Proportion  isofProclus  thus  dcmonftrated. 


Suppofe  A  3  Cto  be  a  triangle,  hauing  hisangle  at  the  point  £  greater  then  the  an 
gle  at  the  point  C,  Then  I  fay  that  the  fide  A  Cis  greater  then  the  fide  AB.Deuide  the 
line  B  C  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  £>,and  draw  a  line  from  A  to£>.  And  pro¬ 
duce  the  line  A  D  to  the  point  £ :  and  put  the  line  D  £  equall  to  the  line  A  Z>,and  draw 
alinefrom£to£.Nowforafmuchas££>  is  equall  to  DC,  and  AD  is  equall  to  DE 
therefore  in  the  two  triangles  A D  C  and  B  DE,  two 
fides  of  the  one  are  equall  to  two  fides  of  the  other,  ech 
to  his  correfpondent  fide,  and  they  containe  equall  an¬ 
gles  (by  the  i  propofition). -wherefore  (by  the  fourth 
proportion)  the  bafe££  is  equall  to  the  bafe  AC,  and 
the  angle  DB  Eis  equal  to  the  angle  at  the  point  f^De- 
uide  alfo  th’angle  ABE  into  two  equal  parts  by  the  line 
B  F:  wherfore  the  line  EE  is  greater  then  the  line  F  A. 

And  forafutuch  as  in  the  triangle  A  B  £,the  angle  at  the 
point  B  is  deuided  into  two  equall  partes  by  the  right 
line  B  F,  and  the  line  £  £  is  greater  then  the  line  A  F : 
therefore  by  the  former  AJfumpt  the  fide  £  £  is  greater 
then  the  fide  BA:  but  the  line  £  £  is  equall  to  the  line  A  C.  Wherfore  the  fydcAC  is 
greater  then  the  fide  A B:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  i i.lhenreme.  The  20.  Tropofition . 

In  euery  triangle  tier 0  fides,  which  two  fides  fioeuer  be  taken, 
are  greater  then  the  fide  remajning. 


A 


Vuppofe  that  ABC  be  a 
triangle.  Then  IJay  that 
t^o fides  of  the  triangle  A 
B  C,  which  two  fides  foe * 
uer  be  taken ,  are  greater : 
'then  the  fide  remayning 
^  j  that  is,  the  fides  B  A  and 
~  AC  are  greater  then  the 
Bdifi  fit 


An  ether  de- 
monff ration  afs 
ter  Preelm. 


Gtmtfrucffc >#. 
&emsvj?r£ts$n. 


\A»  ether  dema  ■* 
flrttoton  with¬ 
out  producing 
sits  of  the  ftdcs . 


jht  ether  De- 

monfimtkn9 


*  TTjeJirH^oofy 

ftd c  B  C:and  the  (Ides  A  B  and  B  C  then  the  fide  A  C:  and  the fides  A  C  and  B  C 
then  the  fide  B  AfProduce  (by  the  2,peticion)the  line  ©  A  to  the  point  D,And 
(by  the  third  propo/ition finto  the  line  A  C  put  an  equall  line  A  3);  and  dram 
a  line  from  the  point  D  tothepointe  C.  And  forafi 
much  as  the  line  DA  is  equall  to  the  line  A  Cohere* 
jore(by  the  ^,propoftion)the  angle  A3)  C  js  equall 
to  the  angle  A  C  D.But  the  angle  BCD  is  greater 
then  t  he  angle  A  C  D,t  here  fore  the  angle  BCD  is 
greater  then  the  angle  ADC,  And  farafmnch  as  D 
CB  is  a  triangle y  bauing  the  angle  BCD  greater 
then  the  angle  A  D  C,but(by  the  i$,propofitton)viu 
der  the  greater  angle  is  fubtended  the  greater  fide: 

Tt> herfore  D  B  is  greater  then  B  C.  But  the  lineD 
B  is  equall  to  the  lines  A  Band  A  C(for  the  line  JD  is  equall  to  the  line  A  C) 
If  herfore  the files  B  A  and  A  C,  are  greater  then  the  fide  BC.And  in  like  forte 
may  foe  prone  f  hat  the  fides  A  Band  B  C  are  greater  then  the  fide  A  C:&  that 
t  he fides  B  C  and  C  A  are  greater  then  the  fide  A  B  VVherfore  in  euery  t  riant 
gle  tlfo  (idesftohich  two  tides  focuer  be  taken, are  greater  then  the fide  remay * 
ning\ ifhich  IVas  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 

This  Proposition  may  alfobe  detnonftrated  withoutproducing  any  of  the 
fides,  alter  this  mancr. 

Suppofe  ABCt  o  be  triangle.  Then  I  fay,  that  the  two  fides  AB  and  A  Care  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  fide  B  C:  deuide  the  angle  at  the  point  A  (by  the  9.  propofition)into  two 
equal!  partes  by  the  right  line  <tA  E.  Andforafinuch  as  in  the  triangle^  B  £,theoufr* 
ward  angled  EC  is  greater  then  the  angle#  ex/  E  (by 
the  i<5propofition),and  the  angle  BAEis  put  to  be 
equall  to  the  angle  E  A  (^therefore  the  fide  AC  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  fide  (fE,  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  fide 
A  Bis  greater  the  the  fide  B  £JFor  in  the  triangle  AEC 
the  outward  angle  AEBtis  greater  then  the  angle  CA 
<£\that  is  then  the  angle  Wherelorealfb  the  fide 

AB  is  greater  then  the  fide  BE.  Wherfore  the  fides  A'B 
and  A  Care  greater  then  the  whole  fide  B  C.  And  after 
the  fame  maner  may  you  proue  touching  the  other 
fides  alfo. 


The  fame  may  y  etalfo  be  demonfi:  rated  an  other  way. 


Suppofe  A  B  C  to  be  a  triangle.  Now  if  A  B  C  be  an 
equilater  triangle,  then  without  doubt  any  two  fides 
thereof  are  greater  then  the  third.  For  the  three  fides 
being  equallany  two  fides  of  them  are  double  to  the 
third.But  if  it  be  an  Ifofceles  triangle,  either  the  bafe  is 
lefie  then  either  of  the  equall  fides  or  it  is  greater.  If  the 
bafe  be  Iefle,  then  againe  two  of  them  arc  greater  then 
thethirde,  butif  the  bafe  be  greater  (let  BC  being  the 
bafe  of  the  Ifofceles  triangle  ABC  be  greater  the  either 
of  the  fides  AB  Sc  AC  and  from  it  cut  of  (by  the  j.pro- 

‘  pofition 


Polity* 

portion )  &  line  equall  to  any  one  of  the  other  fides,  whiche  let  bee  f-E^and  dtawe 
a  line  from  A to  E. And  forafmuch  as  in  the  triangle  A  E  B, the  angle  A  E  C is  an  out¬ 
ward  angles  therefore  it  is  greater  then  the.  angle  B  AE  (by  the  1 6.  proportion)  .And 
by  the  fame  reafomthe  angle  AEB  is  greater  then  the  angle  CAE .  Wherefore  the  an¬ 
gles  at  the  poiht  E  ate  greater  theh  the  whole  angle  at  the  pointe  A.  But  the  angle  B  E 
A  is  equal  to  the  angle  B  A  E  (by  the  f  *  propofition)  for  Ce B  is  put  to  be  equall  to  B : 
£.  Wherefore  the  angle  remayning  A  Efts  greater  then  the  angle  CAE,  Whereforei’ 
alfo  the  fide  A  C  is  greater  then  the  fide  E  (*.  But  the  fide  AB  is  equall  to  the  fide  2?  £* 
Wherefore  the  fides  A B  and  Care  greater  then  the  fide  B  C, 

But  if  the  triangle  A  B  C  be  a  Scalenum,  let  the  fide 
A  B  be  the  greateft,  and  let  A  C be  the  meane,  and  B  C 
the  leaft.  Wherefore  the  greateft  fide  being  added  tip  a-  ^ 

ny  one  of  the  two  fides  mull  nedes  be  greater  then  the 
third.  For ofit  felfe  it  is  greater  then  any  of  them .  But 
ifAB  being  the  greateft,you  would  proue  the  fides  AC  X  /  \\ 

and  CB  to  be  greater  then  it.  Then  as  you  did  in  the  I-  /  /  \\  » 

foceles  triangle,  cut  of  from  the  greateft  a  line  equall  to 
one  of  them,  and  from  the  point  Cto  the  point  of  the 
interfedtion  draw  a  right  line,and  reafon  as  you  did  be 
fore  by  the  outward  angles  of  the  triangle,andyou  ihal 
haueyourpurpofe. 

This  propofition  may  yet  moreouerbedemonftratedby  an  argument  lea¬ 
ding  to  an  abfurditie,  and  that  after  this  manner. 

Suppofe  ABC  to  be  a  triangle,  then  T  fay  that  the 
fides  A  B  and  A  C,  are  greater  then  the  fide  B  C.  For  if 
they  be  not  greater,they  are  either  equall  or  leffe.  Firft 
let  them  be  equall,and  from  the  line  B  C  cut  of  the  line 
B  E  equall  to  the  line  A  B( by  the  ^propofition)  wher- 
fore  the  refidue  E  Cis  equal!  to  A  C.Now  forafmuch  as 
A  B  is  equall  to  BE  they  fubtend  equall  angles.  Like- 
wife  forafmuch  as  «xr  Cis  equall  to  CE  they  fubtend  e- 
qual  angles.Wherfore  the  angles  which  are  at  the  point 
fare  equall  to  the  angle  swhiche  are  at  the  pointed, 
which  is  impoftiblef  by  the  1 6. propofition). 

But  now  let  the  fides  A B  and  AC  beleffethen  the 
fide  B  C ,and  from  the  line  B  C  cut  of  ( by  the  3  .propofi- 
tion)the  line  B  D  equall  to  the  line  A  B ,and  likewife  fr5 
the  fame  line  B  C  cut  of  the  line  CE  equall  to  the  line  A 
C.  And  forafmuch  as  is  equall  to  f  O,  the  an<de  B 
2>  ^  alfo  is  equall  to  the  angle  BAD  (by  the  fifthpro- 
pofition).Againe  forafmuch  as  zsf  C  is  equall  to  CE 
therefore(bythe  fame)  the  angle  CEAis  equall  to  the 
angle  £  *A  C .  Wherefore  thefe  two  angles  B  D  A  and  C 
€  A  are  equall  to  thefe  two  angles  B*AD  and  £  ^4  C, 

Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  angle  EDA  is  the  OtitwardU 

angle  of  the  triangle  ADC,  therefore  it  is  greater  thenB  D  £  C 

theanglef^C  Foritisgreaterthentheangle‘Z)^Cfbvthe  id.nronofmnn  ) 

by  the  fit  me  reafon/orafimuch  as  CE^tU  tSc  the  outwaS  angle of 
^  therefore  it  is  greater  then  the  angle*  A D  (for  it  is  greater  then  the  an S!/e  ) 
Wherfore  the  ang  es  *  DAandCE  A  are  greater  then  fhe  two  angfej  aHaeA 
.CBut  theywerealfo  proued  equal!  vnto  them  .•  which  is  impoffible.  Wherefore  the 
M'.sAB  and  A  Cure  neither  equall  to  the  fide  *  C,  nor  leffe  thenit  but  neater  And 

foalfo  nuy  itbeprouedofthereft.-  7  ?  out  ^reate,.  Ana 

A 


-l  "i  -i .  ;!.t  « 


edif  cthef  deffto'* 
ftrttticn  leading 
SeAnAfurdiM 


ThefirflcBooh$ 

^tiriefe  demon-  ,  morehriefely  demonftrate  this  proportion  by  Carapanus 

f mtion  bj  the  definition  ofa  right  line,  which  as  we  hauebefore  declared  isthus:  A  right  line  is 
'definition 9f«  tbefomeft  extenfm or  Jrafygbt  that  is  dr  ftiay  be  from  one  point  to  another. SNhcdore.  any  one 
mght H»et  fide  p fa  triangle,  for  that  it  is  a  right  line  drawenfrom  fome  one  point  to  Come 

other  one  point, is  of  neceffitie  lliorter  then  the  other  twofides  drawen  from  and 
tpjthc  famepointes*-  , t  •'  •  -/ 

•3K  %Ll-  cufiOJilftOfoai  ■  V  sr--  7', >  ;  V..;  rt  OK.  1 

a aaftthfttget  Epicurus fuch  as  followed  himderided  this  propofition,  not  counting  it 
IfifcfJt ftllfht  ^ortV  to  be  added  m  the  number  of  proportions  of  Geometry  for  the  eafines 
»  thereof,  for  that  it  is  mam  fell  euen  to  thefenfe.  But  not  all  thinges  manifeft  to 
veafon  *nd  c-«-  fenfe,  are  ftraight  wayes  mam  fell;  to  reafon  and  vnderllanding-  Tt  pertay  neth  to 
Jerfttmiingt  one  that  is  a  teacher  of  Sciences ,  by  profe  and  demonftration  to  render  a  cer- 

tayneand  vndoubted  reafon,  why  itibappeareth  to  thefenfe:  and  in  thatonely 
confiffeth fcience. 

/  -  s  or  S:  •.  •.  'oJitottrtgtfBrn  •  ... .  j^oi 

Theu^ThcoreMe.  TheilfPropofition* 

fffrom  the  aides  of  one  of  the  fide  s  ofa  triangle,  he  drawn 
to  any  point  vpithin  the  fayde  triangle  two  right  lines*  thofe 
right  lines  fo  draWenfalbe  kjle  then  the  two  other  jides  of 
f  a  -  the  triangle,  but jhaUcont dine  the greater  angle. 

Vppofe  that  ABC  be  a 
triangletand  fro  the  endes 
oftheJide'B  C ^namely  fro 
the  point e s  3  and  C  y  let 
[there  be  drawen  Taithin  y 
j triangle  right  lines  3 

\D  and  CD  to  y  point  IX 
Then! fay ,  that  the  lines 
3  3)  and  C  ID  are  lejs’e  then  the  ether  jides  of  the 
triangle,  namely,  then  the  Jides  3y{  and  AC:md  that  the  angle  fbhich  they 
contayne,  namely,  3  DC,  is  greater  then  the  angle  3  AC.  Extend  (  by  the 
ficond  petition)  the  line  3D  to  the  point  Et  And  for af much  as ( by  the  Zo. pro* 
pojition)  in  euery  triangle  the  ttrofides  are  greater  then  the  fide  remayning% 
therefore  the  t'&o Jides  of  the  triangle  A3  E,  namely,  the Jides  A  3  and  A  Ey 
are  greater  then  the fide  E  3.  Tut  the  lineE  C  common  to  them  both.  Where < 
fore  the  lines  3  A  and  A  C, are  greater  then  the  lines  3  E  and  E  C.Againe  for * 
afrmb  as  ( by  the  famejin  the  triangle  C  E Dyhe  tlt>o Jides  C  E  and  E  D,  are 
greater  then  yfide  D  C,  puty  line  D  3  common  to  them  botht  Tbherforey  lines 
CE  and  E  B^are  greater  then  thelinesCDand D  3. 3ut  it  isproued  that  the 
Ones  3 A  and  AC^are  greater  then  the  lines  3  E and  ECj/Vhere fore  the  lines 
BA  and  A  C3are  much  greater  then  the  lines  3  D  and  D  C.  Agayneforafmuch 

\  as 


A 


fcf*  Fol^o* 

as  (by  the  1 6.  proportion)  in  ettery  triangle  ^theoutward  angle  is  greater  then 
the  inward  and  oppojite  angle  y  therefore  the  outward  angle  of  the  triangle  C 
IDE9  namely  fBB  Ctis greater  then  the  angle  CEB).  VV her e fore  alfo  (by  the 
fame)  the  outward  angle  of  the  triangle  A  B  E*  namely  9  the  angle  CEB  is 
greater  then  the  angle  B  AC.  But  it  is  prouedythat  the  angle  BBC  is  greater 
then  the  angle  C  EB.VVherfore  theangle  BCD  Cis  much  greater  then  the  ana 
gle  B  J  C .Where fore  if  from  the  endes  of  one  of  thefidesofa  triangkybe  dra* 
Wen  to  any  point  within  the  fay  de  triangle  tW o right lines  itho/e  right  lines fo 
drawn Jhalbelefte  then  the  two  other  fedes  of  the  triangle ,  but Jhallcontayne 
the  greater  angle :  which  was  required  to  be  demonflrated. 


.tone:" '< 


r.iuzn  IV :! 


In  this  propofition  is  exprefledjthac  the  two  right  lines  drawen  within  the 
triangle,haue  their  beginning  at  the  extremes  of  the  fide  ofth:  triangle*  Tor  fio 
the  one  extreme  of  the  fide  of  the  tr  langl  e,and  fro  ttifome  o  nepo  i  n  t  of  the  lame 
fide, may  be  drawen  two  right  lines  within  the  triangle, which  fliail  be  longer  the 
the  two  outwardlines:  which  i  s  wonderfull  and  feemeth  firaunge,  that  two  right 
lines  drawen  vpon  a  par  te  of  a  line,fiiould  be  greater  then  two  right  lines  drawen 
vpon  the  whole  lme.And  agay  ne  it  is  poffible  from  the  one  extreme  of  the  fide 
ofatriangle,andfrom  fome  one  point  ofthefamefide  to  drawe  two  right  lynes 
within  the  triangle  which  fiiall  contain^  an  anglelefic  then  the  angle  contayned 
yndcr  the  two  outward  lines*  3s"7V*wH  ' 


As  touching  the  firfi:  part* 

Suppofe  A  B  C  to  be  a  re&an- 
gle  triangle/whofe  right  angle  let 
be  at  the  point  B.  And  in  the  fide 
B  C  take  a  point  at  al  aduentures, 
which  let  be  D:  and  draw  a  right 
line  fro  AtoD  Wherfore  the  line 
AD  is  greater  then  the  line  AB 
fby  the  ip.propofitio)  From  the 
line  A  D  cut  of  (  by  the  thirde)  a 
lineequallto  the  line  A  B  which 
let  be D  E.  And  deuide  the  line  E 
Ain  to  two  equall  partes  in  the 
point  F(by  the  io. propofition ) 
And  draw  aline  fro  F  to  C.  Now 


-£r:;i  s 


"i  i  r.*1 


iaoi  -j'i 


: in  - 


forifmuch  zsAFCisz  triangle.thcrfore  the  lines  A  Fund  F  Care  greater  th?  r  i  •  „ 
j  ^ormerProP°htionJ.-but«^?' F  is  equal  ro  F-Eiarherforethe  rmktr  f 

and  F  ©are  grater  then  the  line  A  C. Arntthe  line  ©  B  is  equall  to  the  line!^  s" wh  E 
fore  the  right  lines  F  ©and  FD  are  greater  then  the  right  lines  j?  B^T/r  r‘ 

are  drawen  within  the  triangle  ABC,  the  one  from  one  extreme of 
Other  from  appint  in  the  fame  fide* C  ;  whiche  was  required  to  be  proued  *** 


A  ’  *r\  rf 

v.1  •» 


l  4  J 


Av* 


v*r>  * 


equall  fydes,  and  from  the  lyne  TJC  cuttcofalin  *  eauall  to  thr  itn.  t 

thirde  propofition)  whiche  le  t  bee  BV:  and  drawc  a  line  from  to©  ^ mid  in  the 

li*  line 


Thefirft'Bbo\ i 


Sine  tA  Drake  a  point  at  al  aducnturcs,  which 
let  be  £,  &drawalinefrom,Cto£.  Nowfor- 
afrnuch  as  the  line  is  equal  to  the lyne  S 

2>1therfore(bythefiftpropofition)the  angle 
B  AD  is  equall  to  the  angle BD  A.  And for- 
afmuch  as  in  the  triangle  E  D  Cthe  angle  ED 
Bis  an  outwarde angle,therefore  (by  the  id. 
proportion)  it  is  greater  then  the  inw  ard  and 
oppofiteangie  DEC,  Wherefore  the  angle  B 
AD  is  greater  then  the  angle  DEC,  Wherfore 
the  angle  B  AC  is  much  greater  then  the  an¬ 
gle  D  EC:  andtheanglcB  ACis  contained  of 
the  outward  right  lines,5  y^an:d  A  C?  and  the 
an  gl  eD  EC  is  contayned  of  the  inward  right  * 

lines  D  E  and  E  C:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


By  meancs  of  this  propesfi- 
tio n  alio  i  s  defer  ibed  that  ky  nd 
of  triangles, which  contayncth 
fourefides,  A  s  for  example, .this 
figu re  A  B  C.For  it  is  retained, 
ot  towel- fides  B  A, A  C,C  BjSC 
EB.But  ii;  hath  onely  three  a$-. 
gle  s,onc  a t.  the  p  o  in  t  B,an  other. 
atthepointA.andthe  third  at 
the  point  C.  VVhereforethis 
prefent  figure  ABC  is  a  qua- 
drilatertriangle:  whichofolde  B 
philofophcrs  hath  eucr  bene  counted  wonderful!, 

And  here  is  to  be  noted,  that  there  is  difference  bc- 
tweqe  a  three  fided  figure,  and  a  three  angled  figure. 

For  not  euer>  figure  hauing  three  angles  hath  alfo 
onely  three  fides5as  ir  is  platnc  to  fee  in  this  figure*, 

Likewife  it  is  not  all  on,a figure  to  haue  lower  fides, 
and  fower  angles,  Forafoure  fided  figure  may  hauc 
onely  threangles,as  in  the  former  figure:  andafoure 

angled  figure  may  hauc  fine  fides,  as  in  this  figure  to lo wing,  And  fo  of allothcc 
figures,  -  -  !  -:Vr  i'* 


’-it+UiU 


ofrtion • 


Ofthreright  lines, which  are  equall  to  tbre  right  lines  gem* 
to  makg  a  triangle . ! Butitbehoueth  two  ofthofe  lines, which 
mo/oeuer  be  taken, to  be  greater  then  the  third.  For  that  in 
mery  triangle  mo  fides,  which  mo fides foeuer  be  taken,  are 

grea* * 


greater  then  the  fide  remaining* 

Vppofe  that  the  three  right 
lines geue  be  A,B,C:of  which 
let  tiro  of  them,  Tvhkh  ttro 
fbeuer  be  taken*  be greater  then  the 
third y  that  is  let  the  lines  AjBAe 
greater  then  the  line  C,  and  the  lines 
Afijhen  the  line  B,and  the  lines  B, 

C*  then  the  line  \A .  It  is  required  of 

OwmtyMw » Jkmh 

lines  AfBfijomake  a  tmnglefTake 
a  right  line  baiting  an  appointed ende 
on  the  fide  £>,  and  being  infinite  on 
the  fide  E.  Andfbythe  $ ,  propopti* 
m)putVnto  the  line  A, an  e  quail  line :  *  '  * 

£) F,and put  ImtQ  the  line  Btan  equall  line  FG^and'vntoy  line  C3an  equall  line 

GH-  And  making  the  centre  Fyand  the  [pace  b  Ffiefcribe  (by  the  $  .peticio) 

a  circle  D  KJL.  Agayne  making  the  centre  G0and  the face  G  77,  deferibe  (by 

the fame )a  circle  H  I\L:and  let  the  point  of the  inter [eHion  of  the  fayd  circles 

be  K^andfby  the  fir fiptticion)dra'tr>  a  right  line  from  the  point  fitoy  point  Fy 

Cst*  an  other  from  the  point  fito  the  point  G,  Then  7 fay  3t  hat  of thre  right  lines 

equall  to  the  lines  AfBfijs  made  a  triangle  I\FG.  Forforafmuch  as  the  point  Dem»»ffr*t;o» 

F  is  the  centre  of  the  circled)  therefore  (by  the  definition)  the  lineF 

D  is  equall  to  the  line  F  If,  But  the  line  A  is  equall  to  the  line  F  D  Wherfore 

( by  tbefrfl  common  fentence )  the  line  F  Jfjs  equall  to  the  line  A.  Agayne  for* 

afmuch  as  the  point  G,is  the  centre  of the  circle  L  IfjA^therefcre(by  the  fame 

definition)  the  line  G  Kjs  equall  to  the  line  G  BBut  the  line  C  is  equall  to  the 

lineG  FL  therefore  (by  t  he  first  common  fentence)  the  line  K^G  is  equallto 

the  UneCfBut  the  line  FG  is  byfiuppofition  equal  to  the  line  B:  therefore  tbefe 

three  right  lines  GFfi K»,and  Kfifi  3are  equall  to  tbefe  three  right  lines  AfBy 

C.  Wherefore  of  three  right  lines  ,  that  is,  JfJF,F  G,  and  G  2^  ,  which  are 

equallto  the  thre  right  lines geuen that  is  to  A '  B.C,is  made  a  triangle  K  FG: 

M^as  required  to  be  done.  ?  ~  V 


CmjimStm „ 


An  other  conftru£tion,and  dcraonftration after  Flnffatcs* 

Suppofe  that  the  three  right  lines  be  Andyntq  fome  one  of  them3namely,  t,berc9mJ 

to  C,put  an  equall  line  D  £,and(by  the  fecond  propofitionjfrom  the  point  A,  draw  the  anf 

line  £  C/ , equall  to  the  lme^:  and  (by  the  fame)  vnto  the  point  D  put  the  lineDHe-  Irffiifrlt 

frt  hne/,Al;d  makLlnS the  centre  the  point  Ey  &  the  fpace  E  <?,defcribe  a  cir-  ^ 
cleFG  :  bice  wife  making  the  centre  the  point  .D,  andthe  fpace  D  H  deferibe  an  o- 

t  er  circle  which  circles  let  cutte  the  one  the  other  in  the  point  F.  And  draw 
-  -  I.ii;,  thefe 


%  t 


v  -  y<v 


thefe  lines  ©  F  and  E  F.  Then  I  faye 
thatf©££isa  triangle  defcribed  of 
§  right  lines  equal!  to  the  right  lines 
-^,£,C.For  forafmuch  as  the  line©// 
is  equall  to  the  right  line  ^4,  the  line 
©£.  (hall  alfobe  equall  to  the  fame 
light  line  For  that  the  lines  ©  H 
and  ©  £, are  drawen  fro  the  centre  to 
the  circumferenceJ.Likewife  foraf- 
much  as  E  ( 7 is  equall  to  E  F(by  the 
1 5«  definition)  and  the  right  line  B  is 
equall  to  the  fame  right  line  £  (7:ther 
fore  the  right  line  £  £  is  equall  to  the 
right  line/?  :  but  the  right  line  ©  £, 
was  put  to  be  equall  to  the  right  line 
C.Wherfore  of  three  right  lines  £  ©,©  F,  and  ££,Which  equa}  to three  right  lines’ 
geuen,  ts4,B,Cyis  defcribed  a  triangle:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


» 


n:,-, 


.  5  h 


tnflances  in  this 
Frebleme. 


Fir  ft  inflame. 


& 


r  r  <-\  r  * 

*  •  V  •ci \  \  i .  :  .  ■  i  •  •  *  cv,  'A*'.  '-vJi  v  :  v  '  •  *n 

In  this  proposition  theaduerfary  paradueoturc  mil  caul  Ilshat  the  circles' 
fhall  not  cut  the  one  the  other  (which  thingfeuF/f  putteth  them  to  do)Butnosr 
ifthey  cutte  not  the  one  the  other, either  they  touch  the  one  the  ocher,or  they 
axe  diftaunte  the  one  from  the  other .  Fiiffcif  itbepoflibleiec  them tqoche the 
one  the  other:  as  in  the  figure  here  put  (the  conftruction  thereof  anfwercthto 
the  conftruaion  viEuclide). 

And  forafmuch  as  F  is  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  circle©  if.therfore  the  ; 
line  ©  £  is  equal  tothe  line  f’M 
And  forafmuch  as  the  point  C,is 
.  .  th  e  ce  ntte  o  f  the circle  HL,  ther- 

fore  theliiie  fi  G\  is  equall  to  the  j  \ 

line  G  M.  Wherefore  thefe  two  /  \ 

lines  ©  F,  and  G  H,  are  equall  to  ( 
one  line ,  namely ,  to  F  G .  But 
they  were  put  to  be  greater  then  9 
it :  for  the  lines  ©  F,  F  (?,  and  G  \ 

H,  were  put  to  be  eqiidll  to  the  \ 
lines  uery  two  of  which  ' 

are  fuppofed  to  be  greater  then 
the  thirds  ;  wherefore  they  are 
both  greater,  and  alio  equall,. 
tuami  infiance  which  is  impoffible.  Agayne  if  it 
be  poifibledct  the  circles  be  di- 
ftant  the  one  from  the  other,  as 
are  the  circles  DK&ndH  ©.And 
forafmuch  as  Fisthe  centre  of 
the  circle  ©  K,  therfore  the  line 
©  £  is  equal  to  the  line  F/V.And 
forafmuch  as  g  is  the  centre  of 
the  circle  L  H, .therefore  the  line 
HG  is  equall  to  the  line  G  Af: 
wherefore  the  whole  line  F  G  is 
greater  then  the  two  lines©  £, 
and  c j  Hy  (for  the  line  £  (/,exee- 
deth  the  lines  ©  £,  and  G  H,  by 
the  line  NM Jhut  it  was  fupjpo« 


ofEuclides  Elemntes* 


FoL]i. 

fed  that  the  linesDF  and  if  Care  greater  thm  the  Mne  FG :  as  alfo  it  was  fuppofed 
that  the  lines  A  and  C7wcre  greater  then  the  line  F(for  the line  D  Fisput  to  be  equal! 
to  the  line  A,  and  the  line  F  G  to  the  line  2?,  and  theline  H  G  to  th,e  line  C. )  Wherefore 
they  are  both  greater  and  alfo  equall:  which  is  impoffible.  Wherefore  the  circles  ney- 
ther  tooch  the  one  the  other,  nor  are  diftant  the  one  from  the  other.  Wherefore  of  ne- 
celfitie  they  cut  the  one  the  other:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Ehe  p.  Tmbleme,  The  i^fPropofttwn. 

. v '  N\\  I  s  '  i 

Vpon  a  right  line geuenyand to  a point  in  it  geuen:  to  make  a 
reBiline  angle  equall  to  a  reBiline  angle  geuen* 

Vppofey  the  right  line  ge¬ 
ne  be  AB,  lety  point  in 

it  geuen  be  A.  And  let  alfo 
the  reBiline  angle  gene  be 
DCHJt  is  required  Vpon  the  right 
line  geuen  A  B,and  to  the  point  in  it 
geuen  A  Jo  make  a  reBiline  angle  e* 
quail  to  the  reBiline  angle  geuen  ID 
C  H.  Take  in  either  of  the  lines  CD 
and  CHa  point  at  all aduenturesjfr 
let  the  fame  he  Dand  E.And(by  the 
first  peticion)  dra'to  a  right  line  fro 
jp  to  E,And  ofthre  right  lines yA  F> 

F G  and  G  jiJfbich  let  be  equall  to 

the  three  right  lines  geuen  jhat  is, to  CDfD  E,and  EC,make(byy  proportion. 

goyng  hefore)a  triangle, and  let  the  fame  he  AEG;  fo  that  let  the  line  CD  be  e* 

quail  to  the  line  AF and  the  line  C  E  to  the  line  AG  }and  more  oner  the  lyne  D 

E  to  the  line  F  G.  And  fora fmuch  ds  thefe  t^o  lines  D  C  and  CEare  equall  to  Demonftr*tk*. 

thefe  tV>o  lines  FA  and  A  G,the  one  to  the  other, and  the  bafe  D  E  is  equall  to 

the  bafeF G'.ther fore  (by  the  S.  proportion)  the  angle  D  CE  is  equall  to  the 

angle  F AG  .W  her  fore  vpon  the  right  ImegeuenA  B tand  to  the  point  in  itge* 

uen  namely  A, is  made  a  reBiline  angle  F  A  Gjqual  to  the  reBiline  angle  geuen 

D  CH:  Tvhicb'SVas  required  to  he  done . 


.  CiitftrH&lot?, 


An  other conftrudionanddemonftration  after  Proclus, 

Suppofe  that  the  right  line  geuen  be  A  B:  &  let  the  point  in  it  geuen  be  A, 8c  let  the  Jn  other 
rediline  angle  geue  be  C  D  E, It  is  required  vpo  the  right  line  gene  A  B38c  to  the  point  jhuafLfZ de 
in  it  geue  A,to  make, a  redijine  angle  equal  to  the  rediline  angle  geue  CD  E.  Drawe  a  m0n(l ration af  s 
line  fro  C  to  E.  And  produce  the  line  A  B  on  either  fide  to  the  points  F  and  G.  And  vn-,  ter  Proclm. 

I.iiii.  to 


tt&  er  Tse- 
tswx-jtr# turn 
Pektariies, 


Tbefirmooke 


<  t  *  s  4  —  —  — ■•• » * —  —  ***»  .».*».*  %*  mw  €q  u  al  j  yjj* 

j°r  e-  LlnC  £.^PUC  c^e  ^ne  5(7  C(1  uallAnd  making  the  cetre  the  point  si, Sc  the  fpace  AF, 
4elcnbe  a  circle  K  F.  And  agayne  making  the  centre  the  point  B  and  the  fpace  B  G  de- 


fcribe  an  other  circle  G  L:  which  dial  of  necefiitie  cut  the  one  the  other,as  we  haue  be¬ 
fore  proued.Let  them  cut  the  one  the  other  in  the  pointes  M  &  N.And  draw  thefe  right 
lines  AN,  AM,  BN,  and  R  M.  And  forafmuch  as  F  A  is  equall  to  A  M:and  alfo  to  A  N 
(by  the  definition  of  a  circle)but  C  D  is  equall  to  F  A,whcrfore  the  lines  A  M  and  A  !M 
are  eche  equall  to  the  line  B  C.  Agayne  forafmuch5  a  sBG,is  equall  to  B'M,and  to  B  N, 
and  B  G  is  equall  to  C  E:  therfore  either  of  thefe  lines  B  M  and  B  N  is  equal!  to  the  line 
C  E  Bat  the  line  BA  is  equall  to  the  line  D  E.Wherfore  thefe  two  lines  B  A  &  A  M,arc 
equall  to  thefe  two  lines  D  E  and  D  C.the  one  to  the  other.and  the  bafeB  M  is  equal  to 
thebafeC  f.Wherforefby  the  8,propofition)the  angle  M  AB,is  equall  to  the  angle  at 
the  point  D.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  angle  N  A  B.is  equall  to  thefame  angle  at  the. 
point  O.Wherforevpon  the  right  line  geuen^i?,andtothe  point  in  it  geuen  ^4,is  de- 
feribed  a  reftilinc  angle  on  either  fide  of  the  line  ABi  namely, on  one  fide  the  re&iline 
angle  N  A  B,and  on  the  other  fide  the  re&iline  angle  M  A  B,  either  of  which  is  equall  to 
the  re&iline  angle  geueh  C BE:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


An  other  conftru&ionalfo^and  detnonftration  after  Pelitarius.’ 

Suppofe  thar.the  right  line  geuen  be  AB:  and  let  the  point  in  it  geuenbe  C,  and 
letthere&ilineanglegeuen  be  DEFJtis  required  vpontheline  geuen  .//5,and  to  the 
point  in  it  geuen -C,to  deferibe  a  re&iiine  angle  equall  to  the  reitiline  angle  geuen  B  E 
JF.Prqduce  the  line  F  E  to  the  point  G :  and  from  the  point  E  ere£fc(by  the  1 1  .propofi- 
tion  )  vnto  the  line  GF  a  perpendictiler  line  E  H, which,  if  it  exa&ly  agree  with  the  lync 
iT'Z), then  was  the  angle  geue  a  right 
angle.Wherforeiffrom  thepointe  C 
you  erefte  a  perpendiculer  line  vnto 
the  line  ABythzt  fliall  be  done  which 

was  required  to  be  done  But  if  it  do  1G  K  t>  M 

notythenfrom  the  point//,  ereft  vn¬ 
to  the  line  HE,&  perpendiculer  lyne 
H'B  ,  whiche  being  produced  Hull 
(by  the  fifth  peticionjconcurre  with 
the  line  £  D  being  alfo  produced:  for 
the  angle  B  EH  is  Idfe  then  a  right 

angle(whenas6’£//isarightangje),  _ _ ,  _ _ , 

Wherefore  let  them  concurre  in  the  A  C  3  G  JS  p 

point  £>,audfois  made  the  triangle 
JE>  E  H.  After  the  fame  maner  fr5  the 

gsJica  C,em%  vnto  the  line  A  3  a  perpendiculer  line  C  K ;  which  let  be  equal!  to 

co  .ini  L 


the  perpendicular  line  EH( by  the  %  .pr6pofition):ahd  frcini  the  point  Ketcd  vntothfi 
line  K  C>a  perpendiculer  line  K Z^whiche  let  be  equall  to  the  perpendiculer  lyne  H  D* 
And  draw  a  line  from  C  to  E.Tben  I  fay  thatirhs  angle  L  C  F,is  equall  to  the  angle  ge¬ 
uen  DE  A.  lor  the  two  triangles  HE  CD  and  K G  L,are  (by  the  fourth  propofition)  e- 
qual,  and  cquilatcr  the  one  to  the  other;  and  the  two  angles  LCK  a  nd'DEH  are  equal* 
And  the  two  angIes|5C/C  and  EEH  are  equal,  for  either  of  them  is  a  right  angle.Wher- 
fote  (  by  the  i  kComffion  fentencejthe  whole atigleZ#  C  i?,iseqtiall  to  the  whole  angle  D 
E  F.  Which  was  required  to  be  done. 

And  if  the  perpendiculer  line  chaunce  to  fall  without  the  angl  egeuen4namely, if 
the  angle  geuen  be  an  acute  angle,  the  felfefame  manner  of  demonftration  will 
ferae:  but  onely  that  in  ftede  of  the  fecond  common  l'entencc,  muft  be  vfed  the 
2,common  fentencc* 

<  •  ■  ■  .  ’  . ; 

'  '  ........ 

Appollonius  putteth  another  conftru&ibn  Si  dcirionftratioh  of  this  propolitio: 
which  (though  the  demonftration  thereof  depende  of  proportions  put  in  the 
third booke,  y  et  for  that  the  conftrufhon  is  very  good  for  him  that  wil  redcly , 
and  mechanically,  without  demonftration,  defenbe  vpona  line  geuen,  and  toa 
point  init  geuen,  a  re&ilme  angle  equall  to  a  re&ilinc  angle  geuen)  I  thought 
not  amifle  here  to  place  it.  And  it  is  thus . 


Suppofe  that  the  refliline  angle  geuen  be  CD  E7  and  let  the  right  line  geuen  be 
ABS  and  let  the  point  in  it 
geuen  be  e^.  Take  in  the 
line  CU^a  point  at  all  ad¬ 
ventures  ,  which  let  be.F. 

And  making  the  cetre  the 
point  D,  and  the  (pace  D 
F,  deferibea  circle  A  (?,cut 
ting  the  line  in  the 
point  G,  and  draw  a  ryght 
line  from  F  to  G ,  Likewife 
from  the  line  AB,  cut  of 
a  line  equall  to  the  linei> 

FjWhich  let  be  AH.  And  Jq  jj 

making  the  cetre  the  point  ’  v 

A,  and  the  fpace  AH  Ac-  \ 

feribe  a  circle  H  K3  and  from  the  point  A/,fubtend  vnto  the  circumference  of  the  circle 
arightlyne  equal!  to  the  right  line  Fg ,  whicheletbee//FT;  and  drawe  a  right  lyne 
from  A  to  K.  Then  I  fay  thatthe  angle  HA  KM  equall  to  the  angle  CD  E,  The  proofs 
whereofl  now  omitte  for  that  it  dependeth  of  the  a  8  and  27  propofitions  of  the  third 
booke. 


rdft  etkiir  tm- 

Jlraf~ion  £<? 
menftrxtian  *f~ 

ttT 


But  now,as  I  fayd,  by  this  you  may  very  redily,  and  mechanically,  without  demon 
ftration,  vpon  a  line  geuen,  and  to  a  point  init  geuen  deferibe  a  re&iline  angle  equall  t6 
to  areftiline  angle  geuen.  For  ' 

in  the  rechlme  angle  geue,  you 
neede  onely  to  marke  the  two 
pointes,  where  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  of  the  circle  cutteth  the 
lines  contayning  the  angle  ge¬ 
uen:  as  the  points  Aand  G:  and 
likewife  to  marke  in  the  line  ge¬ 
uen  asm  AB,the  point  H,  8c  fo  a 

making  the  centre  the  point  ^according  to  the  fpace  AH  {which  is  put  to  be  equal  to 
FI)) deferibe  a  peece  of  a  circumference  on  that  fide  that  you  wil  haue  the  angle  to  he, 
asfor  example  the  circumference  H  AT,and  openingyour  compaffe  to  the  wideth  from 

K*i»  the 


■®#Mpidei  the 
firfi  tnuenter  of 
thii proportion. 


CtnUrtiftion, 


Dammft ration. 


the  point  F,  to  the  point  G,  fet  one  foote  thereof  fixed  iftthe  point  H,  and  marke  the* 
point  where  the  other  foote  cuttcth  the  fayde  circumference ,  which  point  let  be  Kt 
And  from  that  point  to  the  point  t^draw  a  right  line:  and  fo  (hall  you  hauedeferibed 
at  the  point  A,zn  angle  equal  tp  the  angle  at  the  point  I>. As  in  the  figures  in  the  end 
of  the  other  fide  put*  1 

O empties  was  the  firft  inuenter  of  this  proportion  as  witneffeth  Eudemi  us. 


1  iSTbeoreme  The  Z^fPropofition. 

fftwo  triangles  haue  two  fide s  of  the  one  e  quail  to  two fides  of 
the  other,  ech  to  his  correfpondent  fide, and  if  the  angle  cotai- 
ned  vnder  the  equall fides  of  the  One ,  be  greater  then  the  an¬ 
gle  contained  vnder  the  equall  fides  of  the  other :  the  hafe  alfo 
of the  fame, Jhalbe  greater  then  the  baje  of  the  other . 

V ppofe  that  there  he  Hbo  triangles  A  B  C,  and  1)  E  F} 
hauing  two.  fides  of  the  one ,  that  is,  A  B,  and  ji  C,  e* 
quail  to  two fides  of the  other,  that  is  jo  IDE,  and  D  F, 
ech  to  his  correfpondent fideithat  is, th fide  JtB,  to  the 
|  fide  V  E,and  the  fide  A  C  to  the  fide  DFx  and  fuppofe 
|  ’that  the  angle  $  AC  he  greater  then  the  angle  EVE 

2  f hen  I  fay  e  that  the  ha/e  BC,  is  greater  then  thebafe 
“  E  Ft  For  forafmuch  as  the  angle  B  AC  is  greater  then 


the  angle  ED  Fjnake  (by  the  23  -propofition)vp* 
on  the  right  line  DE,and  to  the  point  in  itgeueDy 
an  angle  ED  G  equall  to  the  angle  geuen  BAC. 

And  to  one  of  the fe  lines, that  is,  either  to  A  Cjr  D 
Eyput  an  equall  tine  D  G.  And  (by  the  firfi  peticio) 
draft  aright  line  from  the  point  G^td  the  point  E, 
and  an  other  from  the  point  F,  to  the  point  G.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  V  E, 
and  the  line  AC  to  the  line  D  Gythe  one  toy  other, 
and  the  angle  BACis  (by  conflructm)  equall  to  .  7 

the  angle  ED  G,  therefore  (by  the q.propofition) the hafe  B C,  is  equal!  to 
she  hafe  E  G.Agayne for  as  much  as  the  line  D  G  is  equall  to  the  line  D  Father* 
( hy  the  5,  propofition)the  angle  DGFy  is  equall  to  the  angle  D  F  Gf/Vhere* 
fore  the  angle  DE G  is greater  then  the  angle  E  G  EjFFherefore  the  angle  E 
F  G  is  much  greater  then  the  angle  EGF And  forafmuch  as  EFG  is  a  trian # 
gle,  hauing  the  angle  E  F G greater  then  the  angle  E  G  F, and  (by  the  18. pro* 
pojition)  Vnder  the  greater  angle  is  fubtended  the  greater fide  ,  therefore  the 
fide  E  G  is  greater  then  the fide  E  FjBut  the fide  E  G  is  equall  to  the  fide  B  C; 
therefore  the  fide  B  C  is  greater  then  the  fide  E  F,  If  therefore  ttvo  triangles 
■  *•  'i  hmi  1 


ofEmMei  Elementeu 

haue  mo fides  of  throne  equal}  to  mo  fides  of  the  other ,  echeto  his  correfponfi 
dent  fide,  and  if the  angle  contayned  Vnder  the  e  quail fides  of  the  one  ,he grea¬ 
ter  then  the  angle  contayned  Vnder  the  equall fides  of  the  other :  the  bafealfo  of 
the fame  jhalbe greater  then  the  baje  of  the  other :  Which  Was  required  to  be 
proued . 

In  this  Theoreme  may  be three  cafes.  For  the  angle  S  JD  <7,  beingputequalltothe 
angled  A  C,  and  the  line  D  C^being  put  equall  to  the  line  AC}ind  a  line  beingdrawen 
from  £  to  G,  the  line  E  G  flulleither  fall  aboue'the  line  G  F ,  or  vpon  it,or  vnder  it.  £ «- 
^wdemonilrationferueth,  when  the  line  CZfaUethabbue  the  line  GFt  as  we  haue 
before  manifeltly  feene. 

But  if  it  fall  vpon  it,as  in  this  figure  here  piit. 

Then  forafmuch  as  the  two  lines  AB  and^C,are 
equal  to  the  two  lines  D  £andD  (/,thebne  to  the 
other,  and  they  contayne  equall  angles  by  con- 
ftrudion:  therefore  ('by  the 4.  propofitionj  the 
bafe  B  C,  is  equall  to  the  bafe  E  G :  but  the  bafe  £ 

<7,  is  greater  then  the  bafe£F  :  wherforealfo  the 
bafeFCyis  greater  then  the  bafe  £  F :  whichwas 
required  to  be  proued* 

But  now  let  the  line  £  (j,  fall  vnder  the  line  £ 

F, as  in  the  figure  here  put.  And  forafmuch  as  thefe 
two  lines  A  B ,  andACt  are  equall  to  thefe  two 
lines  D  E  and  D  (j,  the  one  to  the  other,  and  they 
contayne  equall  angles,  therefore  (by  the  4.  pro- 
pofition)the  bafe  B  Qis  equal  to  the  bafe  £  G.And 
forafmuch  as  within  the  triangle  DEG ,  the  two 
linnes  F  and  F  E> are  fet  vpon  the  fide  D  E:  ther- 
fore  f  by  the  2 1  .propofition)the  lines  JD  F  and  F  £ 
areieife  then  the  outward  lines *2)  G  and  G  Ex  but 
theline  D  G  is  equal  to  theline  D  F.  Wherfore  the 
line  G  E  is  greater  then  the  line  E  E.  But  G  E  is  e- 
quall  to  B  C. Wherefore  the  line  B  Cis  greater  the 
theline  £F,Which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


7  hree  ejfcs  i/i 
this  prop  aft  sen . 


The firft  cafe *. 
Second  cafe. 


Third  cafe. 


T>  (7,  which  arc  equal,  vnto  the  points 
K and  H :  and  draw  a  line  from  F  to  G: 
wherefore  (by  thefecond  part  of  the 
fifth  propofitidn)thc  anglesXF  G  and 
F  G  ft,  which  are  vnder  the  bafe  F  <7, 
are  equall  therefore  the  angle  E  FG  is 
greater  then  the  angle  FG  F.Wherfore 
(by  the  1 8  propofitionj the  fide£  <7  is 
greater  then  the  fide  £  JF;  but  the  bafe 
B  C  is  equal  vnto  the  bafe  E  G:  Where¬ 
fore  the  bafe  B  C,  is  greater  then  the 
bafe  £  F :  Which  was  required  to  be 
proued. 


produce  the  line  s  -Di7  and 
V  > 


£ 


An  other  de- 
monjlratien  of . 
the  third  caf. 


It  may  peraduenture  feme,  that  Euchde  fiiould  here  in  this  proportion  haue 
proued,  that  not  oncly  thebafes  ofthe  triangles  are  vnequall, but  alfo  that  the  as 
teas  of  the  fame  are  vnequallr  for  fo  in  the  fourth'pro  pofit  ion3  after  he  had  pro- 

Kii»  usd 


mty  EneliZe 
"hers  prouith 
*fot  :ht  areas  of 
-the  triangles  to 
:&<l  SsKSqttttlt, 


'lifter  thiff, 
2Jrtpajh/evJ*M 
ft  all fade  the 
campttrifsn  of 
■  triangles,  w  heft 
ijides  being 
equalljkefr  bit** 
Jes  and  angles 
•at  the  tcppe 
art  ineipnall. 


E>ems»f ration 
leading  to  ah 

abfterdttji 


ued  the  bate  to  be  equall,  he  protied  alfo  the  areas  to  be  equally  But  hereto  may 
be  answered,  that  in  equall  angles  and  bafes,and  vnequall  angles  and  hafes ,  the 
confideration  is  not  like*  For  the  angles  and  bafes  being  equall,  the  triangles  al¬ 
fo  fhall  ofnecefliticbe  equall,  but  the  angles  and  bafes  being  vnequall,  the  areas 
fliall  not  ofneceflitie  be  equall*  For  the  triangles  may  both  be  equall  and  vne- 
quail :  and  that  may  be  the  greater, whiche  bathe  the  greater  angle, and  thegred* 
ter  bafe,  and  it  may  alfo  be  the  lelfe.  And  for  that  caufe  Euclide  made  no  mend# 
on  ofthe  comparifon  ofthe  triangles*  Whereof  this  alfo  moughtbeacaiife,fot 
that  to  thedemonftration  thereof  are  required  ccrtayne  Proportions  concer- 
ning  parallel  lines,  which  vc  are  not  as  yet  come  vnto*  Howbeitafter  the  ^7, 
proportion  of  tins  booke  you  fhalfind  the  comparifon  of  thearcas  of  triangles* 
'which  haue  their  fides  equall,  and  their  bafes  andangles  at  the  toppe  vticquall* 

The  1 6.cTheoremv.  T'heifJPropofitiOtt* 

If  mo  triangles  haue  mo  fides  ofthe  otteequaU  tttmo fades 
ofthe  other ,  eche  to  bis  correfpondent fide, and  if  the  bafe  of 
the  one  be  greater  then  the  bafe  ofthe  other:  the  angle  alfo  of 
the  fame  cotayned  vnder  the  equall  right  lines  ffktitt  begrea^ 
ter  then  the  angle  ofthe  other* 

p  Vppofe  that  there  he  ftoo  triangles, A fB,Cy 
land  B)  E  FJiauing  vm>o  fides  0/  tb’onefbat 
Us,  A  B  ft  nd  AC  squall  toffyo  (ides  ofthe  0* 
therjhat  is  to  B)  Ey  and  B)  F,  ecb  to  his  correfpon* 
dent  fide, namely, the  fide  AB  to  the  fide  !DF,  and 
the fide  A  C  to  the  fyde  B)  F.  'But  let  (he  bafe  B  C 
be  greater  then  the  bafe  E  FfTbe  1  fay,  that  the  an* 
git  B  AC isgrea ter  then  the  an g  le  EB)F%  For  if 
nbt ,  then  is  'it  either  equall  Vn(6  it,  or  left  then  its 
But  the  angle  BAG  is  not  equall  to  the  angle. B  ID 
F: for  if  it  There  equall, tire  bafe  alfo  B  C Jhouldfbythe  ^propofitton)  be  equal 
to  the  bafe  E  F:  but  by  fuppofition  it  is  not.Wherfott  the  angle  B  AC  is  note* 
quail  to  the  angle  EDF.Neither  alfo  is  the angle fe  AC [left  then  the  angfiE 
£>  F:  for  then  fhould  the  bafe  BCbe  lefie  the  the  bafe  £  F(  by  the  former  pro* 
pofitioiifBut  by  fuppofition  it  is  notyFherfaef angle  BAGsmilefie 
anAe  E  B>  FJnd  it  is  already  protied, that  it  isnoietiuafomitMerfdrefia^ 
Ae  B  AC  is  greater  then  the  angle  EB)F.  If  therfiret^o  triangles  haue  iM 
fides  of  the  one  equall  to  nvo  fides  ofthe  other, eche  to  his  comfp*ndentfide,& 
if  the  bafe  ofthe  one  be  greater  then  the  bafe  ofthe  other ,  the  angle  alfd  ofthi 
fame  contaytied  Vnder  y  equal  right  lides jhdU  be  greater  the  the  angle  of theo . 

Tbit 


birstrs  eafis  i» 
this  dttmssflnt- 
tiers . 

fir&i*fi.'t 


oj-tsmttm  mtmmtes.  Fol.tf. 

This  propofitio  a  is  plaine  oppofiretb  the  el^ti  is  the  coucrfc  of  the  fdure  Hr/comZoZh 
and  twenty  which  went  befor^.^nd  it  is  proifed(as  commonly  ail  eonuetfes  are)  inJsreaij  <u- 
by  a  reafon  leading  to  an  ablufdi  cie*But  it  may  after  Menelaas  Alexand  rintrs  be  monftr*ted-  ^ 
demonilrared  directly  jafter  this  maner*  '  fUlll! 

Mentlaus  AUtr* 
andrin&s* 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  triangles  iA B  C  8c  B 
£  F:haning  the  two  fides  A  B  and  Ca C  equal  to  the 
two  Tides  lD  E  and®  £,the  one  to  the  other:andle£ 
the  bafe  B  C  be  greater  then  the  bafe  E  /.Then  /  fay 
that  the  angle  at  the  point  A, is  greater  the  the  aft^ 
gle  at  the  point  ®. For  from  the  bafe  BCe  ut  of  (by 
the  thi  rde  ja  lineeqnallto  the  bale  £  F,  and  let  the 
fame  be  B  (?.And  vpon  the  line  GB  and  to  the  point 
B  putf  by  the  2  3,propofition)an  angle  equal  to  the 
angle  ©  E  Ft  which  let  be  G  B  H:  and  let  the  line  B 
H  be  equall  to  the  line  D  £.And  drawe  a  lync  from 
H  to  (band  produce  it  beyond  the  point  G:  whiche 
being  produced  lhall  fal  either  vppon  the  angle  Ay 
or  vpon  the  line  A  B, or  vpon  the  line  A  C ,  Firffc'  let 
it  fall  vpon  theangle  A.  And  forafmuch  as  thefe  two 
lines  B  G  and  B  H are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  E  F 
and  E  D} the  one  to  the  other,and  they  contayne  e- 
quallanglesfbyconftru&ionjnamelyjtheangles  G 

BH and  D  E  F:  therforef  by  the  4.propofition)thei  bafe  G H is  equall  to  the  D  Ft  and 
the  angle®  H  G  to  the  angle  E  D  F.Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  line  B  His  equall  to  the 
jline  B  A(( or  the  line  A  Bis  fuppofed  to  be  equal  to  the  line  D  E,  vnto  which  line  the 
ineBH  isput  equal )  therforef  by  the  5  .propofition)the  anglcBFIA  is  equall  tothe 
angle  BAH :  wherfore  alfo  the  angle  E  D  F  is  equal  to  the  angle  B  A  //.But  the  angle  B 
A  C  is  greater  then  the  angle  BA  Hi  wherfore  alio  the  an  gle  BAG  is  greater  then  the 
angleEDF.  *  ^ 

But  now  let  it  fall  vpon  the  line  in  the 
point  K,  and  drawe  a  line  from  A  to  H.  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  B  G  andB  H  are  equall  to 
thefe  two  lines  E  F  and  E  D3the  one  to  theother,& 
they  containe  eq  ual  angles(by  conftrudion  j  liamc- 
lv,the angles GBH andD  E  F:  therfore (by  the  4* 
propofition)the  bafeGHis  equall  to  the  bafeD  F# 
and  the  angle  B  H  G  to  the  angle  EDF.Agayne  for¬ 
afmuch  as  in  the  triangle  B  A  H,the  fide  BA  is  equal 
to  the  fideB  H,therfore  (by  the  5  .propofition)the 
angle  B  A  FI  is  equal  to  the  angle  B  H  A.But  thean¬ 
gle  B  H  A  is  greater  then  the  angle  B  H  G; wherfore 
alfo  th  e  angle  BAH  is  greater  then  the  angle  BHG, 

Wherfore  the  angle  B  A  C  is  much  greater  then  the 
angle  B  H  G.But  it  is  proued  that  the  angle  BHG  is 
equall  to  the  angle  at  the  point  D  .  Wherefore  the 
dngleE.AC  is  greater  then  the  angle  at  thepbinte 
£):  Which  was  required  to  be  proued* 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  line  H  G  beyng  produced  doo  fall  vppon  the  line  zAC, 
namely,in  the  point  K.And  agayne  draw  alfo  a  line  from  cA  to  //.And  forafmuch  as  B 
G  i  s  equal!  to  E  F,and  B  H,to  E  /^therefore  thefe  two  lines  B  G  and  BH  are  equall  to 
thefe  two  lines  E  F  and  E  D ,the  one  to  the  other,and  (by  conftrudion  Jthey  contayne 
equall  angles,namely,the  angles  GBH  and  FED, Wherfore  (by  the  fourth  propofitio ) 

K.iii.  the 


Thirdcstfe, 


je»  ttfter  de- 
■xns  nfiratisn  /tf‘ 
Ter  Hers  Mea 
eebaaicm. 


chc  bafejG  His  equal  tothebafc  *Z)  Ft  Sc  th’an 
gle  B  H  G  is  cquall  to  th’angle  E  D  E,  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  GH is equall  toDi^andDF  ist- 
quall  to  AC:  therforeG  H  alfo  is  equal!  to  A 
C.  Wherfore  H  K  is  greater  then  A C,  where¬ 
fore  H  K  is  much  greater  then  A  K.  Wherfore 
(bytheiS.  propofition)  theangle  KAH  is 
greater  then  the  angle  K  H  A.  Agayne  foraf- 
much  a  sB  H  is  equahto  A  Bl(  for  B  H  is  pute- 
quall  to  D  £,  which  is  by  fuppofition  equal  to  B 
the  r  fore  (by  the  5  .propofition  ^  thean¬ 
gle  B  H  A  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  AH.  Wher- 
fore  the  whole  angle  BHK  is  leflethen  the 
whole  angle  BAK,  But  it  hath  bene  proued, 
that  the  angle  B  H  K  is  equall  to  the  angle  at 
•the  point  D,wherfore  the  angle  B  AC  is  grea¬ 
ter-then  tlie  angle  at  the  point  D,  which  was 
-re  q  u  ir  ed  to  b  e  p  r  o  ued. 

Hero  Mcchanicus  alfo  dcmonftratethican  other  way,andthat  by  4  dixcft 
•demonftranon. 


-a 


Suppofe  that  there  be  two  triangles  ABC 
and  DEE,  hauyngthetwofides-42?,and.// 

C,equallto  the  twofidesD  E,8cDF,  tlveone 
to  the  .other,  and  letthe  bale  BCy  be  greater 
then  the  bale  E  E. Then  I  fay,that  the  angle  at 
the  point -4,  is  greater  then  the  angle  at  the 
point  -D.Forforafmuch  a  sBCt  isgreater  the 
£F,produce£Ftothepoint£7,  and  put  the 
line  E  G,  equall  t“o  the  line  2 EC.  likewife  pro¬ 
duce  the  line  D  E  to  the  point  //,  and  put  the 
line  D  Hy  equall  to  the  line  D  E,.  Wherefore 
making  the  centre  the  point  D,and  the  /pace 
D  F,dcfcribe  a  circle,and  it  fliall  pa'fie  alfo  by 
the  paint  //.Let  the  fame  circle  be  E  K  //.And 
forafmuch  as  A  C  and  A  B  are  greater  the  BC 
(by  the  2  0.propofitio)&  the  lines  AB  &  A C, 
ar  equal  to  the  line  £H,8c  the  line  BC  is  equal 
to  the  line  E  (/.Therefore  theline  E  H  is  grea 
ter  then  theline  E  (J,  VVherefore  making  the 
centre  the  point  £  and  the  fpace  E  G  deferibe 
3tcirde,and  it  (hall  cut  the  line  E  //.  Let  the 
fame  circle  be  G  K:  and  from  the  common 
ife&ib  of  the  circles,  which  let  be  the’point  if, 
draw  rhefe  right  lines  K D  and  If  E.  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  the  point  D  is  the  centre  of  the  cir¬ 
cle  H  K  F,  therefore^ by  the  1 5,  definition  JltheliijeD  K,is  equall  to  the  line  D  H, that 
is  vnto  the  fine  A  C.  Agayne  forafmuch  as  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  G  K,  therefore 
•theline  E  If  is  equal  to  theline  EG,thatis,to  the  line  B  C.  And  forafmuch  as  thefetwo 
lines  A  B  and  A  C,are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  D  E  and  D  A", and  the  bale 2?  C is  equal 
to  the  bale  E  K(t or  E  Kis  equall  to  E  G  (by  the  1 5 .definition)  &  EG  is  put  to  be  equal 
to  B  C).Whereforef  by  the  4.propofitidn)the angle  B  A  Cis  equal  to  the  angle  E  D  K, 
But  the  angle  E  D  Ki s  greater  then  the  angle  ED  F :  wherefore  alfo  the  angle  B  A  C,if 
greater  then  the  angle  £  D  Ftwhich  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Tk  1 


ofEuclides  Elemenfes.  FoL]6 . 

The  17.  T htoreme.  (Thei6fPropoftim . 

.#2  j  _r j; “  ■' ’•  *  ''  1  -  . •.  s ;  ' •  • 

ffmo  triangles  haue  two  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  two  an¬ 
gles  of  the  other, ecb  to  his  correftondent  angle, and  haue  alfo 
one  fide  of the  one  equall to  one fide  of the  other ,  either  that 
fide  which  lie th  betwene  the  equal! angles,  or  that  which  is 
fukended  vnder  one  of  the  equallangles:  the  other jides  alfo 
of  the  onefalbe  equal!  to  the  other fides  of  the  other,  eche  to 
Us  correfpondent fide,  and  the  other  angle  of  the  one  jhalbe 
equal!  to  the  other  angle  of  the  other. 


Vppofe  that  there  he  t*too  triangles  A  B 
C,atid  D  E  E,hauing  Vtoo  angles  of  the 
one ,  that  is  .the  angles  A  BC,andB  C  A, 
e  quail  to  n>o  angles  of  the  other,  that  is, 
to  the  angles  ID  E  F,and  E  FD,ech  to  his  correfpo 
dent  angle, that  is, the  angle  AB  C,  to  the  angle  D 
EF,and  the  angle  B  C  A  to  the  angle  EFDyind  one 
fide  of  the  one  e  quail  to  one fide  of  $  other, firft  that 
fide  Ttshich  lieth  betlpene  the  equall  angles  ,  that  is, 
the  fide  BC, to  the  fide  EF.The  I  fay  that  the  other 
fides  alfo  of  the  one fhalbe  equall  to  the  other  fides  of  the  other, ecb  to  his  cor  re* 
f pendent  fide,thatis,the  fide  A  B,to  the fide  V  E,and  the  fide  A  C,to  the  fide 
DF,and  the  other  angle  of the  one, to  the  other  angle  of  the  other, that  is,  the 
angle  BA  C  to  the  angle  E  ID  FJFor  if the fide  A  B  be  not  equall  to  the  fide  T> 
Ejthe  one  of  them  is  greater ,  Let  the  fyde A  B  be  greater :  and  ( by  the  5  .propo 
fiiion)  Vnto  the  line  T>  E,put  an  equall  line  GB,and  drafts  a  right  line  from  the 
point  G,to  the  point  C.  ISLoSts  for  a  [much  as  thedine  G  B,  is  equall  to  the  line  D 
E,ahd  the  line  BC  to  the  line  E  F ^therefore  thefe  tstso  lines  G  B  and  B  C,  are 
equall  to  thefe  tSt>o  lines  ID  E  and  EFjhe  one  to  the  other, and  the  angle  GBC 
is  (by  fuppofition)  equall  to  the  angle  D  E  F.V therefore  (by  the  jp.propojy* 
tion )  the  bafe  G  Cis  equall  to  the  bafe  T>  F,  and  the  triangle  GCB  is  equall  to 
the  triangle  DUE, and  the  angles  remayningare  equall  to  the  angles  remay • 
ning  vnderTvhichare fubtended  equall fydes  .Wherefore  the  angle  GCB  is  o 
quail  to  the  angle  DFE.But  the  angle  D  EE  is  fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  an 
gle BC A.W here for e(by  the firfi common jentence)the angle  BCG'ts equal 
to  the  angle  B  CA,the  lefie  angle  to  the greater -.fvbich  is  impofiible .  Where- 
fore  the  line  A  B  is  not  Vne  quail  to  the  line  'DE.Wherefore  it  is  equall  And  the 
the  line  B  C  is  equall  to  the  line  E  F:now  therefore  there  are  tUso fydes  A  B  and 

Kjiq.  BC 


Dentonfirati.n 
leading  to  an 
abfurditk* 


iB  C  equal!  to  tV>o  fydes  t>  E  and  S  fi ,  the  one  to  tbeother,and  the  angle  AftC, 
if  equal!  to  the  angleD  EE .Wherefore(by  the  4-propofition)the  bafe  AC  is 
equal!  to  the  bafe  D  E^and  the  angle  remay ning  ft  AC  is  equal!  to  the  angle  re 
mayning  ED  F, 

Agaynefuppofe  that  the  fydes ful  tending  the  equaU  angles  be  equall  the 
one  to  the  other  Jet  the  fyde  I  fay  AD  be  equal!  to  the  fyde  D  E.  Then  agayne  l 
fiyjkat  the  other  fydes  of  the  one  are  equal!  to  the  other  fydes  o f the  other ,ech 
to  his  correfpondent  fyde, that  is  the  fyde  AC  to  the fyde  D  E,and  the  fyde  ft  C 
to  the  fyde  E  F :  and  moreouer  the  angle  remayning,  namely ,  ft  A  C,  is  equall 
to  the  angle  remayningy  that  is,  to  the  angle E  VF.  For  if  the  fyde  ft  C  he  not 
equall  to  the  fyde  E  F,the  one  of  them  is  greater:  let  the  fyde  ftCJfit  be  pofii* 
He ,  be  greater .  And  (by  the  third  proportion)  Vnto  the  line  EF,put  an 
equall  line  ft  H,and  dr  an?  e  a  right  line  from  the  point  J A  to  the  point  0,  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  ft  Bis  equall  to  the  lineE  E ,  and  the  line  A  ft  to  the 
line  D  E, therefore  thefe  tn?oJydes  A ft  and  ft  0,  are  equall to  thefe  tn>o  fydes 
D  Eand  EF, the  one  to  the  other, and  they  contdine 
equa  11  angles, V Vi here  fore  (by  the  A.propofitmi)  the 
bafe  A  His  equall  to  the  bafe  D  E,and  the  triangle 
A  ft  H,is  equall  to  the  triangle  D  E  F^and  the  an*  c 

gtes  remayning  are  equall  todhe  angles  remayning, 

Vnder'tobtcb  ar  fubteded  equalfydes.VVherfore  the 
angle  ft  HA is  equall  to  the  angle  FED.  ftut  the 
angle  E  ED  is  equall  to  the  angle  ftCJ \  Where * 
fore  the  angle  ft  HA  is  equal  to  the  angle  ft  C  A \ 

Wherefore  the  outward  angle  of y  triangle  A  HC, 
namely, the  angle  ft  0  Ads  equall  to  the  inlvard  and  oppofite  angle  yiamely , to 
the  angle  HCAft»hich(by  the  \6  proportion)  is  impofible.Wherfore  the  fyde 
E  Fis  not'  Unequal!  to  the  fyde  ft  Cohere  fore  it  is  equall.  And  the fyde  A  ft  is 
equall  toy  fyde  D  Ei'toherefor  e  thefe  t'Hoo  fydes  Aft  andftC,are  equall  to  thefe 
two  fydes  DE  and.E  F,the  one  to  the  other,  and  they  contayne  equall  angles : 
W  her  fore  (by  the  ^propofitm  )the  bafe  A  C  is  equall  to  the  bafe  D  E:and  the 
triangle  A  ft  C,is  equall  to  the  triangle  D  EF,and  the  angle  remay  ning,name* 
fy,the  angle  ft  AC  is  equall  to  the  angle  remayning,  that  is, to  the  angle  EDF. 
If  there  fore  two  triangles  haue  Wo  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  tH>o  angles  of  the 
other,  ech  to  his  correfpondent  angle, and  haue  alfo  one  fyde  of the  one  equall  to 
qne. fyde  of  the  other, either  thatfydefohich  lietb  betToene  the  equall  angles,  or 
that  tohich  is  fub  tended  Vnder  one  of  the  equall  angles :  the  other  fydes  alfo  of 
the  one fhalbe  equall  to  the  other  fydes  of  the  other,  eche  to  his  correfpondent 
fide, and  the  other  angle  of the  one  fhalbe  equall  to  the  other  angle  of  the  other : 
Ifibicb  laces  required  to  be proued* 

Whereas  in  this  propofition  it  is  fay  de,  that  triangles  are  equall ,  which 
featuring  two  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  two  angles  ofthe  other, the  one  to  the  o- 

thcr, 


of Euclides  Elements .  FoLff. 

ther,  haue  alfo  one  fide  ofthc  one  cquall  to  one  fide  of  the  other,either  that  fide 
which  lieth  betwene  the  equal!  angles,  or  that  fide  which  fubtendeth  one  of  the 
equall  angles :th  is  is  to  be  noted  that  without  that  caution  touching  the  cquall 
fiie,the  propofition  fiiall  not  alway  e$  be  true.  As  for  example. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  rectangle  triangle  A  B  C.whofe  right  angle  let  be  at  the 
point  B,Sc  let  the  fide  B  C  be  greater  the  the  fide  B  ^4:and  produce  the  line  A  2?,f ro  the 
point  'B  to  the  point  D.And  vpo  the  right  line 
B  C  &  to  the  point  in  it  C,  make  vnto  the  angle 
B  AC  an  equal  angle(by  the  2  3 .  propofition), 
which  let  be  BCD ,8c  let  the  lines  BD  Sc  CD, be 
ing  produced  cocurrein  the  point  D .Now  thS 
there  are  two  triangles  A  B  C,and  BCD,w hich 
haue  two  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  two  an¬ 
gles  of  the  other,the  one  to  the  other,namely, 
the  angle  *ABC  to  the  angle  DBC  (for  they 
are  both  right  angles ),  Sc  the  angle  B  A  C,  to 
the  angle  BCD( by  conftru&ionjand  haue  al¬ 
fo  one  fide  of  the  one  equall  to  one  fide  of  the  other,  namely, the  fide  B  C,  which  is  co¬ 
ition  to  them  both.  And  yet  notwithftanding  the  triangles  are  not  equall  :for  the  tri¬ 
angle  B  DC,is  greater  then  the  triangle  AB  C.Forvpon the  right  line  BC,  and  to  the 
point  in  it  C,defcribe  an  angle  equall  to  the  angled  CB:  which  let  be  FCB( by  the  2  3 . 
propofition ).And  forafmuch  as  the  fide  B  C  was  fuppofed  to  be  greater  then  the  fide, 

AB ,  therefore  (by  the  1  S.propofition)  the  angle  B  AC  is  greater  then  the  angle  BC 
^,whereforealfotheangle5CDisgreaterthentheangle^CJP.  Wherefore  the  tri¬ 
angle  BCDis  greater  then  the  triangle  B  £f.  Agayne  forafmuch  as  there  are  two  tri¬ 
angles  A  B  £and  B  Cishauing  two  angles  of  the  one  equal  to  two  angles  of  the  other*, 
the  one  to  the  other,namely,the  angle  ABC  to  the  angle  FBCffor  they  are  both  right 
angles)  and  the  angled  CB  to  the  angle  FCB(by  conftru&ion),and  one  fide  of  the  one 
is  equall  to  one  fide  of  the  other,  namely,that  fide  which  lieth  betwene  the  equall  an- 
gles.thatis.the  fide  B  C  which  is  common  to  both  triangles.  Wherefore  (by  this  pro¬ 
pofition)  the  triangles  A  B  Cand  F  B  Care  equal. But  the  triangle  DBC  is  greater  the 
the  triangle  F2?C.  Wherefore  alfo  the  triangle  D  B  fis  greater  then  the  triangle  A  B 
C. Wherefore  the  triangles  ABC  and  D  B  C,  are  not  cquall.-notwithftanding  they  haue 
two  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  two  angles  of  the  other,the  one  to  the  other ,  and  one 
fide  of  the  one  equall  to  one  fide  of  the  other. 

The  reafon  wherof  is, for  that  the  equal  fide  in  one  triangle,  fubtedeth  one  of 
the  equall  angles, and  in  the  other  lieth  betwene  the  equal  angles. So  that  you  fee 
that  it  is  ol  necclfitie  that  the  equall  fide  do  in  both  triangles, cither  fubtend  one 
of  the  equall  anglcs,or  lie  betwene  the  equall  angles. 

Of  this  propofition  was  Thales  Milefius  theinuentor,  as  witncffethEude- 
inus  in  his  booke  of  Geometricall  enarrations,  Thales 

the  snuentcr  of 
this  fro fojstitss. 

clhe  i&FTheoreme.  Theij-Tropo/ttion* 

If  a  right  line  falling  vpon  two  right  lines  Jo  make  the  alter ~ 
nate  angles  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  thofe  two  right  lines 
are parallels  the  one  to  the  other . 


c  . 


ThefrflTdooke 

\  V ppofe  that  the  right  line  E  F falling  Vppon  thefe  Mo  right  lines  A  B 
\and  C  D^o  wake  the  alternate  angles  ^namely, the  angles  A  EF<&  E 
*F  V  equall  the  one  to  the  other  Ah  enl fay  that  A  B  is  a  parallel  line  to 
C  D.  For  if  not 3  then  thefe  lines  produced fhall 

mete  together  ^either  on  the fide  of  B  and  (Dyor  on 
23  njlrattan  the  fyde  of  A  ip  C.Let  them  be  produced  therfore , 
let  ri)em  mete  lflt  be  pofiible  on  the  fyde  of  B 
andVjn  the  point  G.  VF her  fore  in  the  triangle 
G  E  Ffthe  ouMar dangle  A  E  Fis  equal  to  the  m - 
trard and  oppofite  angle  E  F Gftohich  (by  the  f6- 
propo(ition}isimpofiible4  Wberfore  the  lines  AB 
and  C(D  beyng produced  on  the  fide  ofB  and 

jhallnot  meeteJn  like  forte  alfo  may  it  be  prouedthat  they  fhall  not  mete  on  the 
fyde  of  AandC ,  But  lines  Tbhiche  being  produced  on  no  fydemeete  together yare 
parrallell  lines  (by  the  lafi  definition:)wherforeA  B  is  a  parrallel  line  toC  T)Jf 
therfore  a  right  line  fallings pon  Mo  right  lines  ,do  make  the  alternate  angles 
equall  the  one  to  the  other:  thofe  Mo  right  lines  are parrallels  the  one  to  the  o* 
then  Ttthkh  'to&s  required  to  be  demonstrated . 


Tbit  mrde  al¬ 
ternate  9 ft  A  in 
tkmcn fenfet*. 

Hots  it  is  hdgtt 
in  this  plats. 
Whu  h  singles 
are  csUedalters 
fusts. 


This  worde  alternate  is  ofEuclide  in  diuers  places  diuerfiy  taken:  fomtimes 
forakind  offituation  in  place,andfomtimefbran  order  in  proportion,  in  which 
fignification  he  vfeth  it  in  the  v.booke,and  in  his  bokes  of  numbers.  And  in  the 
firftfignification  he  vfeth  it  here  in  this  place,  and  generally  in  all  hys  other 
bokes  ,hauing  to  do  with  lines  Sc  figures* And  thofe  two  angles  hecallech  alter¬ 
nate,  which  beyng  both  contayned  within  two  parallel  or  equidiftant  lynes  arc 
neither  angles  in  order,  nor  are  on  the  one  and  felfe  fame  fide,  but  are  feperated 
the  one  from  the  other  by  the  line  which  falleth  on  the  two  lines:  the  one  angle 
beyngaboue,and  the  other  beneath. 


T he  iy.Theoreme.  The  z8.  Tropoftion. 

ffa  right  line  fatting  ypon  two  right  lines ,ma^e  the  outward 
angle  equall  to  the  inward  and  oppofite  angle  on  one  and  the 
fame  fyde, or  the  inwar de  angles  on  one  and  the  fame  fyde ,  e- 
quail  to  two  right  angles ithoje  two  right  lines ) hall  be paraU 
lets  the  one  to  the  other • 


Vppofethat  the  right  line  EF^  fallyng  Vppon  thefe  Mo  right  lines 
A  B  andCfDfio  make  the  outward  angle  EGB  equall  to  the  inward 
and  oppofite  angle  G  H  T>,or  do  make  the  inward  angles  on  one  and 

the 


of  Euelides  Element es. 


FoLfi. 


the  fme  jidejbat  is,  the  angles  BGH  andGHD 
equall  to  tibo  right  anglesXhen  I  fay  that  the  lyne  A 
IB  is  a  parallel  line  to  the  lyne  C  DEorforafmuchas 
the  angle  E  G  Bis(byfuppofition)equall  to.  the  an* 
gle  G  HD^and  the  angle  E  G  B  is(by  the  1 5  .pro* 
pofition)equdll to  the  angle  jiGH:  therfore  the  an* 
gle  AJj...  ft  he quail  to  the  angle  G  HD :  and  they 
are  alternate  angles.VVherj or e( by  the  zy. pro  pop* 
tUn)  AB  is  a  parallel  line  to  C  ID. 

Agaynefdrafmuch  as  the  angles  BGH  and  G  HD  are  (by  fuppo/ition)e» 
quail  ionvo  right  angles  &  ( by  the  i^propofition )tbe  angles  J.  G  H  and  BG 
H,ar  ealfo  equall  to  tVo  right  angles,  therefore  the  angles  AG  Hand'B  G 
H}  are e  quail  to  the  angles  BGH  and  G  HD:  take  avay  the  angle  BGH 
vhich  is  common  to  them  both  Wherfore  the  angle  nmainyng,namety,AGH 
is  equall  to  the  angle  remay  ning,namely, to  G  H  D.And  they  are  alternate  an* 
gles.  VVherfore(by  the  former  proportion)  A  B  isaparallell  line  to  CD ,  If 
therfore  a  right  line  fallyng  Vpon  tvo  right  lines, do  make  the  outward  angle  e* 
quail  to  the  inward  and  opposite  angle  on  one  and  the  fame  fide, or  the  invar  de 
angles  on  one  and  the  fame  (ideyequall  to  tVo  right  angles, thofe  tVo  right  lines 
Jhall  be  parallels  the  one  to  the  otherivhich  Vas  required  to  be  proued , 

Ptolomeus  dcmonftrateth  the  fecond  part  of  this  propofition,  namely,  that 
the  two  inward  angles  on  one  and  the  fame  fide  being cqual^the  right  lines  arc 
parellels,afterthis  manner* 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  A B  and  C  T), and  let  a  certaync  right  line  E 
FCj  H  cuttethemin  fuche  forte,  that 
it  make  the  angles  B  F  g  and  FGD  e- 
quail  to  two  right  angles.  Then  I  fay, 
that  thele  right  lines  zAB  and  CD  are 
parallel  lines,that  is, they  fhall  not  con- 
curre.For  if  it  be  poffibledet  the  lines  B 
F  and  G  D  being  produced  concurrc  in 
thepointeK.  Noweforafmucheas  the 
right  line  E  F  itandeth  vppon  the  right 
line  A 2?,therfore(by  the  1  ^.proporti¬ 
on  Jit  maketh  the  angles  zA F  £,  and  B 
FE  equall  to  t  wo  right  angles :  Iikewife  forafmuch  as  the  line  E  g  ftandeth  vpo  the  line 
C  Z^therforef  by  the  fame  propofition  Jit  maketh  the  angles  CG  F  and  D  g  F  equall  to 
two  right  angles.  Wherfore  the  foure  angles  B  FE,  zAF  E,  CG  F,  and ‘Z>  C7  Fare  equal 
to  foure  right  angles :  of  which  the  two  angles  B  F  G  and  FGD  are(by  fuppofition)  e- 
quall  to  two  right  angles,wherfore  the  angles  remaining,namely,  zAV  G  and  C(?F  are 
alfo  equall  to  two  right  angles  .if  therfore  the  right  lines  F  B  and  G  D  being  produced 
(the  inward  angles  being  equall  to  two  right  angles  Jdo  concurre,  then  fhall  the  lynes 
FA3.n6.GC  being  produced  concurre.  For  the  angles  AY  G  and  CG  F  are  equall  to 
two  right  angles.For  either  the  right  linesfhall  concurre  on  either  fide,  or  els  on  nei¬ 
ther  fide.For  that  on  either  fide  the  angles  are  equall  to  two  right  angles.  Wherefore 
let  the  right  lines  FA  and  GC  concurre  in  the  point  L.Wherefore  the  two  right  lines 
LAFKandLCGK  do  comprehends  ipace,  which  (by  the  6.  petition) is impofiu 

L.ij,  ble. 


S 


DmtnftrnMis 


An  $ther  cUm$- 
Jlrnthn  of  the 
fccondptsrt  af 
this  prtfffitien 
after  i'tekmex* 


ThefirftBooke 

He.Wherfore  itis  not  poflible  that  the  inward  angles  being  equal  to  two  right  angled 
the  right  lines  fhould  concurrc.  Wherefore  they  are  parallels :  which  was  required  to 
beproucd.  '  c  ^  5  •  n 


ittmznfifAUon 
Seeding  ft  <f* 

fjrftgart. 


The  lo.Theoreme.  The  zyfPropofition. 

...  '  ■  ■ 

fright  line  line falling  rppon  two  parallel  right  lines :  ma- 
hpththe  alternate  angles  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  andal- 
fo  the  oumarde  angle  equdtl  to  the  inwarde  andoppojite  an- 
glean  one  and  thejamefideiand  moreouerthe  inwarde  an¬ 
gles  on  one  and  the  fame  fide  equall  to  two  right  angles. 


Vppofe  tlxttppon  theft  parallel  lines  A  Band  C  IDd&fal 
the  right  line  E  F.  Then  I  fay  that  the  alternate  an* 
gles  ibbkk  it  maketh,  namely  r  the  angles  A  G  H  and 
G  H  Bf^are  equad  the  one 
to  the  other. andy  the  out* 
li?ard  angle  EGBis  equal 
\to  the  in'toarde  and  oppo* 
fite  angle  on  the  fame: fide 9 
namely yto)  angle  G  H  B:andj  the  inward  an¬ 
gles  on  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide ythat  is^the  an -  c 
ales BG  Band G  HT>, are  equad  to  two  right 
Angles. For  if  the  angle  AGHbe  not  equal  to  the 
angle  G  H  ID, the  one  of  them  is greater. Let  the  angle  AGH  he  greater.  And 
for af much  as  the  angle  AG  His  greater  then  the  angle  GH  Vrput  the  angle 
B  G  Hcommo  to  theboth.Wherforey  angles  A  GHand  BGH,  aregreater 
the y  angles  BG  H&GB iD.  But by  ey  i$ .  propofitio)  angles  AGHzsrB 
GHare  e  quad  to  ttfo  right  angles, "toher fore  y  angles  BGH  er  GHD  arelefie 
the  two  right  angles. But  (hy)  $. petition )  ifvpotWo  right  lines  do  fall  a  right 
line  yaking)  inward  angles  on  one  and y  fame  fide, le fie  the  Ctoo  right  angles, 
thofe  right  lines  being  inftmtly  produced  muft  ncedesaty  length  meete  on  the. 
fide  Ipherin  are  the  angles  kffe  the  tSto  right  angks^VVherfore  the  right  lines 
A  B  and  C ID  being  infinitely  produced  'toillat)  length  meete. But  they  cannot 
meete, becau ft  they  are  paradels(hyfiuppofition):^berfore  the  angle  A  G  Bit 
not  -vnequaU  to  the  angle  GHDi'tokerfore  it  is  equad. 

And  the  angle  A  G  His(by  the  i<;.propofition)equall  to  the  angle  EG  % 
VVherfore  (by  the  fir  ft  common fentence)  the  angle  E  ’Q  Bis  equad  to  the  an* 

^  But  the  angle  B  G  H common  to  them  botkwherfore  the  angles  EG  B 

and  B  GH,are  equall  to  the  angles  BG  Hand  G  HV.But  the  angles  RGB 

and 


ofEucluIes  Elements*  FoL]p. 

md  <BGH  are  (by  the  i^propofition)eqmM  to  ftoo  ri*h  t  angles ,  VJ? he  re  fore 
the  angles  BGB  and  G  HD  are  alfe  equattmtm-  right  angles.  If  a  lyne 
therfore  do  fall  Vpo  two  parallel  right  lines:kmd^tly  th£naltermte^arigles  equal 
the  one  to  the  other.and alfo  the  outward  itngieftq-udltd  the  inipard  and  oppoo 
fhe  angle' on  one  and  the  fame  fide\ and  momm  et  the  inward  angles  on  one  and 
the  fame  fyde  equallto  tSho  right  angles:  yahiche  'Was  required  to  he  demon* 
Jirated,  . 

This  proportion  is  the conuerfe  ofthe  'two  proportions  next  going  before. 
Fo^that  which  in  cither  of  thernjs  the  thing  fought,or  c5cluron}is  in  this  the 
tin  ng  geucnjor  fupportiotfi And  contrati wile  the  thiri'gcs  which  in  them  were 
geuen  orfupportions3areinthis  proued,ahdafecidhciiirons4 

.4  ■.  '  '•  :v\  ‘  ''A  f\  v V.'Vv  V>  : 

’Telit arins after  this  proportion  addeth  this  witty  conchifioiv* 

■  .  . ; '  '  .  .  .  -  ... 

I- '  F  ■  V  '  •’ 

If  two  right  lines  tybich  cut. Wo  parallellipes  filo  be  Went  thefajde  parallel  lines  conairrs  in  a 
point fdndmahe  the  alternate  angles  equally  or  the  onward  angle  equall  to  the  irWardand  oppofite 
angle  on  the fame  fide  ,cr finally  the  tveo  inward  angles  on  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide,  equall  to  Wo  right 
angles  uhofe  Wo  right  Imes  are :  draft  endiretlly  and  make  one  right  line. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  ex/  B  and  Gif, which  let  cut  two  parallel  lines 
JD  £  and  F  G:  and  let  ^  B  cut  the  line  D  E  in  the  pOintAAand  let  C  B  cut  the  line  F  G  in 
the  point  K:8c  let  the  lines  A  B  ScC  B,c oncurre  betwene  the  two  parallel  lines  DE@z 
F  G  in  the  point  B  :  and  let  the  angle  D  HBbt  s- 
qualto  the  angle  B  K  G :  or  let  the  angle  A  HD  be 
equall  to  the  angle  B^K-F:  orfinally  let  the  angles 
B  H  D  and  B  KF  be  equal  to  two  right  angles.Thc 
I  fay  that  the  two  lines  ABandBC  are  drawen  di 
re£lly,.and  do  make  one  right  line.  For  if  they  be 
not,then  produce  AB  vnti!  it  cut  FG  in  thepoint 
Ii.anH  let  A  L  he  one  righ  t  line, and  fo  ihal  be  made 
the  triangle  B  L  K.  Now  then  (  by  the  firft  part  of 
this  29.pfopofition)the  angle  DHB  dial  be  equal 
to  the  alternate  angle  (]  L  B:  but(by  fuppofitionj 
the  angle  D  H  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  A  KG.  Wherefore  the  angle  B  L  G is  equall  to 
the  angle  B  KL}  namely,  the  outward  angle  to  the  inwarde  and  oppofite  angle:which 
(by  the  i  <5.propofition Jis  impolfible. 

Moreouer  ( by  the  fecodpart  of  this  29.  propofitio  Jthe  angle  A-H-D  lhalbe  equal 
to  the  angle  B  L  AT,  namely,  the  outward  angle  to  the  inward  and  oppofite  angle  on 
one  and  the  fame  fide.  But  the  fame  angle  AH  D  is  fuppofed  to  be  equal!  to  the  angle 
B  K  Fiwherefore  the  angle B  K  Fis  equall  to  theangle B  L  A'. Which  (by  the  felfe  fame 
1 6.  propofition)  is  impolfible.  *  ,  -  .  (  . 

.  Laftly  forafmuchas  the  angles  B  HT)  and  B  KF  are  fuppofed  to  beeqtiall  to  twfO 
right  angles,  &  the  angles  B  H  D  &BLKatealfo  by  thelaftpart  ofthis  appropofiti- 
on  equal  to  two  right  angles,therefore  the  angle B  K  F  lhalbe  equal  to  the  angle-B  LK; 

which  agayne  by  the  felfe  fame  i£-propofition  is  impolfible, 

IhezifEheoreme  The  ^.Tropofition* 

"Might  lines  which  are  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
right  lineiare  alfo parrallel  lines  the  one  to  the  other . 

L.Hj.  Suppofe 


7  his prop  oft  toss 
is  the  conuerfe 
ofthe  two  for¬ 
mer  propofttisi. 


An  addition  of 
Pelitarim. 


Demonftratim.  . 
leading  tp  an 
alfitrditie t 
Fir  ft  part. 


Second  pare. 


Third  part? 


ThefirftBooke 

Vppofetbat  thefe  right  lines 
f,  A  B  and CD, be  parallel  lines 
to  theright  line  EF.  Then  I 
Jay, that  the  line  A  B  is  a  parallel  line 
foC<D.Let  there  fatlDpon  the/e  the 
lines  a  right  line  G  HKf  Andforaf • 
much  as  the  right  line  G HI f  falleth 
yppon  thefe  parallel  right  lines  AB 
and  EF,therfore(by  the  prop  oft  ion 
~^VJ:uvV<\a  going  before) the  angle  A  G  H  is  e* 
quail  to  the  angle  G HR. Agayne  for* 
ajmuch  as  the  right  line  G  If  falleth 
yppon  thefe  parallel!  right  lines  E  F 
and  C  D ^therefore  (by  the  fame)  the 


A  ..  . 

a/ 

B 

E 

/h 

jr 

T.  •>  .  -* 

i  / 

r-£  -i  >•  ",  * 

C  ■  - 

-  .  '  ]  f'r‘  ■ 

/& 

A 

•1;  1  T~  ' •  • 

Anciheretefem- 
sh&e  Prsile/zutf  1 


angle  GHF'u  equal! to  the  angle  G  JfJD.lS{pTi>  thenit  proued  that  the  angle  A 
G  H  is  equal!  toy  angle  G  HE,  andy  the  angle  G  KJD  is  e quail  to  the  angle 
G  HF.V E her  fore  the  angle  jiG  Kjs  e  quail  to  the  angle  G  KJD,  And  they 
are  alternate  anglesiwherfore  AB  is  a  parallelline  to  C  DRight  lines  therfore 
ft  hid?  are  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfefame  right  line, are  alJo  paraM  lines  the 
me  to  the  other:  Trbicb  y?as  required  to  be  proued . 

EuciideirathedemonfkationofthisprQpofmQn,  fetteth  the  two  parallel 
Isneswhich  are  compared  to  one,  in  the  extremes ,  and  theparrallcl  towhomc 
they  are  compared,he  piacetli  in  the  middle ,  for  the  eaficr  demonftration .  Ic 
may  alfo  be  proued  euen  by  a  principle  onely.  For  if  they  fhouldc  conairrc  oa 
any  oncfide,thcy  {houldconcurrealfo  with  the  middle  iinc^andfojfliould  they 
not  be  parallels  vnto  it, which  yet  they  are  fuppofed  to  be* 

But  if  you  will  altertheir  pofition  and  placing.andfet  that  line  to  which  you 
will  copare  the  other  two  lines  ,aboue,or  beneath:  you  may  vie  the  famedemon 
fixation  which  you  had  before.  As  for  example. 

Suppofe  that  the  fines  A B  and  CD  be 
parallels  to  the  fine  £  F :  and  let  both  the 
lines  A  B  and  CD ,  be  abouc ,  and  let  the 
line  EF  be  beneath,and  not  in  the  middeft. 

Vpon  which  -let  the  right  fine  GH  Ki all. 

And  forafmuch  as  either  of  the  angles  KH 
DandAfC-Sisequall  to  the  angle  H  KE9 
(for  they  ar  alternate  angles  Jtherforc  they 
are  (by  the  firft  common  feutence  Jcquall 
'the  one  to  the  other.Whereforefby  the  28 
propofition) the  right  lines  AB  and  £F» 
are  parallels. 

But  here  ifa  man  will  obieft  that  the  lines  E  K  and  K  F,  are  parallels  vnto 
she  line  C  D,and  therefore  are  parallels  the  one  to  theother.  V  Ve  will  anfwere 
that  die  lines  E  K  and  K  Fare  partes  of  one  parallel  line,and  are  not  two  parallel 

lines. 


A 

A 

B 

c 

V 

E 

A 

r 

FoL\  o. 


liaes.For  parallel  lines  a  r  vnderffandedtobe  produced  infirmly  But  E  K  being 
producedifalleth  vpou  K  F*Wherefore  it  is  one  and  the  felfe  fame  with  it,  and 
not  an  other,  wherefore  all  the  partes  of  a  parrallelline  are  parallel  s ,  both  to  the 
right  line  vnto  which  the  whole  parallel  line  is  a  paralleled  alfo  to  al  the  parts 
of  the  fame  right  line*  As  thelineEK  is  a  parallel  vnto  HD,and  the  lineK  Eto 
the  line  C  H*  For  if  they  be  produced  infinitly  ,they  will  neuer  conciirre, 

Howbeit  there  are  fome  which  like  not,  thattwo  diftindt  parellel  lines, 
fhouldbe  taken  and  counted  for  one  parallel  line:  for  that  the  continuall  quan¬ 
tity  ,namely, the  line  is  cutafonder,andcefTeth  to  be  one*  Wherefore  they  fay, 
that  there  ought  to  be  two  diftind  parallel  lines  compared  to  one.  And  therfore 
they  adde  to  the  proportion  acorredion,  in  this  man er.  Two  lines  being  parallels  to 
one  line ;  are  either  parallels  the  one  the  other ,or  els  the  one  is  fet  dirtRly  again  fie  the  other 3fo  that  if 
they  be  produced  they  fliouldmake  one  right  line.  As  for  example * 


H 


B 


Suppofe  that  the  lines  C  D  and  £  F  be  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  line  A B 
and  let  them  not  be  parallels  the  one  to  the  other.  Then  I 
fay,that  the  two  lines  CD  &  £  £,are  diredly  fet  the  one  to 
the  other.  For  for  as  much  as  they  are  not  parallel  lines,  A 
letthemconcurreinthe  point  G,  And  from  the  point  G 
draw  a  line  cutting  the  line  AB  in  the  point  H.Now  by  the 
former  propofition  the  angles  AHG  &.HGC  are  equall 
to  two  right  angles,but  by  the  fame  propofitio,  the  angle  — 

A  H  g,is  equall  to  the  alternate  angle  H  G  f*  Wherefore  G 
the  angles  HG  C and  HG Fare  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Wherefore  (by  the  iqpropofitionJthelinesC’G’  and  FG 
are  drawen  diredly  and  make  one  right  line.  Wherfore  al¬ 
fo  the  lines  C  D  and  £  F  are  fet  diredly  the  one  to  the  other:  and  being  produced  they 
will  make  one  right  line. 


G  E 


r 


$&The  lo.Trobleme,  The luBropoJition* 

By  a  point  geuen  Jo  draw  vnto  a  right  line  geuen  ^  a  parallel 
line . 


^^^Tppofe  that  the  point  geuen  be 
ytfind let  the  right  line geuen  be  e 
fg  q  it  is  required  by  the  point 
geuen  yiamely  Jffio  draft  Vnto  the  right 
line  ©  C?a  parallel  line.  Take  in  the  line 
C  a  point  at  alladuentures 9  and  let  the 
fame  be  D.and  (by  the firft peticio)dralb 
a  right  line  from  the  point  A,  to  the  point 
D.And  (by  the  2  3  .propofition)  Vpon  the 
right  line geuen  A  T)}and  to  the  point  in 
it  geuen  A^make  an  angle  VAE^quall  to  ^  v  0 

the  angle  geuen  A  VC.  And  (by  the  14 , 

propofition) put  vnto  the  line  yf  E  the  line  A  FdtreHly^  in  fuch  forte  that  they 

LJUi  both " 


Parallellines 
are  ^nderfian* 
ded  to  be  fro  dan¬ 
ced  infinitely. 


Gwflru&it*. 

Deimnftrathn. 


TheJirB^Boo^e 

both  make  one  right  line.  And  fora/much  as  the  right  line  A  D  falling  Vpon  the 
right  lines  ft  C  and  E  F,doth  make  the  alternate  angles ,namely,E AD tand  A 
IDC equally  one  to  the  other, ther for  e(by  theiy,propofition)EFis a  parallel 
line  toft  C.Wherfore  by  the  point  geuen  ynamely  A,is  draWne  to  the  right  line 
geuen  ftCa  parallel  line  E  A  F:  which  "teas  required  to  he  done „ 


This  proportion  is  to  be  vnderftandcd  ofa  point  geuen  without  the  line  ge- 
uen,and  in  fuch  forte  alfo,  that  the  fame  line  geuen  being  produced, doo  not  fail 
vppon  the  pointc  geuen* 

The  n.Theoreme.  The  izfPropofition* 

ffoneofthefydes  of  any  triangle  be  produced:  the  outwarde 
angle  that  it  ma\eth,is  equal  to  the  mo  inward  and  oppofite 
angles. ^And  the  three  inwar de  angles  ofa  triangle  are  equall 
totWorwbt  anvles. 


Vppofej  A  ft  C  he  a  triangle, 
produce  one  of yfides  therm 
of  namely  yC ft  to  the  point  e  ID. 

Then  Ifay ,  that  the  outWarde 
angle  A  CD  is  equallto  the  two  inward  e 
and  oppoflte  angles  C  Aft  &  AftCiandy 
the  three  inwar  de  angles  of  the  triangle , 
that  is, the  angles  A  ft  C,ftC  A,and  C  A 
ft  are  equall  to  two  right  angles.  For(by 
the  propofit  ion  going  before  )rayfe  Vpfro 
the  point  C,a  parallel  to  the  right  line  A  b 
ft, and  let  the  fame  be  C  E.Andforafmuch 
as  Aft  is  a  parallel  to  C  E,and  Vpon  them  fade  th  the  right  line  ACx  therefore 
the  alternate  angles  ft  AC  and  ACE  are  equaU  the  one  to  the  other ,  Agayne 
forafmuch  as  A  ft  is  a  parallel  Vnto  C  E,and  Vpon  them  faUeth  the  right  line  ft 
D,tber fore  the  outward  angle  EC  D  is  (by  the  zy.propofition)  equallto  the 
inward  and  oppoflte  angle  A  ft  C. And  it  is  proued  that  the  angle  A  C  E  is  equal 
to  the  angle  ft  AC:  wherfore  the  whole  outwarde  angle  A  CD  is  equall  to  the 
two  inward  and  oppoflte  angles, that  is, to  the  angles  ft  AC  and  A  ft  CJPut  the 
angle  AC  ft  common  to  them  both,VFherfore  the  angles  AC D and  A  C  fttare 
equall  to  thefe  three  angles  AftQftC  A,and  ft  AC.  ftut  the  angles  AC  Do* 
AC  ft  are  equall  to  two  right  angles  (by  the  ij.  propofition)iwherfort  the  angles 
A  C  ft,  C  ft  A,  and  C  A  ft  are  equall  to  two  right  angles .  If  t  her  fore  one  of  the 
fides  of  any  triangle  be  produced,the  outward  angle  that  it  mahthfls  equad  to 
the  two  inward  and  oppoflte  angles.  And  the  three  inward  angles  ofa  triangle 

are 


of Euclide  $  Elements s . 


Fol.^u 


are  e  quail  to  ffro  right  angles:  Tfrhicb  was  required  to  he  demonfirated, 

Euclide  demonftrateth  either  part  ofthis  compofcd  Theoreme,by  drawyng  fro 
one  angle  of  the  triangle  a  parrallel  line  to  oneofthcfides  of  the  fame  triangle, 
withoutthe  triangle.  Either  part  therof  may  alfo  be  proued  without  drawyng  of 
a  parallel  linewithoutthe  triangle,  only  chaunging  the  order  of  the  thinges  re¬ 
quired  or  conclufious.For  Euclide firftproueth  that  the  outwarde  angle  of  atri • 
angle(oneofhisfides  beyngproduced)is  equallto  thetwo  inwardeand  oppofne 
angles;  and  by  that  he  proueth  the  fecond  part:  namely,that  the  3  .inward  angles 
o  fa  triangle  are  equall  to  two  right  anglesJBut  here  it  is  contrariwile.  Forfirft  is 
proued  that  the  three  inward  angles  ofa  triangle  are  equallto  two  right  angles, 
and  by  that  is  proued  the  other  part  oftheTheoreme,  namely,  that  one  fide  ofa 
triagle  beyng  produced,  theoutward  angle  is  equal  to  the  two  inward  and  oppo¬ 
fite  angles,And  that  after  this  maner* 


Suppofe  that  there  be  a  triangle  ABC, and  produce  the  fide  BC  to  the  point  E.  And  take 
in  the  line  B  C at  al  a  point  auentures  which  let  be  F : 
&drawalinefroin^toF.AndbythepointFdrawe  A  n 

vnto  the  line^S  a  parallel  line  (by  the  former  pro- 
pofition)which  let  be  F  D,  Now  forafmuch  as  F  D  is 
a  parallell  vnto  A  B, and  vpon  them  falleth  the  right 
line  AF,and  alfo  the  right  line2?C,therfore  the  alter¬ 
nate  angles  are  equalhand  alfo  the  outward  angle  is 
equall  to  the  inward  angle.Wherefore  the  whole  an¬ 
gle  A  F  C is  equall  to  the  angles  F  A  B  and  ABF.  And 
by  the  fame  reafon(if  by  the  point  F  we  draw  aparal- 
lel  line  to  the  line  A  C)  may  we  proue  that  the  angle 
A  F  B  is  equall  to  the  angles  F  A  C,and  A  C  F . Wherfore  the  two  angles  A FB  8c  AFC 
are  equall  to  the  three  angles  of  the  triangle  A  B  C.But  the  two  ang  lesAFB  8c  AFC 
are(by  the  1 3  .prop  ofition)equall  to  two  right  angles,  Wherfore  alfo  the  three  angles 
of  the  triangle  ABC  are  equall  to  two  right  angles. 

But  the  angles  ACF  and  <^ACE  are  alfo  (by  the  13.  propofition)  equall  to  two 
right  angl  es  .Take  away  the  angle  A  C  F  which  is  common ,  w herfore  the  an  gle  remai- 
ning,namely,the  outward  angle  ACEis equall  to  the  two  angles  remaining,  namely, 
to  the  two  inwarde  and  oppofite  angles  A B  C and  C  A B ;  which  was  required  to  be 
proued. 


Eudemus  affirmeth  that  the  latter  part  ofthis  Theoremc ,  The  three  angles  ofa 
triangle  are  equall  tot\\>oright  angles, was  fir  ft  foundout  by  Jp  thagoras^whofe  demon; 
ftration  thereof  is  thus. 


Suppofe  that  there  be  a  triangle  AB  Crand  by  the  points,  draw  (by  the  former 
propofition)  vnto  the  line  £C,a  parallel  line,  which  let  beD£.And  forafmuch  as  the 
right  lines -BCand-DfEare  parallels, and  vpon  them  falleth 
the  right  lines  A  B  and./4C,therefore(by  the  2p.  propofiti-  T> 
onj  the  alternate  angles  are  equall.  Wherefore  the  angle  D 
A B  is  equall  to  the  angle  ABCran<X  the  angle  £^Ctothe 
angled  CB.  Adde  the  angle  B  A  C  common. Wherefore  the 
angles  DAB,  BA  C,CA  E ,  that  is,  the  angles  DAB  and#  B 
v4£,namely,two  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles^are  equal 
to  the  thre  angles  of  the  triangle^  B  C.  Wherfore  the  thre  angles  of  a  triangle  are  e- 
quail  to  two  right  angles:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  conuerfe  ofthis  propofition  is  thus* 

Mq.  If 


sth  other  de- 
manffratsea* 


The  latter  part 
ofthis  Theo  • 
remejirji  found 
tut  bj  IUthaga-. 
ras. 

T he  demanftra* 
tion  thereof  af¬ 
ter  him » 


The  canuerfeof 
shit  props  fit  ton. 


Demonfiratiom 
cf  the  firfl  part 
•fthe  canuerfe . 


Demonfiration : 
cf the  fecond 
part  of  the  con- 
oterfe. 


4  Cerrollarj. 


Euerj  right  li¬ 
fted  figure  is  re¬ 
fitted  in  tri¬ 
angles, 

A  triangle  is 
the fir (l  of  all fi- 
gures. 

Into  hove  many 
triangles  a  fi¬ 
gure  may  he  rc- 
feltttd. 


7  he  firfl  Boo{e 


If  the  outward  angle  of a  triangle  be  equall  to  the  tWo  inward  angles  oppofite  again  ft  it :  one  of  the 
fides  of  the  triangle  is  produced, and  the  line  without  the  triangle,  is  dravten  direttlj  to  the fide  of  the 
triangle, &  maketh  one  right  line  With  it.  And  if  the  thre  inWard  angles  of  a  rettiline figure  be  equal 
to  two  right  angles,thefkme  rettilinc figure  is  a  triangle » 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  triangle  ABC: and  let  the  outward  angle  A  CD  be  equal  to 
the  two  inward  &  oppofite  angles  A  B  Cand  CAB. Then 
I  fay  that  the  fide  BCis  produced  to  the  poynt  D,  And 
that  -5C2)  is  one  right line,For  forafmuch  as  the  angle 
ACD  is  equal  to  the  two  inward  &  oppofite  angles, addc 
the  angle  ACB  common.  Wherefore  the  angles  ACD 
and  ACB  are  equal  to  the  three  angles  of  the  triangle  A 
B  C  .But  the  three  angles  of  the  triangle  ABC  are  equall 
to  two  right  angles  Wherefore  alfo  the  two  angles  ACD 
and  ACB  are  equall  to  two  right  angles .  But  if  vnto  a  _ 
right  line,and  to  a  point  in  the  fame  line  be  drawen  two  B 
right  lines, not  both  on  one  and  the  fame  fide,  making 
the  fide  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles  :thofe  two  rightlines  fhal  be  drawe  dire&ly, 
and  make  one  right  linefby  the  H-propofirion.^Wherefore  the  right  line  BC  is  dra¬ 
wen  dire&ly  to  cue  line  C  D,  and  fo  is  B  CD  one  right  line;  which  was  required  to  be 
proued. 

Agayne  fuppofe  that  there  be  a  certayne  reftilincfigure  AB  C,hauing  onely  three 
ang'es,  namely,  at  the  pointejM^C:  which  angles  let  be  equal  to  two  right  angles 
Then  I  fay  that  *ABC  is  a  triangle-Firll^C  wrohe right 
line .  For  draw  the  line2?  D.  And  forafmuch  4s  in  either  A 

of  the  triau  gles  A  B  D  and  D  B  C,  the  three  angles  are  e- 
qua!  to  two  right  angle  s,of  which  the  angles  at  the  points 
e//,B,C,are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  Wherefore  the  an¬ 
gles  remayning, namely,  ADB  and  CDS  are  equall  to 
two  right  angles.  Whereforef  by  the  1 4-propofition )  the 
line  D  Cis  let  dire&ly  to  the  lineD  A,  Wherefore  the  fide 
AC  is  one  right  line.And  in  like  fort  may  we  proue  that 
the  fide  zABis  one  right  line,and  alfo  that  the  fide  BCis 
one  right  line.  Wherefore  the  figure  eA  B  Cis  a  triangle: 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


By  the  fec5d  part  of  this  29,propofitio,  namely  fhree  angles  of  a  triangle  are  equall 
to  tworight angles,  may  ealely  be  knowen ,  to  how  many  right  angles,  the  angles 
within  any  figure  hauing  right  lines  and  many  angles  are  equall.  As  arc  figures 
offower  angles, of fiue angles,offixe  angles, and  fo  confequently:  and  infinitly* 
And  this  is  to  be  noted , that  euery  rightlined  figure  is  icfolucd  into  triangle. 
For  that  a  triangle  is  the  firfl:  ofall  figures .  For  two  lines  accomplifh  no  figures 
V  Vherfore  how  many  fides  the  figure  hath, into  fo  many  triangles  may  it  be  rc- 
folued,fauing  two.As  if  the  figure  hauefowerfides,itis  refolucd  into  two  trian¬ 
gles, if  ithauefiuefides,into5.triangles:if6  fides  into  4, triangles,  andfo con¬ 
fequently  ,and  infinitly  .And  it  is  proued  that  the  three  angles  ofeuery  triangle 
are  equall  to  two  right  angles.  VYhereforeifyou  multiply  the  number  of  the 
triangles, into  which  the  figure  is  refolued,  by  two>youfhall  haue  the  num¬ 
ber  of  tightangles ,  to  which  theangles  of  thefigure  are  equall.  So  the  angles  of 
euery  qua  irangled  figure  are  equall  to  4,right  angles.  For  it  is  compofedoftwo 
triangles.  And  the  angles  ofafiue  angled  figure  are  equal  to  6-rightangles,  for  it 
is  compofed  of  three  triangles  ,andfo  forth  in  like  order. 

The  redieft  andapteftmanerto  reduce  any  rc&ilinc  figure  into  triangles,  is 

thus 


ofEuclides  Elementes , 


Eol\i, 


thus.From  any  one  angle  of  the  figure  to  euery  other  angle  (of  the  fame)  bey  iig 
oppofite  vnto  it,  drawe  a  right  liue,fo  (hall  you  haue  all  the  triangles  of  that  fi  * 
gure  described* 

In  a  quadragle, 
from  one  angle 
you  can  drawe 
butonelyne  to 
thcoppofice  an 
gle,by  which  it 
is  deuided  into 
two  triangles 
only.  In  a  pen¬ 
tagon  figu  re, 
from  one  angle 
you  may  draw 
lines  to  two  op 
polite  angles, 
and  fo  you  fhai 

haue  three  triangles, In  an  Hexhgon, you  may  from  One  angle  draw  lines  to  thre 
oppofiteangles,and  fo  fliall  you  haue  4.  triangles. In  an  heptagon, from  one  an¬ 
gle  may  be  drawne  lines  to  foure  oppofite  angles, and  fo  fhal  there  be  flue  trian^ 
gle.  And  fo  confequently  ofthc  reft*  As  you  fee  in  the  figures  here  fet. 


This  thing  may  alfo  be  thus  cxprefled.In  any  figure  of  many  fides, the  num-  Zotnbwrhilii- 
ber  of  the  angles  of  the  figure  doubled,  is  thenuber  of  the  right  angles  to  which  ZerofrightZZa* 
the  angles  ofthe  figure  are  cquall/auing*  foure.  As  for  example*  gfa  9itfo  which 

Let  there  be  an  hexagon  figure  ABODE  F,and  within  it  take  a  point  at  all  the«”Sl“  °f  '*• 
auentures,namely,G*  And  draw  from  the  fame  point  figure*™  w 

to  euery  one  ofthe  angles  a  right  line,8c  fo  dial  there 
be  comprehended  in  the  figure  fo  many  triangles,  as 
there  are  angles  in  the  fame.  Whereforeby  this  32,. 
propoficion  all  the  angles  of  thefe  triangles  taken  toa  c 
gether,arc  equall  to  double  fo  many  right  angles,  as 
there  beangles in  rhefigure*  Wdierefoteforafmuch 
as  there  are  fixe  triangles,  there  are  tweluc  right  an* 
glcs  .Butall  the  angles  at  the  point  G  arc  equall  to  4, 
right  angles  by  the  i^propofmon.  Wherefore  rake 
away  foure  out  oftwelue,and  there  reft  eight,  Wher 
fore  thefixe  angles  in  the  Hexagon  figure  are  equall  to  eight  right  angles. 

By  that  which  hath  now  bene  declared, it  foloweth  that  all  the  angles  of  any  fi- 
gure  hauing  many  fides, take  together,  are  equal  to  twife  fo  many  right  angles,  mcZcJJZj, 
as  the  figure  is  in  the  reaw  or  order  of  figures.A  triagle  is  the  firft  figure  in  order* 

&,his  angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles  .which  are  twife  one.  A  quadrangle  is  AtrUnsle  *he 
the  fecond  figure  in  order*  Wherfore  his  angles  are  equal  to  fower  right  angles  ** 

which  are  twife  two.The  order  offigures  is  gathered  ofthe  Tides,  For  if  you  rake  ^  ^draHle 
two  from  the  number  ofthe  fides  of  a  figure, the  number  of  thefidcs  remayning,  the  fcco”d> an* 
is  thenumber  oftheorder  ofthefigure.  As  if  you  will  know,how  many  in  order 
is  a  figure  of  fixe  fides:  from  fix(which  is  thenumber  of  his  fidcs)take  away  two*  offigures  hr* 
and  there  will  remains  foure.  VVherforca  figure  offixe  fides  is  the  fourth  figure  thsredv. 

M.u*  in 


A  B 


other  Cor - 

VelUtj. 


i  n  the  order  of  figures  .Then  double  fourc/o  {hall  you  hauc  cigh  r.  Wherefore 
the  angles  therof  arc  equal!  to  eight  right  angles. And  fo  of  alLoth  cr  figures. 


Hereby  alfoitis  manifeft, that  the  outward  angles  of  any  figure  of  many  fides 
taken  together, are  equall  to  fourc  right  anglcs.For  the  inwardc  angles  together 
with  the  outward  angles ,are  equall  to  twife  fo  many  right  angles, as  there  be  an¬ 
gles  in  the  figurc(by  the  i3.propofition)Bnt  the  inward  angles  are  equal  to  twife 
fomany  rightangles,  asthere  be  angles  in  the  figure,  fauyng  foure:  as  it  was  be¬ 
fore  declared.  VVherfore  the  outwardangles  are  always  equal  to  foure  right:  ana 
gles*  As  for  example. 

Suppofethat  there  be  a  pentagon3A  BCD  E.And  produce  the  fiue  fidcs  ther- 
-ofto  the  points  FjG^jKjL.Nowfby  thei^. 
propofitio)the  two  angles  at  the  point  A  fiiall 
be  equal  to  two  rightangles  .And(by  the  fame) 
the  two  angles  at  the  pointe  B  fhall  be  alfo  e- 
quall  to  two  right  angles*  And  fo  taking  eucry 
two  angles, they  fliaii  be  in  all  equall  to  tenne 
right  angles .  .V  Vherforc  taky ng  away  the  in¬ 
ward  angles  ,  whiche(as  hath  before  bene  pro- 
ued)  are  equall  to  fixe  righteangles,  the  out¬ 
wardangles  (hall be  equallto  fower  right  an* 
gles.Andfo  of  all  other  figures. 


other  Ctr-  ^ 15  a^°  manifeft»that  euery  pcntag5,which  is  fo  deferibed .thatech  fide  therof 

*  deuideth  two  of  the  ocherfidesjhathhisfiueangies  equall  to  two  rightangles. 

For  fuppofe  that  ABC DE :  be  fuch  a  pentagon  as  is  there  required  fo  that  let  the  fide 
AC  cut  the  fide  B  E  in  the  point  G-.&c  let  the  fide  AT)^  cut 
the  fame  fide  B  £  in  the  point  F.  Now  the  by  this  propo- 
fitiontheangle^F(7fhalbeequalltothe  two  angles  at 
thepointFand^D:namdy,theoutwardangletothetwo  ® 
inward  and  oppofite  angles. And  by  the  famereafon  the 
angle  F  G  A  is  equal  to  the  angles  at  the  points  C  and  E 
which  are  in  the  triangle  C£<?.But  the  two  angles  AFG 
and  F  G  ^together  with  the  angle  at  the  point  A,  are  e- 
quall  to  two  right  anglesf  by  this  propofition ).  Where¬ 
fore  the  fower  angles  at  thepointes,  B,C,  £>,£,  together 
with  the  angle  at  the  point  A, are  equal  to  two  right  an¬ 
gles  .-which  was  required  to  beproued. 


jtn  other  Cor- 
tralLrj. 


<An  ether  Cor- 
O'xMerjs 


By  this  propofition  alfo  it  is  manifeftjthat  cuery  angle  ofan  equilate  trian'- 
gle  is  two  third  partes  ofa  right  angle.And  that  in  a  triangle  of  two  equall  fides 
hauing  aright  angle  at  the  toppe, either  ofthe  two  angles  at  the  bafe  is  the  halfe 
of  a  right  angle.  And  in  a  triangle  called  Scalenum.fuch  a  Scalenu  ( I  fay  )  which 
is  made  by  the  drawght  ofa  perpendicular  line  from  any  one  oi  the  angles  of  an 
equilaier  triagleto  the  oppofite  fide  therof, one  angle  is  a  right  angle,an  other  is 
two  third  parts  ofa  right  angle, namely , that  angle  which  was  alfo  an  angle  of  the 
equilater  tnanglejwherforeofneceffity  the  angle  remaining  is  one  third  part  of 
a  rightangle.For  the  three  angles  ofatriaglc  mull  be  equall  to  two  rightangles* 

Moreouer  by  this  propofition  it  is  manifeftjthat  if  there  be  two  triangles, 
and  if  two  angles  of  the  one  be  equal  to  two  angles  of  the  othenthc  angle  remai- 

niog 


mng  {lull  alfo be  equall  to  the  angle  remay  mng.F or  fowCrauch  as  three  angles 
of  any  criaugle  are  equal  to  three  angles  ofany  other  triangle  (for  that  in  ech  the 
three  angles  are  equal  to  two  right  angles)- If  from  ech  triangle  be  taken  away 
the  two  equall  angles  }the  angle  remay  mng  fhall  (by  the  common  lentence)be 
equallto  the  angle  remay  mng. 


And  here  I  thinke  it  good  to  (hew  how  to  detiide  a  right  angle  into  three  c- 
quail  parteSjfor  that  the  demonftration  thereof  depended!  of  this  proportion. 


A 


Suppofe  that  there  be  a  right  angle  C^contayned  of  the  right  lilies  AB  and  B  C\& 

in  the  line  B  C,take  a  point  at  all  aduentures, which  let  be 
D.An d  vpon  the  line  B  ‘D  deferibef  by  the  firft)an  equila- 
ter  triangle  B  E>  £,And(by  the  p.propofition)deuide  the 
angle  D  B  E  into  two  equall  partes  by  the  right  line  B  F. 

Then  /  fay  that  the  right  angle  A  B  Cis  deuided into  thre 
eq  ual  parts  by  the  right  lines  B  E  and  B  F.For  forafmuch 
as  £  F  D  is  an  equilater  triangle,therfore  as  hath  before 
bene  declared,  the  angle  SB  D  is  two  thirdc  partes  of  a 
right  angle.  B  ut  the  whole  angle  ABC3  is  a  right  angle. 

Wherfote  the  angle  remaining, namely,^££  is  one  third 
part  of  a  right  angle.  Again  forafmuch  as  the  angle  EBD, 


is  two  third  partes  of  a  right  angle,andit  is  deuided  into  two  equall  parts  by  the  ri^ 
lne  B  £3therefore either  of  thefe  two  angles  E  B  E  8cF  BT)is;  one  third  part  of  a  right 
angle.Wherefore  the  three  angles -<42?  £,£2?  £  and  2)  are  equall  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther.  Wherefore  the  right  angle  A  B  Cis  deuided  into  three  equall  partes  by  the  right 
lines  B  E  and  B  F:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


1'he  %\fTheoreme.  The  TftfPropofition* 

Two  right  lines  ioyning  together  on  one  and  the  fame  fide, 
mo  equall  parallel  lines:  are  alfo  themfelues  equall  the  one 
to  the  other >and  alfo  parallels • 

fppofe  that  A  3  and  CD  he 
right  lines  equal \  and  parallels : 
and  let  thefe  Vtoo  right  lines 
Cand  3D  ioyne  the  together > 
the  one  on  the  one  fide 3and the  other  on $ 
other  fide -Then  I  fay  that  the  lines  AC 
i?3  Dare  both  equally  alfo  parallels. 

S)raH?  (by  the  firfl  petition)  a  right  line 
from  the  point  3  to  thepoint  Ct  And fora 
afmuchasA3  is  a  parallel  toCD,  and 
\>po  them  falleth  the  right  line  3  C,  tber* 
fore  the  alternate  angles  A  3C  and  3  C 
P  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other  (by  the  %9.propofition).  And  forafmuch  as 
the  line  A3  is  equallto  the  line  C  D3and  the  line  3  €  is  common  to  them  both , 

MJiL  there* 


ffov>  t»  fUttsde# 
right  angle  int $ 
three  equall 


ThefirtlTfiookp 

therefore  thefe  Wbo  lines  AB  and  B  Cyare  equall  to  theft  tSbo  lines ) BCandC 
3j,and  the  angle  A  B  Cis  e quail  to  the  angle  B  C DyVberfore  (by  the  4.pro* 
propofiuimfihe  bafe  B  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  A  C,and  the  triangle  A  B  Cfi  e- 
quail  to  the  triangle  B  C  T>yand  the  angles  remayning  are  equall  to  the  angles 
remay  ningthe  one  to  the  other  J>nder  Tbhich  are fub  tended  equall  fide  suffers* 
fore  the  angle  AC  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  CBD ,  and  the  angle  B  AC  to  the 
angle  B  T)  CAnd  forafmuch  as  y>pon  thefe  right  lines  A  C and  B  Dfalletb  the 
right  line  B  C  making  the  alternate  angles ,that  is  the  angles  ACB  and  CBD , 
equall  the  one  to  the  other  ^therefore  (by  the  zy.propofition)  the  line  ACisa 
par  ailed  to  the  line  B  tD.Jfnd  it  is  prouedthat  it  is  equall  Vnto  it .  Wherefore 
two  right  lines  soyning  together  on  one  and  the fame  fide  two  equall  lines  which 
are  parallels  ,are  alfo  themjelues  equall  the  one  to  the  other, and  aljo  parallels: 
Tbhicb  'toas  required  to  be proued. 

The  i^.Theoreme.  T he  34.  Tropo/ttion. 

fn  farattelogrammesjhefides  and  angles  which  are  oppofae 
the  one  to  the  other ,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other*  and  their 
diameter  deuideth  them  into  two  equall  partes. 

BVppofe  that  A  BOD  be  a  parallelogramme  and  let  the  diameter  ther * 
of  be  B  C.Tben  I  fay  that  the  oppofitefides  and  angles  of  the  paralhlo » 
gramme  ACDB  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other yandj  the  diameter  BC 
deuideth  it  into  Wbo  equall  partes .  For  forafi 
much  as  A  B  is  a  parallel  line  bnto  C  fyand  V* 
pon  them  falleth  a  right  line  B  C:  therfore  (by 
the  2  <y,propofition)the  alternate  angles  ABC 
and  BCD  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  A • 
gay  ne forafmuch  as  AC  is  a  parallelline  to  B 
lD,and  Vppon  them  falleth  the  right  lyne  B  C: 
therfore  (by  the  fame)  the  alternate  angles, 
that  is, the  angles  ACB  and  CBD  are  equall 
the  one  to  the  other .  Nolb  therfore  there  are 
tV>o  triangles  ABC  and  BCDfhauing  Wbo  an - 
gles  of the  oney  namely %  the  angles  ABC  and  ACB  equall  to  Woo  angles  of the 
other  that  isyto  the  angles  BCD  andC  B  D,  the  one  to  the  other jmd  one fide 
of  the  one  equal  to  one  fide  of  the  otherjiamelyjhatfydethatlietb  beWbene  the 
equall  angles  Jbhich  fyde  is  common  to  them  both, namely, the fide  B  C,  Wber* 
fore  (by  the  26.  proportion)  the  other  fides  remaining  are  equall  to  the  other 
fidesremamingghe  oneto  the  other ,and  the  angle  remaining^  equal  to  the  an* 
gle  rmaynmgyVhexfore  the fide  A  B  is  equall  to  the  fide  CD,md  the  fide  AC 


ofEuclides  Ekmentes . 


to  the fide  B  Dgs*  the  angle  B  AC  is  equal  to  the  angle  B  D  C.And  forafmucb 
as  the  angle  ABCis  equal  to  the  angle  B  C  Dtand  the  angle  CBDto  the  an  * 
gle  AC  B :  tberfore  (by  the  fecond  common  f entente)  the  whole  angle  A  B  D 
is  equall  to  the  whole  angle  A  C  Dt  And  it  is  proued  that  the  angle  B  AC  is  e* 
quail  to  the  angle  C  D  BjAClurfore  in  parallelogrammes }  the fides  and  angles 
which  are  oppojite  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  I  fay  al(o  that  the  diameter 
therof deuideth  it  into  two  equall  partes. For  forafmuchas  A  B  is  equall  toCD} 
and  BCis  common  to  them  bothgherfore  thefe  two  A  Band  BCare  equall  to 
thefe  two  BCandCDtandthe  angle  A  B  Cts  equal  to  the  angle  BCDyFher 
fore  (by  the  ^.propofition)  the  bafeACis  equall  to  the  ba  fe  B  D>and  the  t*i* 
angle  A  B  Cis  equall  to  the  triangle  B  C  ID.  VFherfore  the  diameter  B  C  den 
uide  tb  the  psralldogramme  A  B  CD  into  two  equall  partes :  which  is  all  that 
Was  required  to  be  proued. 


In  this  Theorerae,are  demon  Crated  three  paffions  or  properties  ofparallei? 
logrammes.  Namely, that  their  oppofite  files  are  equall;  that  their  oppofice  an? 
gles  are  equall-.and  that  the  diameter  deuideth  the  parallelogrammc  into  two  e- 
quall  partes*  Which  is  true  in  all  kindes  ofparallelogrammes.  There  arc  fo  wer 
kindes  of  parallelogrammes  ,a  iquare,  a  figure  of  one  fide  longer  then  the  other, 
a  Rhombus,or diamond  figure,and  a  Rhomboides  or diamondhke figure.  And 
here  is  to  be  noted, that  in  thofe  parallelogrammes,  all  whofe  angles  ar  right  an- 
gles(as  is  a  fquare,and  a  figure  on  theone  fide  longer)  the  diameters  do  notonly 
deuide  the  figure  into  two  equall  partes,but  alfo  they  are  equal  the  one  to  the  o* 
ther*As  for  example. 

Suppofethat^SCD  beafquare,  4  B  A  B 

or  a  figure  on  the  one  fide  longer, and 
draw  in  it  thefe  diametres  A  D  and  5 
C.And  forafmuch  as  the  line  >4  5  is  e- 
quallto  the  line  CD  (by  the  definitio 
of  a  fquare,and  of  a  figure  on  the  alfo 
one  fide  loger)&  the  line  A  Cis  com¬ 
mon  to  the  both  ;  therfore  two  fides 
of  the  triangle  A  5  Care  equal  to  two 
fides  of  the  triangle  A  CD  gat  one  to 
the  other,  and  the  angles  which  they  a 
contayne  are  equall,  namely,  the  an-  C  v 

gles  5  AC  &  AC  Z>,  for  they  ate  right  angles.  Wherefore  the bafes  namely,  the  diame¬ 
ters  A  D  and  5C,arefby  theq.propofitionjequal, 

Butin  thofe  parallelogrames  whofe  angles  arcnotrightangles,as  is  a  Rhom¬ 
bus  ,and  a  Rhomboides, the  diameters  be  euer  vnequall.  As  for  example. 

Suppofe  that  ABC  D  be 
a  Rhombus,or  a  Rhombaides 
and  drawe  in  it  thefe  diame¬ 
ters  A  C  and 5  D.  And  foras¬ 
much  as  >45  is  equall  to  C2>, 
and  B  Cis  common  to  them 
both,&the  angle>45  Cis  not 
equall  to  the  angle  5  C  D  (  by 
the  definition  of  a  Rhombus 
and  alfo  of  a  Rhombaides) 

M.iiii. 


B 


T  tire  fastens  of 
far  alio  tegrames 
demo  ft  rated  in 
this  T horeme. 
Power  kjndes  of 
faraHelo- 
grammet. 


’  ■  ‘-f-. 


there 


*The  eonuerfe  of 
this  prep  opt  ion 
itfter  Vrqclm, 


A  Corollary  ta¬ 
ken  emt  of  v’ 


ThefirslTiooke 

therefore  (by  the  24,propofition)  the  bafes  alfo  are  vnequall,  namely,  the  diameters 
zACa.n6.BD. 

Agaync.Inparallelogrammesofequallfides,asareafquare,  anda  Rhom* 
bus, the  diameters  do  notonely  delude  the  figures  into  two  equall  partes,  but 
alfo  they  deuide  the  angles  into  two  equall  partes* 

For  fuppofe  that  there  be  a  fquare  or  Rhombus  AB  CD,  and  draw  the  diameter  e/tf 
D. And  forafmuch  as  the  fides  A  B  and  B  D  are  e- 
quall  to  the  fides  A  C  and  CD(for  the  figures  are 
equilateral  and  the  angles  sAB  D  and^  CD  are 
equally  for  they  are  oppofite  angles )  and  the  bafc 
ADisrommontoboth  triangles.  Therefore  (by 
the  fourth  propofition)the  angles  BAD  &  CAD 
are  equail,and  fo  alfo  are  the  angles  BDA  and  C 
‘D  A  equall.  Wherfore  the  angles  i?  AC  and  CD  B 
are  deuidedinto  two  equall  partes. 


Butin  parallogratnmes  whofe  fides  arenot  equall,  fuch  as  area  figure  on  the 
one  fide  longer, and  a  Rhomboides  it  is  not  fo. 

For  fuppofe  AB  CD  to  be  a  figure  on  the  one 
fide  longer  or  a  Romboides,  And  draw  thedia-  A  B  IB 

meter  zA  D,And  now  if  the  angles  B  A  Cand  CD 
*S,be  deuidedinto  two  equall  partes  by  the  dia- 
meter-^D,theu  forafmuch  as  the  angle  CAD 
is  (by  the  2<?.propofition,)  equall  to  the  angled 
*D  .8,  the  angle  alfo  BAD  fhal  be  equal  to  the  an¬ 
gle  A  D  B(by  the  firft  common  fentence),  Wher¬ 
fore  alfo  the  fide is  equall  to  the  fide  B  Dfby 
the  tf.propofitio  ).  But  the  fayd  fides  are  vnequal: 
which  is  impoifible.Wherefore  the  angles  B  AC  c 

and  C  D  B  are  not  deuided  in  to  two  equall  partes* 

The  eonuerfe  of  the  firft  and  fecond  part  of  this  propofition  after  Proclus. 
if  a  reel ihne figure  whatfoeuer  haue  his  oppofite  fides  andangles  equall :  then  is  aparallelograme. 


For  fuppofe  that  AB  CD  be  fuch  a  figure,namely,which  hath  his  oppofite  fides 
and  angles  equall.  And  let  the  diameter  thereof  be  zAD. 

Nowforafmuchas  the  fides  A  rB  and  2D  are  equall  to 
to  the  fides'D  C  and  zA  C,  and  the  angles  which  they  co~  A_ 
tayne  are  equall,  and  the  bafe  AD  is  common  to  ech  tri- 
angle,thereforef  by  the  4,propofition  Jthe  angles  rema y- 
ning  are  equall  to  the  angles  femayriing,vnder  which  are 
fubtended  equal  fides.Wherfore  the  angled  AD  is  equal 
to  the  angle  A  D  C, and  the  angle  zA  D  B  to  the  angle  CA 
D. Wherefore  (by  the  27.  propofition )  the  line  ABisa 
parallel  to  the  line  CD^and  the  line  AC  to  the  line  B  D, 

Wherefore  the  figure  AB  CD  is  a parallogramme:which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 

\  /  \  !  ^ 

A  Corrollary  taken  out  of  Fluffates. 
tA  right  line  cutting  a  parallelogramme  Which  Way  foeuer  into  two  equall  partes ,  Jhall  alfo  de¬ 
uide  the  diameter  thereof  into  two  equall  partes. 

For 


of Euclides  Elementes.  FoL  4.?. 


For  if  it  be  polfible  let  the  right  line  G  C  deuide  the  parallelogramme  A  SR  JO  into 
two  equal  partes,  but  let  it  deuide  the  diameter  D  E  into  two  vnequal!  partes  in  the 
point  h  And  let  the  part  /  £  be  greater  then  the  part  /  Z>*And  vnto  the  line  ID  put  the 
line/O  equall(by  thg.  propofitioj.  And  by  the 
point  0,draw  vnto  the  lines -4  2>  and-#  S  apa- 
rallelline  O  £(by  the  3  1  .propofition .)  Where¬ 
fore  in  the  triangles  EG  I  and  CD  I,  two  angles ; 
of  the  one  are  equal  to  two  angles  of  the  other, 
namely, the  angles  IOF  and  I  DC  (  by  the  2p* 
propofition),&  the  angles  FI  O  8cCID( by  the 
1 5  .propofitio),&  the  fide  ID  is  equal  to  the  fide 
I O. Wherefore  (by  the  2  ^.propofition ^the  tri¬ 
angles  are  equall.Wherefore  the  whole  triangle 
Sigis  greater  then  the  triangle  D IC.  And  forafmuch  as  the  trapefium  GBDCis  fup- 
pofed  to  be  the  haife  of  the  parralleIograme,and  the  halfe  of  the  fame  parallelograme 
is  the  triangle  EB  D  (by  this  propofition)  .From  the  trapefium  GB  DC  and  the  trian- 

fle££-Dwnichare  equalhtake  away  the  trapefium  (?£  D/whichis  common  to  them 
oth,and  therefidue  namely,  the  triangle  D  IC lhalbeequall  to  the  refidue, namely, 
to  the  triagle  £/(7:butitis  alfo  leflefas  hath  before  ben  proued): which  is  impoffible. 
Wherefore  a  right  line  deuiding  a  parallelogramme  into  two  equal!  partes,  {ball  not 
deuide  the  diameter  thereof  vnequally.  Wherefore  it  fhall  deuide  it  equally  ?  which  was 
required  to  be  proued. 

An  addition  of  P  elitarius* 

Betty enettyo  right  lines  being  infinite  and  making  an  angle  geuen  :  to  place  a  line  equall  to  a 
line  geuen, in jack forte, that  it Jhau  make  Veith  one  oft  ho/e  lines  an  angle  squall  to  an  other  angle ge* 
utn,N°ty  *t  behoueth  that  the  ttyo  angles geuen  be  le/fc  then  ttyo  right  angles. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  lines  A  B and  A  C,making  an  angle  geuen  BA  C:  and  let 
them  be  infinite  on  that  fide  where  they  open  one  from  the  other*  And  let  the  line 
geuen  beD,  and  let  the  other  angle  geuen  be  £. 

And  let  the  two  angles  A  and  £  be  lefle  then 
two  right  angles  (  otherwife  there  coulde 
not  be  made  a  triangle,asitis  manifeft  by  the  17 
propofition) .  It  is  required  betwene  the  lines  csf 
B  and  AC  to  place  a  line  equall  to  the  line  geuen 
D, which  with  one  of  them  as  for  exaple  with  the 
line  A  C, may  make  an  angle  equal  to  the  angle  ge  ^ 
uen  £.Now  then  vpon  the  line  C  and  to  the 
pointinitcxf.make  an  angle  equail  to  the  angle 
geue£(by  the  2  3  .propofition),  which  let  be  CA 
£,And  produce  the  line  FA  on  the  other  fide  of 
the  point  A  to  the  point  G:znd  let  A  (/be  equall 
to  the  line  geuen  D  ( by  the  3 .  propofition ).  And 

by  the  point  (?,draw(by  the  3 1  .propofition)  a  parallel  line  to  the  line  oAC,  which  let 
be  G  H, and  produce  it  vntil  it  concurre  with  the  line  A  B:  which  concurfe  let  be  in  the 
point//. And  agayne  by  the  point// draw  the  line  HK parallel  vnto  the  line  (//.-which 
let  cut  the  line  exf  C  in  the  point  ZT.Then  I  fay  that  the  line  H  K  is  placed  betwene  the 
lines  AB  8c  AC  &  is  equall  to  the  line  D*And  that  the  angle  at  the  point  K  is  equall  to 
the  angle  geuen  £.Forforafmuchas(byconftru&ion)-4<?///:is  a  parallelogramme 
the  line  K  His  equall  to  the  line  A  (/(by  this  propofition ).  Wherefore  alfo  it  is  equall 
to  the  line  D.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  ZTfalleth  vppon  the  two  parallel  lines,  F  G 
and  K //, therforc  the  angle  A  K His  equal  to  the  angle  F  A  K( by  the  2p.propofitio.) 
for  that  they  are  alternate  angles-Wherfore  alfo  the  fame  angle  at  the  point  £is  equal 
to  the  angle  geuen  S.  Wherefore  the  line  Z/K  being  placed  betwene  the  two  lines  AB 
and  <sA  C,and  being  equall  to  the  line  D,maketh  the  angle  at  the  point  K  equall  to  the 
angle  geuen  £:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

Though  this  addition  of  Pclitarius  be  not  fo  muche  pertayning  to  the 

N.i*  propo- 


Hemon/lratim 
leading  to  tt  ft 
ah [nr dy tie. 


An  addition  of 
Vclitarittt. 


CenJlruHsm. 


Demmftrarim 


Demtnftrdthn 


Three  cafes  in 
this  fropofttion„ 
Thcfirjt  cafe. 


propofitiomy  ctbecaufeit  is  witty  and  femcth fomewfm  difficult,  I  thought  it 
good  here  to  ancxe  it. 

4  if  '  —*'•  l  ■  ■  .  *  .  f  44J,.  v r 

.  Theiy  .Theorems.  The  tf.Tropofoion. 

TaraUelogrammes  confi/lingvppon  one  and the fame  bafe, 
and  in  the felfe fame  parallel  lines,  are  e  quail  the  one  to  the 
other.  - 


p  Vppofe  that  the/e  paraUelo * 
f if  grammes  A  'B  CD  and  EB  4 
CF  Jo  confeft  vpon  one  and 
the  fame  bafe /hat  iss  Vppon 


& 


J  J  3  1  If 

B  Ctand  in  the  felfe  fame  pa  rallel  lines  y 
that  is  J  F,and  B  C.Tbeti  1 fay /hat  the 
parallelograrne  ABC  Bis  equal  to  the 
parallelograrne  EEC  F.For forafnuch 
as  A  $  CB  is  a  pardUetagramme,  ther* 
fore  (by  the  $  4 .propofttion )  the  fde  A 
&7is  equallto  the  fideB  C,  and  by  the 
fame  reafm  alfo  the  fide  EE  is  equall  to 
the  fide  BC/vhcrfore  JED  is  equall  to 
EFandB  Eis  common  to  them  both- 
Wherfore  the  tbbole  line  A  E  is  equall  to  the  whole  line/D  FsAnd  the  fide  Al 8 
is  equall  toy  fide  D  Cypher  fore  the/e  two  EA  and  AB  are  equall  to  theft  Vtoo 
HD  and  DC /he  one  to  the  otheriandy  angle  FDC  is  equall  to  the  angle  EABy 
namely/he  outward  angle  toy  inlrard  angle (by  y  n)tpropofitio):ts>herfore(by  jt 
4  propofition)the  bafe  E  B  is  equall  to  the  bafe  ECy  and  the  triangle  EA  Bis 
equallto  the  triangle  FED  C.Take  ale  ay  the  triangle  EDGE,  lehich  is  common 
to  them  botb.VVherefore  the re  ft  due, namely, the  trapefium  A  BG  Bis  equall 
to  the  re/idue,  that  is  Jo  the  trapefium  EG  C  FfPut  the  triangle  GB  C  commo 
to  them  both  Wherefore  the  to  hole  paralleUgramme  ABC  Bis  equall  to  the 
"tobole  parallelogramme  EB  C  FVVherefore  paralletogrammes  con f fling  vp* 
on  one  and  the  fame  bafe, and  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines  yare  equal  the  one  to 
the  otber.'fchich  was  required  to  be  demonflrated. 


Parallelogrammcs  are  fayde  to  be  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines, when  their 
bafes,andthe  oppofite  Hies  vnto  them,  are  one  and  the  felfe  fame  lynes  wy  th 
the  parallels* 

In  this  propofition  are  three  cafes*  For  the  line  B  E  may  cutte  the  line  AF, 
either  beyond  the  point  D,or  in  the  point  D,or  on  this  fide  the  point  D  *  When 


ofEuclides  Elementeu 


FoL\6. 


itcnttcth  the  line  A  F  beyond  the  point  D  the  demontetion  before  put  fcr^ 

ueth*  V:  .•  e 

•  ■  '  •••  -  -  :  •  .  *  \  *  *  V  i  \  '  *  > 

Butiftheline££do  cutte  the  line  AF in 
the  point  D,then  forafmuch  as  (  by  the  former 
propofition)the  triangle  £  CED  or  2?  C£  is  the 
halfe  of  either  of  thcfe  paralelogrammes  ABC 
‘Da.ndEBCF  (  for  intheparallelogramme^ 

B  CT>  the  diameter  B  D  maketh  the  triangle  B 
DCthe  halfe  of  the  fame  paraIlelogramme,and 
in  the  parallelogramme  EBCF  the  diameter 
£  Cor  DC  maketh  the  felfe  fame  triangle  £‘D 
Cthe  halfe  of  the  parallelogramc££  CF  Jther* 
fore(by  the  7. common  fentence)thcparallelo- 
grammes  A  B  CD  and  £  B  CF  are  equall. 


But  if  the  Hue  BE  do  cutte  the  lyne  *AF 
on  thi5  fi.de  the  point  D,  then  forafmuch  as  ei¬ 
ther  oF  the  lines  AD  and  EFis  equall  to  the 
line  B  C,therefore  by  the  fir  ft  common  Sentence 
they  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherefore 
taking  awav  ED,  which  is  common  to  both y 
the  refid  ueV^  £  fhalbe  equall  to  the  refidue.D 
F.  Agaync  forafmuch  as(by  the  ^.propofitio) 
the  line  zA  B  is  equall  to  the  line  C  D,  and  (by 
the  17.  propofition)theangle£  A  B  is.equaUo 
the  angle  FDC:  therfore  (by  the  4.  proposi¬ 
tion)  the  triangles  E  2?  A  and  F  C  D  are  equal* 
Adde  the  trapefium  CDEB  common  to  them 
both  :  and  fo  (by  the  feConde  common  Sen¬ 
tence  jthe  two  paraflelogrammes  */{ B  CD  and 
££C£fhaIbe  equall  :  which  was  required  to 
beproued. 


The/ecmdeitfi* 


The  third ca ft. 


h&'The i6:Theoreme.  'ThetfSPropofition. 

ParaUelogrammes  confi fling  vpon  equall bafes,  and  in  the 
felfe  fame  parallel  lines  ^are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

Vppofe  that  thefe  parallelogramtnes  AB  CD  and  EE  G  H  do  con  ft jl 
ypon  equall  ba/es3that  is^pon  BCandF  G,and  in  the  felfe  fame  paraU 
■  lei  lines  9t  bat  is  3A  Hand  I B  G,  Then  I  Jay  %t  bat  the  parallelogramme  A 
BCD  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  EFG  FLDra'Se  a  right  line  from  the  C9”J?ruaio*‘ 
point  B  to  the  point  Eyand  an  other  from  the  point  C  to  the  point  H.  Jndfor*  Demorfr#** 

afmuch  asBC  is  equall  to  F GJhut  F  G  is  equall  to  E  H,  therfore  <B  Calfo  is  e* 
quail  to  E  H3  and  they  are  parallel  lines ,  and  the  lines  B  E  andC  B  ioyne 
them  together :  hut  npo  right  lynes  ioynyng  together  tlt>o  equall  right 

Hdj*  lines 


“V 

■l 


Three  cafes  in 
this  propofttion. 

The fir  ft  cafe. 
Eaerj  cafe  maj 
happen  fetiea 
timers  wajet. 

a. 

3» 


%  •*».*.  <f7 
•Ji-aff.’.r' 


E 


H 


7 

:  C  A*1 

y 

’  /  ■  : 

- 

Jr 

/ 

sj 

/  '1 
--  *. 

if 

•-  ■  1 

if 

7 

if 

...  .  '  .  '! 

/  j 

/ 

■  ;i 

Jr 

/ 

j 

fine s  being parallels;  art  themfeluts 
alfo  (by  the  ^  proportion)  e quail 
the  one  to  the  other ,  and  parallels, 

VVherforeEB CH  is  a parallelo* 
gramme  3and  is  equall  to  the  parallel 
lograme  ABCS):  for  they  haueboth 
one  and)  fame  bafeythat  tsfB  C,And 
are  iny  felfe  fame  parallel  lines ythat 
is3BC&  EHtAnd  byy  fame  reafoit 
alfo  the parallelograme  EFG H  is  e* 
qual  to  the  parallelograme  E  B  CH ; 

VVber fore  the  parallelograme  AB 
CS)  is  equal  to  the  parallelograme  E  &  c:  ^ 

FGH,  VVher  fore  parallelogr  antes 

conjifting  vppon  equall  bafes3andin  the  felfe  fame  parralkl  lines,  art  t quail  the 
one  to  the  other.Tahich  'toas  required  to  beproued. 

i,.  .?•  -.  .  ,  j .  ^  ^  ,  _  f.  (  , .  (  „ 

In  this  propoficton  alfo  are  three  cafes.For  the  equall  bafes  may  either  be  v  t¬ 
terly  feperated  a  fonder:  or  they  maytouefoeat  oncof  the  codes:  ortheymay 
haue  one  part  common  to  them  both. 

Ettclides  demonftration  ferueth  when  the  bafesbe  vtterly  feperated  a  fonder* 
Which  yet  may  happen  feuen  diners  waycs.For  thebafes  being  feperated  af5*> 
der, their  oppofite  fides  alfo  may  be  vtterly  feperated  a  fonder  beyond  thepoinfi 
D,as  the  Tides  A  D  and  E  H  in  the  firift  figure. 

Or  they  may  touche  together  in  one  of  the  endes,  and  the  vhole  fi  demay  be 
beyond  the  point  D,as  the  Tides  A  DandE  H  do  in  the  fecond  figure. 

Or  one  part  may  be  beyond  the  point  D,  andan  other  part  common  to  them 


4 


b  cp 


d  B  C  F 


<3  3  C  F 


both  ,a  s  in  the  third  figure,the  fides  A  D  and  E  H  haue  the  part  E  D  common  to 
them  both* 

Or  they  may  iuftly  agree  the  one  with  th'cother,that  is,the  pointes  A  and  D 
may  fall  vpon  the  pointes  Eand  H:  as  in  the  fourth  figure. 

Or  the  fide  A  D  being  produced  on  this  fide  the  point  A}part  ofthe  oppofite  y. 

fide  vnto  the  bafeF  G  m'ay  be  on  this  fide  the  point  A,  and  an  other  part  may  be 
common  with  the  line  A  D,as  in  the  fifth  figure* 

Or  one  ende  ofthe  fide  EH  may  light  vpon  the  pointcA3  and  the  whole  fide  6. 
on  this  fide  of  it:  Asinthefixt  figure. 

Or  the  faid  fide  E  H  may  vtterly  be  feperated  a  fonder  on  this  fide  the  pointc 
A, as  in  the  feuenth  figure. 


And  the  two  other  cafes  affo  may  inlike  mancrfiauc  feuen  varieties:  as  in 
th„e  figures  here  vnderncth  and  on  the  other  fide  of  this  leafefet  it  is  inanifeft. 
and  here  is  to  be  noted^thac  in  thelft  three  cafes  and  in  all  their  varieties  alfo, the 
conftru&ion  SC  demonftration  put  by  Eqclidef  namely  ^thc  drawing  of  linos  fro 
the  point  B  to  the  point  E  Sc  from  the  pointe  C  to  the  point  H,and  fo  prouing 
ic  by  theforinetpropofition)  will  feme  oncly  in  the  fourth  varietie  ofech  cafe, 
there  nedeth  no  farther  conftructiomfor  that  the  conclufion  ftraight  way  folio? 
weth  by  the  former  propofition. 


The  like  *varie* 

tj  in  ech  ofthe 
other  two  cafes , 
Each  da  con - 
Jirullian  and 
demonftration 
feructhinall 
thefe  cafes,  and 
in  their9aritiet 
alfo. 


A  "DE  H 


&  F  C  <3 


A  B  D  H 


AR  T>ff 


3  F  C  <3 


»  F  O  G 


Canftntftion, 


Demonftratiott. 


i 1  '■  Cj  .  ;  l\ 

TheijaTheoreme .  7 be  ty.Tropo/ition. 

■  ",  ■’  r  ‘  i  \  ,  **  41  .  i 

T riangles  con f fling  upon  one  and the  felfe  fame  bafe?and in 
the felfe fame  par allesiare  e  quad  the  one  to  the  other* 

Vppofe  that  the  re  triangles  A  BCandlDBC  doconfift 
Vpon  one  and  the  fame  bafe>namdyi  B  Cyand  in  the  felfe 
fame  parallel  lines  jhat  is ,  jiT>  and  B  C.  Then  I  fayy 
that  the  triangle  ABCis  e quail  to  the  triangle  B(DC. 
Produce  (by  the  2.  peticion )  the  line  At)  on  ech  fide  to 
the  pointer  E  and  F.  And  (by  the  31,  proportion)  by  the 
point  Hydras  Ynto  the  line  C  A  a  parallel  line  B  E  and 
(by)  fame)  by  the  point  C,  draw  Ynto  the  line  B  !Da  pa* 
rallel  line  C F Wherefore  EBCA. 
and  D  B  C^are  paraHelogrammes „ 

And  the  paralklogramme  E  B  fAy 
is  (by  the  $  5.  propofition)  equal/  to 
the parallelogramme  (DBCF ,  For 
they  confift  Yppon  one  and  the  (elfe 
fame  bafe ,  namely ,  BCy  and  are  in 
the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines ,  that  isy 
B  (  and  E  F,  But  the  triangle  ABf 
id  (by  the  $4. propofim)tbt  halfe  of 
the  parallelogramme  EBCAyfor 
the  diameter  AB  deuideth  it  into  two 
equall  par ts:&( by  the  fame)thetri •  £  C 

angle  BBC  is  the  halfe  of  the  pa a 

rallelogra mmelDBC  F for  the  diameter  B>  Q deuideth  it  into  two  equall parts: 
but  the  balues  ofthinges  equallarealfo  equall  the  one  to  theotber  (by  they . 
common  fentence  )  therefore  ehe  triangle  ABC  is  equall  to  the  triangle  (DB 
(V  therefore  triangles  confining  Ypon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe3and  in  the 
felfe  fame  parallelsiare  equal l  the  one  to  the  other :  Tphicb  Y>as  required  to  be 
demonilrated. 


Thofe 


ofEuclides  Elementes . 


FoL^.8* 


Thofc  triangles  are  faide  to  be  comayned  rithin  the  felfe fame  parallel  lines,  HowtrUngtes 
which  hauing  their, bafes  in  oneofths  parallel  lineSjhane  their  toppes  in  the  %e/hffiife°fJLe 

Other.  '  •  1  parallel  lines, 

Hereas  I  prom  i  fed  will  I  flicw  out  of  PCocIas  the  com  pari  fori  of  two  triad-  comparifonof 
gles, which  hailing  their  hies  equal!  'jti&ttc  the  Safes  and  angles  at  the  toppe  vucj  two  triangles 
quail*  Arid  Aril:  I  fay  that  the  vneqnall  angles-  at  the  toppe  being,  equall  to  two  wh°^^tie!  btl‘ejr 
right  angles, the  triangles  flialbe  cqualLAs  for  example, ,  -  ^ffJand  angles 

at  the  toppe  art 

Suppofe  that  thefe  two  triangles  ABC  and  DEF  haue  twofides  ofthe  onemarne- 
ly,  A  B  ahd  A  C^equall  to  two  fides  of  the  Other,  namely,  to  D  £  and  D  F,  eche  to  his 
correfporideni:  fide, that  is,  ABtoD  £,and  ACtoD  F, and  let  the  bafe  B  C  be  greater  v/hen  the  two 
then  the  bafe  £  F :  andfet  the  angle  at  the  point  tA  be  greater  then  the  angle  at  the  angles  at  the 
pointD.Butletthefaydeanglesatthe  pointes  ^4andD,  \  toppes  are  ec^uaU 

be  equall  to  two  right  angles. Then  I  fay  that  the  triangles 
ABC  andD  ££  are  equall. For  fora/rauch  as  the  angle's 
AC  is  greater  then  the  angle  £  D  £,vpon  the  line  £  D,and 
tothepointD  defcribe  (by  the  23.  propoikion) an  angle 
equall  to  the  angle  £^TC;which  let  be  E  D  G :  and  put  the 
line  D  G  equall  to  the  line  A  Ci  and  draw  a  line  from  E  to 
G,and  an  other  from  F  to  G;  and  produce  the  lines  ED& 

F  D  beyond  the  poynt  D  to  the  pointes  H and  AT.Now  for 
afmuch  as  the  angle  'B  AC  is  equall  to  the  angle  ED  G* 
and  the  angles  b  A  Cani  E  D  F  are  equall  to  two  right  am 
gles,thereforethe  angles  EDG  andEDF  are  equall  to 
two  right  angles  .But  the  angles  EDG  and  K  D  G,arealfo 
equal  to  two  rightangles.-take  away  che  angle  FDG  com¬ 
mon  to  them  both:  wherefore  the  angle  remayning  EDF 
is  equall  to  the  angle  femayning.G  D  K. But  the  angle  ED' 

F  is  equall  to  the  angle'H  D  K  (  by  the  1 5  .propofition)for 
they  are  hed  angles.  Wherefore  theangle  G  D  K  isequall 
to  the  angle  HDK  .And  forafmuch  as  in  the  triangle  G  D  F  the  outward  angle  G  D  H 
is(by the  3 2. propofition) equal  to  the  two  inward  and  oppofite  angles  at  the  points  G 
and  £:  which  two  angles  alfoare(by  the  5. propoiition)  equall  the  one  to  the  other: 
for  the  line DG  is  by  confku&ion  equall  to  the  line  c AC,  namely,  to  the  line  DF. 

Wherefore  the  angle  G  D.H  is  double  both  to  the  angle  at  the  point  <?,and  to  the  an¬ 
gle  at  the  point  P.Biit  the  angle  G  D  His  alfo  double  to  the  angle  GDK  (forthe  an¬ 
gle  G  D  K  is  proued  to  be  equal!  to  the  angle  K  D  H)  wherefore  the  angle  at  D  G  F 
is  equal!  to  Che  angle  G  D  K  :  and  they  zie  alternate  angles.  Wherefore  (by  the  27. 
propoiition)  thelineD  E  isaparallel  to  the  line  £  £7.  Wherefore  the  triangles  GDE 
and  FD  E  arevppon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe,  namdy,  Z>£,  and  in  the  felfe  fame 
parallel  lines  D  E  and  GF  .Wherefore  by  this  propofition  they  are  equall.  But  the  tri¬ 
angle  GDE is  by  conftm&ion  equall  to  the  triangle  ABC.  Wherefore-  alfo  the  tri¬ 
angle  D  E  F  is  equall  to  the  triangle  zABC :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

But  now  let  the  ariglesA  A  C  and  £  CD  £  be  greater  then  two  right  angles  :  &  let  When  thej  ats 
the  angle  at  the  point  A  be  greater  then  the  angle  at  the  point  D,  as  it  was  before  The  ireater  th'**e 
I  fay  that  the  triangle  ABCis  lelfe  thea-the  triangle  £>£  £.  Let  the  fame  conlfruaion  r,ght  angles. 
beherothat  was  in  the  former.  And  forafmuch  as  the  angles  B  ACznd  S'DF  that  is, 
the  angles  EDCj  and  £CD£are  greaterthen  tworight  angles,  but  the  angles  EDG 
and  GD  A" are  equall  to  two  right  angles:  take  away  the  angle  FD  G  which  is  common 
to  them  both .  Wherefore  the  angle  remayning,namely,£D£  is  greater  the  the  amrie 
remayningpiamelyjthen  GD  A:  thatis,the 'angle  JCD  H (which  by  the  1  5.  propofition 
is  equall  to  the  angle  £  D  F)is  greater  then  the  angle  G  D  K,  wherefore  the  angle  G  D 
H  is  more  then  double  to  the  angle.  G.D  K :  but  the  angle  f?  D  His  double  to  the  an- 

N.iii;‘.  glc 


Whettthcj  *rt 
leJJ'e  then  tn>a 
right  angle t. 


cHbefirH(Boo^e 

glc  DGF ,  as  was  before  proued,  Wherefore  the 
angle  GDK is  leffe  then  the  angle  DGF.  Vnto  the 
angle  GDK  put(by  the  a  3  .propofition )  the  an¬ 
gle  OG  £  equall:  and  produce  the  line  G  L  till  it 
concurre  with  theline  ££inthepointe  L.  And 
draw  a  line  from  D  to  L.  Wherefore(by  the  2  7, 
propofition)G*  L  is  a  parallel  line  to£>  £,forthat 
the  alternate  angles  D  G  £and  G  D  K are  equal. 

Wherfore  the  triangles  G  D  E  and  LD  E are  (by 
this  propofition  Jeq  ual(for  they  confift  vpon  one 
and  the  lelf  fame  bafe,namel|y,2)£,  and  are  in  the 
felfc  fame  parallel  lines,namely,£  D  and  G  £)But 
the  triangle  LDEis  leffe  then  the  triangle  £Z>£, 

Wherfore alfo  the  triangle GDE is leffe  thentfhe 
triangle  F  D  £.But  the  triangle  G  2)  £  is  equal  to 
the  triangle  ABC.  Wherfore  the  triangle  ABC 
is  leffe  then  the  triangle  D  E  £;  which  was  requi- 
red  to  beproued. 

But  now  let  the  angles  B  AC  and  EDF  be  leffe 
then  two  right  angles.' and  agayne  let  the  angle 
at  the  pointed  be  greater  then  the  angle  at  the 
point  Z>.Then  / fay  that  the  triagle  ABCis  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  triangle  D  E  F.Lcttbe  fame  conftru- 
ftio  be  alfo  here  that  was  in  the  two  former.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  angles  B  AC  and  £  D  £,that  is, 
the  angles  EDG  &  ED  F,  arc  leffe  then  two  right 
angle s,but  the  angles  EDG  and  GD  Katz  equal 
to  two  right  angles,  takeaway  the  angle  FDG 
which  is  common  to  them  both,  wherefore  the 
angle  remayning,  namely,  EDF  is  leffe  then  the 
angle  remayning,namely,then  GD  £T:thatis,the 
angle  H  D  iff  which  by  the  1  f .  propofition  is  e- 
quall  to  the  angle  £  D  F)  is  leffe  then  the  angle  G 
D  K.  Wherfore  the  whole  angle  G  D  H  is  leffe  then  double  to  the  angle  G  D  -KT.But  itis 
double  to  the  angleDG  Ffas  before  it  was  proued  wherfore  the  angle  GDKis  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  angle  D  G  F.  PuttheanglcDG  Lequall  to  thcangle  GDK  (by  the  23. 
propofition  Jand  produce  the  line  G  L  till  it  concurre  with  the  line  8 F alfo  produced, 
&  let  the  concurfe  be  in  the  point  L.  And  draw  a  line  from  D  to  b.Andfor  as  much  as 
the  angle  DG  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  G  D  K,  and  they  are  alternate  angles,  therefore 
the  line  G  Lisa  parallel  to  D  £(by  the  2  7. propofition ) .  Wherefore(by  this  propofiti¬ 
on  Jthe  triangles  GDE  and  L  D  £  are  equal:  bu  tthe  triangle  L  D  E  is  greater  then  the 
triangle  FD£,and  the  triangle  G  D£  is  equall  to  the  triangle  ABC.  Wherefore  the 
triangle  tABCis  greater  then  the  triangle  D  £  £:  which  was  required  to  be  proued, 

7 he  ift.T'heoreme.  T'he  fifPropofition* 

T’riangles  which  con/r/lvppon  equall  bafes,  and  in  thefelfe 
fame  parallel  lines ,are  equall  the  one  to  the  other . 

^^^Fppofe  that  thefe  triangles  A  BCand  V  E  F Jo  con  ft ft  vpon  equal  ba* 
'W0I-  jeSjtbat  ts, Vpon  B  C  and  E  Fyand  in  thefelfe  fame  parallel  lines  ytbat  is 
^S&'BF  and  A  V.Tben  I  fay  that  the  triangle  ABCis  equall  to  the  trian * 


ofEuclides  Elementes . 


FoL^p* 


Confirullton^ 


Demmffraticfi'' 


gle  A  B  C  is  equall  to  the  triangle  B)  E  F JProduce  (by  the  fecond  petition)  the 
line  AT)  on  echefede  to  the  point  es  G  and  H.  And  (by  the  3  i  .proportion)  by 
the  point  B  draiPe  Pnto  CAa  paraU 
lei  line  B  G^and(by  the  fame)  by  the  $ 
pointe  F  dra'Hoe  Pnto  IDE  a  parallel 
lineF  0  Wherfore  G  BC  A  and 
(DEF  Hare  parallelogrammes.But 
the  parallelograms  GBCA  is  (by  the 
3  6  proportion) equal  to  the paralle* 
logr  am  me  D  EF H,f or  they  conjiH 
Vpon  equall  bafesjbat  isfB  C and  E 
F,  and  are  in  the  ) elf e fame  parallel 
lines  .that  is  }BF  andG  H.  But  (by 
the  $4 .proportion)  the  triangle  A  B 
C  is  the  halfe  of  the  parallelogramme 
GBC  AJor  the  diameter  A  B  deui • 

deih  it  into  typo  e  quail  partes'-andthe  triangle  T)  EFisfby  tbefame)the  halfe 
of  the  parallelogramme  V  EF  H^for  the  diameter  FT)  deuideth  it  into  typo  e* 
quail  partes  jBut  the  h dues  ofthinges  equall  are  (by  the  7, common  fentence)e* 
quail  the  one  to  the  other. Wherfore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equall  to  the  trian* 
gle  D  EF.  Wherefore  triangles  Tphicb  con  fist  Pppon  equall  bafes,  and  in  the 
jelfe  fame  parallel  lines yare  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  TPbich  Tpas  required  to 
beproued. 

In  this  propofition  are  three  cafes. For  the  bafes  ofthe  triangles  either  haue 
one  part  common  to  them  both  or  the  bafe  ofthe  one  toucheth  the  bafe  of  the 
other  onely  in  a  point:  or  their  bafes  are  vtterly  feuereda  funder  *  And  ech  of  Ecbep  bef 
thefe  tales  may  alfo be  diuerfly5as  we  before  haue  fenein  parallelogrammes  con  /LfifomfiT 
{iff  mg  on  equall  bafes,and  being  in  the  felfe  fame  parallellines*So  that  he  which  diuerjlj . 
diligently  noteth  the  variety  that  was  there  put  touching  them!  may  alfo  eafely 
frame  thefame  varietietoechcafe  in  this  proportion*  Wherefore  I  thinke  it 
nedeles  hereto  repeat?,  the  fame  agayne-.forhowfoeuer  thebafes  beput,  or  the 
toppessthe  manner  of  confirmation  and  demonftration  here  put  by  Euclide  will 
ferue:  namely,  to  draw  parallel  lines  to  the  tides. 


..'3. 


Thre  cafes  m 
thupropofmon* 


An  addition  of  Pelitarius* 

T 0  deuide  a  triangle geuen  into  Wo  equall  partes. 

Suppofe  that  the  triangle  geuen  to  be  deuided  in  to  two 
equall  partes, be  A  B  C  .Deuide  one  of  the  fides  therof, 
name!y,5Cinto  two  equall  partes  fby  the  10.  propo¬ 
fition  jin  the  point  D.  And  draw  a  line  from  the  point  D 
to  the  point  -/Flhe  I  fay  that  the  two  triangles  A  B  D  & 
A  C  Share  Cquahwhich  is  eafy  to  proue(by  the.  3  8.  pro¬ 
portion)  if  by  the  point  A  we  drawe  vnto  the  line  B  C  a 
parallel  line  (by  the  3  1  .proportion  J^which  let  by  H  K : 
for  fo  the  triangles  AB  D  and  A  D  Cs  confiffing  vppon 
equal  bafes  B'D  &  S)C,and  being  in  the  felfe  fame  paral¬ 
lel  lines  H/Cand  B  C  are  of  neceffitie  equall.  The  felfe 

Q.i.  fame 


An  addition  ef 
I'ehtariut,to 
tleutde  a  trian¬ 
gle  into  two  e- 
yua/l partes. 


Nofe, 


An  other  addi¬ 
tion  of  Peltta- 
wtes. 


ConFiruftion. 


Vemonjlration 


7  hefirfl  Booty 

fame  thing  alfo  wil  happen  if  the  fide  B  A  be  deuided  into  two  equall  parts  in  the  point 
£,and  fo  be  drawen  a  rightline  from  the  point£,to  the  point  C.  Orifthe  fide  A  C  be 
deuided  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  F,andfo  be  drawen  aright  line  from  the 
point  F  to  the  point  .5:  which  is  in  like  manner  proued  by  drawing  parallel  lines  by  the 
pointes  B,-and  C,  to  the  lines  B  A  and  A  C, 

And  fo  by  this  you  may  deuide any  mangle  into  fo  many  partes  as  are  fig - 
nified  by  any  number  that  is  euenly  euen;  as  into  14, 16,32. (S^Scc. 

An  other  addition  ofpelitarius* 

From  any  point geuen  in  one  of  the  fide s  of  a  triangle ,to  draw  a  line  Which  fiat  deuide  the  trian¬ 
gle  into  tWo  equall  partes. 

Let  the  triangle  geuen  be^CD:andletthepointgeueninthefide  BC  be  A.  Itis 
required  from  the  point  A  to  draw  a  line  which  ihal  deuide  the  triangle  B  CD  into  two 
equall  partes.  Deuide  the  fide  B  Cinto  two  equall  partes  in  the  point£.  And  drawea 
right  line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  *D.And(by  the 
3  1. proposition  J  by  the  point  E  draw  vnto  the  line  AD 
a  parallel  lineA  F:  which  letcutte  the  fide  D  C  in  the 
point  F, And  draw  a  line  from  the  point  ^4  to  the  point 
D.Then  I  fay  that  the  line  F  deuideth  the  triangle  B 

C D  into  two  equall  partes :  namely,  the  trapefium  A  B 
D  F is  equall  to  the  triangle  A  C  F. For  draw  aline  from 
E  to D,cuttine.the line  Ain  thepointC.  Nowthenit  ^ 
is  manifeft  f  by  the  3  8  .propofition)  that  the  two  trian¬ 
gles  B  E  D  and  C  £  D  are  equall  (if we  vnderftand  aline 
to  be  drawen  by  the  point  D  parallel  to  the  line  A  Cfor 
the  bafe  s  B  E  and  E  Care  equal)  .The  two  triangles  alfo  DE  F  and  A  EF  arc  f  by  the 
37.propofition)equall:fortheyconfift  vponoheand  the felfe  fame  bafe  EF,  and  are 
in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines  A D  and  E F.  Wherefore  taking  away  the  triangle  EFG 
which  is  como  to  the  both,the  triangl qAE  G  fhalbe  equall  to  the  triangle  DF(/  :wher 
fore  vnto  either  of  the  adde  the  trapefiu  CFG  £,and  the  triangle  ACF  fhalbe  equal  to 
the  triangle- DEC.  But  the  triangle  'DEC  is  the  halfe  part  of  the  whole  triangle  BCD 
wherefore  the  triangle^  C£is  the  halfe  part  of  the  fame  triangle  B  ^D.Wherfore  the 
refidue.namely.the  trapefium  ABF  D  is  the  other  halfe  ofthe  fame  triangle.  Where¬ 
fore  the  line  A  F  deuideth  the  whole  triangle  BCD  into  two  equall  partes :  which  was 
required  to  be  done. 

Jfi$fThe  ipJTheoreme.  T  he  tyfiPropofition. 

Equall  triangles  confining  upon  one  and  the  fame  bafe ,  and 
on  one  and  the  fame  fide :  are  alfo  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel 
lines . 


f.  P'ppofe  tbstt  thefetwo  equal!  triangles  j4.BC  andT>  BCdo  conftjl  Vp* 
^ pon  one  and  the  fame  bafe  gamely,  B  C  and  on  one  and  the  fame  fide. 
The  I  Jay  that  they  are  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines.  Vra'We  a  right 
line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  ID. Noth  I  Jay  that  A  ID  is  a  parallel  line  to 
IB  C.  For  if  not ,  then  (by  the  3  r.  propofition )  by  the  point  A  dr  all?  e  Vnto  the 
right  line  BCa  parallel  line  jEyanddraH?  a  right  line  from  the  point  E  to  the 

point 


Folio. 


of Euclides  Elementes. 

point  C.  Wherfore)  triangle  EB  Cis 
(by)  n.j propofitio)equal  to  the  triangle 
A  B  CJor  they  conji/l  vpon  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  bafe, namely  fBC^and  are  in) 
felfe  fame  parallels ,  that  is y  A  E  and  B 
C.  But  the  triangle  DBCis  (by  fuppo • 
fition )  e quail  to  the  triangle  ABC, 

VV her fore  the  triangle  DB  Cis  equal 
to  the  triangle  EBCy  the  greater  Vnto 
the  lefle.'tohicb  is  impofiible.  Where • 
fore  the  line  A  E,  is  not  a  parallel  to 
the  line  B  CtAnd  in  like  forte  may  it  be 
proued  that  no  other  line  befides  is 
a  parallel  line  to  B  Cohere  fore  AT)  is  s 

a  parallel  line  to  B  CWherfore  equall 
triangles  confifiing  vpon  one  and  the  fame  bafe,  and  on  one  and  the  fame  fide, 
are  alfo  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  linesi'frbicb  Tvas  required  to  be  proued 

This  propofition  is  the  conuerfe  of  the  37.propofition.And  here  is  to  be  noted  This  Theorem* 
that  if  by  the  point  A.you  draw  vnto  the  line  B  C  a  parallel  line, the  lame  dial  of  •heconuerfeof 
neceffitie  either  light  vpo  the  pointD,orvndcr  it, or  aboue  it.  If  it  light  vpo  it, 
then  is  that  manifeft  which  is  required: but  ifit  light  vnder  it,then  foloweth  that 
abfurdi  tie  which  Euciide  puttech, namely,  that  the  greater  triangle  is  equall  to 
the  leffe:  which  felfe  fame  abfurditiealfo  will  follow,ifitfall  aboue  the  point  D* 

As  for  example. 

Suppofe  that  thefe  equall  triangles  A*B  Cand  T>  SC  do  confift  vppon  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  bafe  B  C,and  on  one  and  the  fame  fide.  Then  / 
fay,that  they  are  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines.and  that 
a  right  line  ioyning  together  their  toppes  is  a  parallel  to 
the  bafe  B  C.Draw  a  right  line  fro  A  to  D.Nowifthisbe 
not  a  parallel  to  the  bafe  B  C,let  AS  be  a  parallel  vnto  it, 
and  let  AS  fall  without  the  line  AD,  And  produce  the 
line  B  D  till  it  concurre  with  the  line  A  E  in  the  pointe  E 
and  draw  aline  from  E  to  C.Whcrfore  the  triangle  tsf  B 
Cis  equal  to  the  triangle  EB  C:but  the  triangle  A*B  Cis 
equall  to  the  triangle  D  B  C: Wherfore  the  triangle  SBC 
is  equall  to  the  triangle  D  B  C.  Namely,the  whole  to  the 
part:  which  is  impofiible. Wherfore  the  parallel  line  fal- 
leth  not  without  the  line  A  D.  And  Euciide  hath  proued 
that  it  falleth  not  within.  Wherfore  the  line  AD  is  a.  pa¬ 
rallel  vnto  the  line  3  C.  Wherfore  equall  triangles  which 
are  on  the  felfe  fame  fide,  and  on  one  and  the'felfe  fame 
bafe,are  alfo  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

An  additionofFluffates, 

The  felfe  fame  alfo  followeth  in  parallelogrames.Forifvpon  the  bafe  AB  be  Anadditiencf 
fet  on  one  &c  the  fame  fide  thefe  equal  parallelogrames  ABCD  sc  A  B  G  E,they  riujpstes. 
fhallof  neceffitiebem  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines.Fori  foot, but  one  of  them  is 

O.ii,  fet 


t*.  'J  f 


sirt  addition  ef 
Campanula 


Tbefirfl  Hooke 

feteyther  within  or  without,  let  the  parallelo¬ 
grams  B  F  being  equall  to  the  parallelograme  A 
BCD  be  fet  within  the  fame  parallel  lines: 
wherefore  the  fame  parallelograme  B  F  beyng  e- 
quall  to  theparallelograme  A  B  C  D  (by  the 
proportion)  (hall  alfo  be  equall  to  theother  pa- 
rallclograme  A  B  G  E  (by  the  firft  common  fen- 
tence)  For  the  parallelograme  AB  GE  is  by  fup$ 
pofition  equall  to  the  parallelogrammeAB  C  D; 
whetforc  theparallelograme  B  F  being  equall  to 
the  parallelograme  AB  G  E,the  parte  fhall  bee  e- 
qualto  the  whole, which  is  abfurde.The  fame  in- 
conuenience  alfo  will  foliowc,  if  it  fall  without* 

Wherefore  itcan  neither  fall  within  nor  withs 
out.Wherfore  equall  parallelogrames  beyng\rpon  one  and  the  felfc  fame  bafe 
and  on  one  and  the  fame  fide,are  alfo  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines.  . 

/  An  addition  of  Campanus. 

If  a  right  line  deride  ttyo fide:  of  a  mangle  into  m>o  equall  partes :  'it  fall  be  efuidiffant  vntd 
the  third fide. 


Suppofe  that  there  be  a  triangle  ABC:  and  let  there  bee  a  right  ly  ne  D  E, 
which  let  deuide  the  two  fides  AB  and  B  C  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  pointes 
D  and  E  Then  I  fay  ,that  the  line  D  E  i  s  a  parallel  to  the  line  A 
C4  Drawe  thefe two  lines  AEand  D  C*Now  then  imagining 
a  line  to  bedrawn  eby  the  point  E  parallel  to  the  line  A  B,  the 
triangleBDE  fhall  (by  the  38.pro pofition)  bee  equall  to  the 
triangle  D  A  E(for  their  two  bales  AD  and  D  Bare  putto  be 
equall)  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  triangle  B  D  E  is  equall  to 
the  triangle  C  E  D.  V  Vherforefby  the  firft  common  fen tece) 
the  triangles  E  AD  and E  C  D  are  equall,and  they  are  ere&ed 
on  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe,namely  ,DE,andon  one  and  the 
fame  fide. VVhereforefby  theqp^propofition)  they  are  in  the 
felfc  fame  parallel  lines,  and  the  line  which  ioyneth  together 
their  toppes  is  a  parallel  to  their  bafe.  V  Vherfore  the  lynes  DE  and  A  C  arepa- 
rallels  :  which|was  required  to  beproued* 


be^o.T heoreme.  The  ^.ofPropofition* 

Squall  triangles  confijling  vpon  equall  bafes ,  and  in  one  and 
the fame fide:  are  alfo  in  the  felfe fame  parallel  lines . 


iofe  that  thefe  equall  triangles  A  EC  and  CD  E  do  confift  Vppon  e* 
Squall  bafes  9  that  isy  Vppon  ft  C  and  CE ,  and  on  one  and  the  fame fyde , 
ti®  namely  yon  the  jide  of  A.  Then  I fay  that  they  are  in  the felfe fame  paraU 

lei 


ofEuclides  Elementes.  Fol.ji. 

Ml  lines .  Draw  by  the  firB  peticion  a 
right  line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  e 
’  B)JS[ow  I  fay  that  A  T)  is  a  parallel  line 
to  B  E.Forifnotjhen  (by  the  y.propo* 

Jition)by  the  point  A  dray?  Vnto  the  line 
BE  a  parallel  line  A  F.  And  dralbe  a 
right  line  from  the  point  Fto  thepomte 
EyVherfore(b)  the  js, propoJitio)the 
triangle  B  A  Cis  equall  to  the  triangle 
CF E'for  they  confift  Vpon  equal  bafesy 
that  is  B  C  and  C  E,and  are  in  the  felfe 
fame  parallel  lines, namely,  B  E  and  A 
F.But  by  fuppofttion  the  triangle  A  B  ^ 

C  is  equal  to  the  triangle  CDEJ/Vher * 
fore  the  triangle  DC  Eis  equall  to  the  triangle  FCE, namely  s  the  greater  Vnto 
tbelejfe}'tobich  isimpofiible.Wberfore  A  F  is  not  a  parallel  line  to  B  Et  And 
in  lib  forte  may  Tbe proue  that  no  other  line  befides  A  D  is  a  parallell  line  to  B 
E.Wherfore  AD  is  a  parallel  lyne  to  BE  Equall  triangles  therfore  confining 
Vppon  equall  bafes^and  in  one  and  the  fame  fideiare  alfo  in  the  felfe  fame  pa* 
rallel  lines:  lubicb  "teas  required  to  be proued. 

This  propofition  istheconuerfeot:  the38,pcopo.(ition*And  inthisas  in  the 
former  propofition,ifthc  parallel  linedrawen  by  the  point  A,  Ihould  not  paffe 
by  the  poincD,  it  mud  paiTe  eyther  beneath  it,or  aboue  it. Eudide&tceth  forth 
onely  the  abfurdity  which  ihould  follow  if  it  pafle  beneath  it:  bat  the  felfe  fame 
abfurditicalfo  wdfoliow  ifit  ihould  paileaboue  it:  as  itisnothardto  lee  by  the 
gatheringthereofinche  former  propofition*  And  therefore  here  I  omitte  it* 

The  3 1 .  Theoreme.  The  4 ifPropoftion . 

If i par allelograme  &  a  triangle  haue  one  &  the  felfe fame 
bafe,  and  be  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines  :  the  parallel 
grame/halbe  double  to  the  triangle. 


E  T>  A 


let  the  be  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines, 
namely  fB  C&jt  E.The  I fay  ft  hat  the 
paralklograme  ABCDis  double  to  the 
triangle  B  E  CJDraief  by  the firjl peti * 
cion )  a  rygbt  line  from  the  point  e  A  to 
y  pointe  Cyyherjore(by  the  37.  propo • 

Oaf  fition 


Vppofe  that  the  paralklo  * 
grame  ABCD and  tbetri* 
angle  EBC haue  one  the 
fame  bafepiamely^  B  C,  and 


Ctnftru&M#. 


Demonfiration 
leading  to  an 
abfurditis^ 


T hh  proportion 
it  the  Conner fe 

of  the 
pofitiiu 


DemenBfitttem 


) 


(TbejirflcBooJ{C 


Jition )  the  triangle  ABC  is  equall  to 
the  triangle  EBC-.  for  they  are  Vppon 
one  and  the  ftlfe  fame  baje  &  Cy  and  in 
the felfe fame  parallell  lines  B  C  and  E 
A :  hut  the parallelogram e  A  B  CS)  is 
double  to  the  triangle  ABCfby  the  34, 
propofition  )for  the  diameter  thereof  A 
Cdeuideth  it  into  tUso  equal  part  slither 
fore  the parrallelogramme  ABCS)  is 
double  to  the  triangle  E  B  Clftherfore 
a  parallelogramme  and  a  triangle  haue 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe ,  and  be  in  the  felfe  fame  parallels ,  the  parallel 
gr amefhall  be  double  to  the  triangle:  -frhicb  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Tv/o  cafet  in 
tbif  propofition. 


This  propofition  hath  two  cafes.For  thebafebcyng  one,the  triangle  may 
haue  his  toppe  withoutthc  parallelograme,  or  wichin/The  firftcafe  is  demon- 
ftrated  of  the  authorfThe  fecond  cafe  is  thus. 


Suppofe  that  there  be  a  parallelograme  AB  CD> and  let 
the  triangle  be  E  C  Neither  of  which  let  haue  oneand  the 
felfe  fame  bafe,  namely,  CDt  and  let  them  be  in  the  felfe 
fame  parallel  lines  CD  and  A  B ,  and  let  the  toppe  of  the 
triangle  £  C  ^namely, the  point  £,be  within  the  paralle¬ 
lograme  ABC  .D.Then  /  fay  that  the  parallelograme  A  2 
C  D  is  double  to  the  triangle  EC  D.  Draw  a  right  line  fro 
the  point  A  to  the  point  D.Now  forafmuch  as  the  paral¬ 
lelograme  A  B  CD  is  double  to  the  triangle  AC  D  (by  the 
34-propofition) and  the  triangle  tsfDCis  equall  to  the 
triangle  £  DC  (by  the  3  7.  propofition  J.Therfore  thepa- 
rallelogrammc  A  B  CD  is  double  to  the  triangle  £  CD; 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


AES 


jcorolUrj.  By  this  propofition  it  is  manifeft:  that  if  the  bafe  be  doubled,  the  triangle  c* 

refted  vppon  it  flialbe  equall  to  the  parallelogramme. 

The  felfe  fame  And  if  the  bafes  ofthe  triangle  and  of  the  parallelogramme  be  equall ,  the 

demonfirattm  felfe  fame  demonftration  will  lerue  if  you  drawc  the  diameter  oi  the  parallelo- 
Trifngk  &  tic  grame*  F°r  the  triangles  being  equal ,  the  parallelogramme  which  is  double  to 
parallelograme  the  one,  fiial  alfo  be  double  to  the  other.  And  the  triangles  muft  nedcs  be  equal! 
beSpon  tjHad  (by  the  38.propofition)for  that  their  bafes  arc  equal,and  for  that  they  are  in  the 
felfe  fame  parallel  lines. 

The  conucrfeofthis  propofition  is  thus. 

If a  parallelogramme  and  a  triangle  haue  one  And  the felfe fame  bafi,or  equall  bafes  the  one  to 
t he  at  her, and  be  deferi  bed  on  one  and  the fame  fide  ofthe  bafe  :  if  the  parallelogramme  be  double  to 
the  triangle, they  Jhalbe  in  the felfe fame  parallel  lines. 

Theconuerfe  of  For  if  they  be  notjthe  whole  fiial  be  equal  I  to  his  parte.  For  then  the  toppe 

tbit  propofition.  of  the  triangle  muftnedes  fall  either  within  the  parallel  lines  or  without.  And 

whether 


ofEuclides  Elementes .  F0L52. 

whether  of  both  foeuer  it  do,  one  and  the  felfe  fame  impoffibilitie  follow, 

if  by  the  toppe  of  the  triangle  be  draweti  vnto  the  bafe  a  parallel  line. 


An  other  conuerfe  of  the  fame  proportion* 

If  a  parallelogramme  be  the  double  of  a  triangle, being  both  Within  the felfe fame  parallel  lines  X  other  cat- 

then, are  thty  vpon  one  and  the felfe fame  bafe, or  vpon  equallbafes  .F  or  if  111  that  Cafe  their  has  uerfe  ofthe  ~ 
fes  fliould  be  vnequal,  then  might  ftraight  way  be  pro ued,  that  the  whole  ise-  famefr3?cfair>' 
quail  to  his  part: which  isimpoffible* 


A  trapefium  hamng  two  fides  onely  parallel  lines,is  ey  ther  more  then  don-  Compart  fort  of a 
ble ,  or  leffe  then  double  to  a  triangle  contayned  within  the  felfe  fame  parallel  triangle  and# 
lines, and  hauingone  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe  with  the  trapefium, or  table.!  oil  the 
double  it  cannot  be, for  then  it  fhould  be  a  parallelogramme.  A  trapefium  ha?  felfe- fame  up, 
uing  two  fides  parallels  hath  ofnccelTitic  the  one  of  them  longer  then  the  other:  and  in  the  felfe 
for  ft  they  were  equall  then  fliould  the  other  two  fides  encloiing  them  be  aifo  e-  tarallel 
quail  (by  the  35*propofition»)Ifthe  greater  fide  of  the  trapefium  be  thebafe.of  taes* 
the  triangle, then  dial  th<“  trapefium  be  leffe  then  the  double  ofthe  triangle  And 
if  the  leffe  fide  of  the  trapefiu  m  be  the  bafe  of  the  triangle  then  fhall  the  trapefi- 
um  be  greater  then  the  triangle. 


For  fnppofe  that  AB  CD  be  a  trapefium,and  let 
two  fides  thereof,  namely,  AB  and  CT>  be  parallel 
lines,and  let  the  fide  AB  be  leffe  then  the  fide  CD,  & 
produce  the  fide  AB  infinitlye  on  the  fide  B  to  the 
point  i7.  And  let  the  triangle  E  CD  haue  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  bafe  with  the  trapefium,  namely,  the  line 
CD.Then  I  fay  that  the  trapefium  AB  CD  is  leffe  the 
the  double  ofthe  triangle  £  CjD.Forput  the  line  AF 
equall  to  the  line  C  D  (  by  the  3  .propofitio)anddraw 
a  line  from  D  to  F.  Wherefore  A  CD  F  is  a  parallelo¬ 
gramme  (  by  the  3  3 .  propofition) .  Wherefore  (by 
the  3  4  propofition)it  is  double  to  the  triangle  £  CD. 
But  the  trapefium  AB  CD  is  a  part  of  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  A  CD  F.  Wherefore  the  trapefium  AB  CD 
is  leffe  then  the  double  of  the  triangle  £CD:  which 
was  required  to  beproued. 

' 

Agayne  let  the  triangle  haue  to  his  bafe  the  fide 
A  .S.Then  I  fay  that  the  trapefium  A  2?  CD  is  trea¬ 
ter  then  the  double  of  the  triangle  tAE  2. For  from 
the  fide  C  D  cut  of  the  line  CF  equall  to  the  line  A  B 
(by  the  3 .  propofition)  And  draw  a  line  from  B  to 
F,  Wherfore  (by  the  3  3  .propofition )  <lAB  C  Fisa. 
parallelogramme.- andjrherefore  is  (by  the  344*0- 
pofition  J  double  to  the  triangle  csEEB.  Where¬ 
fore  the  trapefium  B  CD  is  more  then  thedou. 
ble  ofthe  triangle  tAEBi  which  was  required  to 
beproued. 


c  r 


When  the  grea¬ 
ter  fide  of  the 
trapefum  is  the 
bafe  of  the  tri- 
angle. 


When  the  leffe 
fide  is  the  bafe. 


•.  r- 


0.iiij, 


T 


T3 


C&njlruftton. 


ThefirttHookg 

The  u/Probleme .  'The  fyi.propofition. 

V nto  a  triangle geuenjo  make  a parallelngrame  equal ftihofe 
angle [hall  bee  quail  to  a  reBtline  angle  geuen. 

'Vppofe  that  the  triangle  geuen  beABCy  and  let  the 
retliline  angle  geuen  be  It  is  required  that  Vnto  the 

[triangle  ABC  there  be  made  a  paradelograme  equally 
‘tohoje  angle Jhal  be  equall  to  therefliline  angle  geuen, 
namely, to  the  angle  DDeuide( by  the  io ,propojitio)the 
line  B  C  into  two  equall  partes  in  the pointe  E.  And(by 
the  jirH  petition)  dra'ta  a  right  line  from  the  point  A  to 
the  point  E.And(by  the  2$.  proportion)  Vponthe  right 
Une geuen  E  C,and  to  the  point  in  it 
geuen  E}make  the  angle  C  EE equal 
to  the  angle  D.Andfby  the  5 1.  pro • 
pojition)  by  the  point  A  dr  alt)  Vnto 
the  line  E  C  a  parallel  line  A  H:  and 
let  the  line  EFcut  the  line  AH  in 
the  point  F.and(hy  thefame)hy  the 
point  C ,  dralbeyntothe  lineFFa 
parallel  line  C  G.W  her  fore  FECG 
is  a  parallelograms.  And  forajmuche 
as  BE  is  equall  to  E  Cither  fore  (by 
the  i  proportion)  the  triangle  A  .  __ 

BE  is  equall  to  the  triangle  A  EC, 
for  they  conjM  ypo  equall hafes  that 

is  BE  and  EC,  and  are  in  the  felfe fame  parallel  lines, namely,  BCandA  H 
Wherfore  the  triangle  ABC  is  double  to  the  triangle  A  E  C.And  the  parade * 
lograme  CEFGis  alfo  double to  the  triangle  A  EC:  for  they  haue  one&  the 
Jetfe  fame  baJeynamely,E  Ci  and  are  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines,  that  is, EC 
and  AH.  Wherfore  the  parallelograms  BE  CG  is  equall  to  the  triangle  A  B 
C,and  hath  the  angle  C  E  F  equall  to  the  angle  geuen  D,  Wherefore  ynto  the 
triangle  geuen  AB  Cis  made  an  equall  pqrallelogr ante, namely, F EC  Gfyyhofe 
angle  C  E  Fis  equall  to  the  angle  geuen  D:  'tobicb  Tt>as  required  to  he  done4 


t>emo»pration 


D 


-  *■>  v\\  U  4V.O1 


The  conuerfe  of 
this  former  fro- 
p  option. 


orti  n 

The  conuerfe  ofthis  proportion  after  Pelitarius . 

Vnto  afarattelogramme  geuen,  to  make  a  triangle  equall,  hauyng  an  angle  equall  to  a  reflilint 
angle  geuen.  1  ■  ' 

Suppofe  that  the  parallelograrae  geuen  be  A  B  C7),  and  let  the  angle  geuen  be  Ea 
Itis  required  vnto  the parallelogtaine  *4 'BC  T>  to  make  a  triangle  equall  hauyng  an 

angle 


ofEucIidesElementes. 


Fol.%. 


A  '  B 


m 


angle  equal  to  the  angle  £.Vpon 
the line. CD  and  to  the  pointe  in 
it  C,defcribe  (by  the  2  3 .  propo- 
pofition)  an  angle  equall  to  the 
angle  Ei  which  let  be  DCF:  aud 
let  the  line  C  F  cut  the  line  cA'  B 
being  produced,  in  the  point  F: 
and  produce  the  line  C I)  (which 
is  paralfel’ to  the  line  A  F)  to  the 
point  G.And  put  the  line  DGe- 
quall  to  the  line  C  D  and  draw  a 
line  from  F  to  Cj,  Then  / fay  that 
the  triangle  C  F  G  is  equal  to  the 
parallelograme  ABCD.  For  for¬ 
afmuch  as(by  the  38.  propofition )  the  whole  triangle  CF  G  is  double  to  the  triangle 
CDF .  Aud(  by  the  4 1  .propofition)the  parallelograme  ABC  D  isdouble  to  the  fame 
triangle  C  D  Fi  therfore  the  parallelograme  A  BCD  and  the  triangle  CFG  are  equall 
the  one  to  the  other:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


n 


The  yiftbeoreme.  The  4.3. Tropofition . 

fn  euery parallelograme fbe fupplementes  ofthoje paralklo* 
grammes  which  are  about;  the  diameter  ?are  efuaUthe  one  to 
the  other.  ? 

Vppofe that  ABC  (Dbea parallelograme, and  let  the  diameter  then 
of  be  A  C:  and  abou  t  the  diameter  A  Clet  thefeparadelogrames  EM 
and  O  Fconfift:  and  let  the  fupplementes  be  B  Kjmd  KJD.  Then  I 
fay  that  the/upplement  B  Kjs  equall  to  the  fupplement  K,!D.  For 
fora/much  as  ABCD  is  a  parallelograme 
and  the  diameter  therofis  A  C}  therfore  & 

( by  the  3  4. propofition )  the  triangle  A 
B  C  is  equall  to  the  triangle  A£>C,  A * 
gayne  forafmuch  as  A  EKJA  is  a  pa* 
ratlelograme3and  the  diameter  therofis 
A  therfore  (by  the  fame)  the  trian* 
gle  A  E  Kjs  equall  to  the  triangle  A  M 
K.And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  the  tri¬ 
angle  KJFC  is  equall  to  the  triangle  K^ 

G  C,  And  forafmuch  as  the  triangle  A  E 
Kjs  equall  to  the  triangle  A  HK+and 
the  triangle  i^FC  to  the  triangle  K  G 
C,  therfore  the  triangles  A  E  Kjtnd  K, 

G  C  are  equall  to  the  triangles  A  H K 

and  K.EC:  and  the  whole  triangle  A  B  Cis  equall  to  the  whole  triangle  A  !D 

<Pf  C 


v<-  Thefir/i^ooke 


H  o  tp  parallclo- 
grammes  are 
fajdeto  conffle 
about  a  dia¬ 
meter. 


C:  Tbherfore  the  refidue, namely  ,the  fupplement  ©  KJs  (by  the  common  fen* 
tence)  e  quail  to  the  refiduejiamelyjo  the fupplement  I(J) .  Wherefore  in  e* 
uery parallelogr amme ,  thefupplementes  of tbofe parallelogrammes  'tobicbe  are 
about  the  diameter,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  Tbhiche  Tt>as  required  to  be 
proued , 

Thofe  paralldcgrames  are  fayde  to  confift  about  a  diameter  which  haue  to 
their  diameters  partofthc  diameter  ofthe  whole  and  great  parallelograme,  as 
in  the  example  of  Euclidc,  Andfuchparallclb- 
grames  whichhaue  not  to  their  diameters  part 
ofthe  diameter  ofthe  greater  parallelograme, 
are  fay  de  not  to  confift  about  the  diameter,^  or . 
the  the  diameter  ofthe  greater  parallelograme 
cutteth  the  fide  outlie  Idle  cocayned  wy  thin  it. 

As  in  the  parallelogramme  A  i?,thc  diameter  <7Z>, 
cutteth  the  fide  EH  of  the  parallelogramme  CE. 

Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  CEis  not  about  j 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  diameter  with  the  parallelo- 
grammeC®.  > 


H 


C 


r~ 

■  yAf:  y  . 

t  • ;  > 

* 

E  .  , 

3 


Supplementes  or  Complementes  are  thofe  figures,  which  with  the  two  pa- 
Sctmpkm!nS.  lallelogrpmmcs accomplifinhewholeparan-clogramme.  Although  Peiitarius 
for  diftmttion  fakeputteth  a  difference  betwene  Supplementes  and  Comple¬ 
mented, The  parallelogram  mes  aboutthc  diameter  he  'calieth  Complementes, 
the  other  two  figures  he  calieth  Supplementes* 


Three  cafes  in 
thisTheorcmc. 


7  he  firft  cafe. 


...  This  theorerae  hath  three  cafes  onely*  Fortheparallelogrammes  which 
confift  about  the  diameter,  eythcr  touch  the  one  the  other  in  a  point:  or  by  accc 
ray  ne  parte  of  the  diameter  are  feuered  the  one  from  the  other:  or  els  they  cutte 
the  one  the  other .  For  the  firft  cafe  is  the  example  ofEuclidebefore  fct.  The  fc- 
cond  cafe  is  thus.  •  '  •  :  ’ 


The  fecond  cafe. 


Suppofe  that  AB  be  a  parallelograme? 
whofe  diameter  let  be  CD  :  andabpute  tfie 
fame  diameter  let  thefe  parallelogra’mmes  C 
KandD  L  confift:  and  betwene  the  let  there, 
be  acertavne  part  of  the  diameter,  namely, . 

L  K.Then  I  fay  that  the  two  fupplementcs  A 
O  L  ICE  &  IS  F  KL  //are  equall.  For  we  may 
as  beforefby  the  3  4.propofition  jproue  that 
the  triangle  AC D,  is  eq uall  to  the  triangle 
B  CD, and  the  triangle  E  C  K  to  the  triangle 
K  CF,  and  alfo  the  triangle  D  G  L  to  the  tri-  c 
angle  D  H  Lt  Wherfore  the  refidue, namely, 
the  fiuefided  figure  AG L  KE  is  equall  to 
the  refidue, namely,  to  the  flue  fided  figure  B 
F  K  L  Hi  that  is,  the  one  fupplement  to  the 
other  .which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


The th>rd cafe.  But  now  fuppofe  &A B  to  be  a  paralleIogramme,and  let  the  diameter  thereof  be 

CD:  and  let  the  one  of  the  parallelogrammes  about  it  be  E  C  F  L9  and  let  the  other  be 

s?  :*  DGKHi 


of  Euclides  Elementes. 


FoL 54. 


A 


Jp 


DGKH,o£which  let  the  one  cut  the  other. 

Then  I  fay  that  the  fupplementes  F  G  and  EH 
areequall.For  forafmuchas  the  whole  trian¬ 
gle  DGK  is  equal  to  the  whole  triangle  DHK 
fbythe  jq.propofition  J, and  part  alfo  of  the 
onemarndy,  the  triangle  KL  Mis  equal  to 
partoftheother.namely^to  the  triangle  KL 
iV(by  the  fame),  forLKis  aparallelograme  i 
therefore  the  refidue,naraelyJthe  Trapefium 
©TA^Ais  equall  to  the  refidue,  namely,  to 
the  trapefiu  D  L  MG*  but  the  triangle  ADC 
is  eq  ual  to  the  triangle  BCD,  and  in  the  pa- 
railelograme  E  F,  the  triangle  F  CL  is  equal! 
to  the  triangle  £C£,and  the  trapefium  D  G 
MLisf  asit  hath  bene  proued)  equal!  to  the 
trapefium DHNE.  Wherefore  the  refid ue, 

namely,  the  quadrilater  figure  G  F  is  equall  to  the  refidueuiamely,  to  the  quadrilater 
figure  E Hjhxt  is, the  one  fupplement  to  the  other:which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


This  is  to  be  noted  that  in  ech  ofthofe  three  cafes  it  may  fo  happen, that  the 
parallelogrammes  aboute  the  diameter  {hall  not  haue  one  angle  common  wy  th 
the  whole  parallelogramme,as  they  haue, in  the  former  figures.But  yet  though 
they  haue  not, the  felfe  fame  demonftration  wil  feme,  as  it  is  play  ne  to  fee  in  the 
figures  here  vndcrneathput*Foralwayes,  if  from  thinges  equall  be  taken  a^ay 
thinges  equall,thc  refidue  fhalbe  equall. 


/ 


This  propofition  P  elitarius  calleth  Gnomicall,  and  mifticall,for  that  of  it 
(faythhe)  fpring  infinite  dcmonftrations,andvfes  in  geometry.  And  he  putteth 
the  conuerle  thereof  after  this  manner*  andmifttcal. 

V  ;  *  "  -  ’  '( i  <  '  *  *  'V 

If  a  parallelogramme  be  derided  into  Wo  equall  fupplementes ,and  into  Wo  complements  What-  The  conuerfe  of 
foeuer:  the  diameter  of  the  Wo  complementes  JhaH  be  fit  direttly ,  and  make  one  diameter  of  the  this  propofition. 
Vehole  parallelogramme. 

Here  is  to  be  noted  as  1  before .  .0  lied  thatpeli  tarius  for  diftindion 
fake  putteth  a  diflerencebetwene  fupplementes  and  complementes  /which  diffe- 
rencejfor  that  I  haue  before  declared,  I  fhallnot  needeheretorepeteagayne. 

Suppofe  that'  there  be  a  parallelogramme  A  BCD,  whofe  two  equall  fupplements 
let  be  A  £  F  (./  and  F  HD  K,and  let  the  two  complementes  thereof  be  GF  C  K  and  £5 
££T: whofe  diameters  let  be  CF  and  FA.Then  I  fay  that  CFB  is  one  right  line,  and  is 
thediameter  of  the  whole  parallelogram  me  A  B  CD\  forifit  be  not,  then  is  there  an 

F-ij*  other 


/ 


GtnRruttisn. 


Tbefirft'Bookp 


other  diameter  of  the  whole  parrallelogrammewhich  let 
be  C  L  B  being  drawen  vnder  the  diameters  C  F  and  F  B, 
and  cutting  the  the  in  the  point  L,And( by  the 

1 1  .propolition  )  by  the  point  L,draw  vnto  the  line  a A  C 
a  parallel  line  M  L  N.  And  fo  are  there  in  the  whole  paral¬ 
lelogramme  A'B CD  two fupplements  AMGL and  L H 
N  D, which  by  this  propolition  lhalbeequall  the  one  to 
the  other.  For  that  they  are  about  the  diameter  C  L  B. 
Butthefupplementex4r£.F(7is  fbyfuppolition)  equall 
to  the  fupplcment  F  H  D  K:and forafmuch  as  FHD  Kis 
greater  then  LHDN,AEFG  alfo  dial  be  greater  then  A 
MGL,nameIy,the  part  greater  then  the  whole:  which  is 
impolfible.  And  by  the  fame  reafo  may  it  be  proued,that 
the  diameter  cannot  be  drawen  aboue  the  diameters  C  F 


-t 


and  F  B.  Wherefore  C  F  B  is  one  diameter  of  the  whole  parallelogramme  tABCD: 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


H*The  rz.  Trobleme .  The 44. Tropofition . 

Vppon  a  right  line geuen  Jo  apply  e  a  paraUelograme  equall 
to  a  triangle geuen,  and contayningan  angle  equall  to  a  rev * 
tiline  angle geuenm 


7M  V pp°ft  that  the  right  litiegeuen  he  A  !E,and  let  the  triangle  geuen 
yjibe  Cyand  let  the  reSliline  angle  geuen  be  (D.Itis  required  Vpon  the 
I  right  line  geuen  AByto  apply  e  a  parallelogramme  equal  to  the  trian* 
gle  geuen  Cy  and  contayning  an  angle  equall  to  therectiline  angle ge* 
ue  (D,T)efcribe(by  t he  4 fypropo/i tion)y 
paraUelograme  EG EF equall  to  the  tri* 
angle  Cy  and  hailing  the  angle  <BGFe* 
quaU  to  the  angle  (D.And  vnto  the  line  E 
<B  ioyne  the  line  A  E  in  fuch  fort  that  they 
make  both  one  right  line.  Jnd  extend  the 
line  EG  beyond  the  point  G  to  thepoynte 
HtAnd(by  the  ]ipropo/ition)by  the  point 
A  draive  to  either  ofthefe  lines  E  G  and 
EE  a  paraUellme  A  H.  And  (by  the  fir  ft 
peticion)draf»  a  right  line  from  the  point 
Hto  the  point  E.And  forafmuch  as  vpon 

the  parallel  lines  A  Hand  E  Efalleth  a  certayne  right  line  H F,  there  fore(by 
the  29  propofition)the  angles  A  HEandHEE>are  equaUto  two  rightangles: 
therefore  the  angles  E  H  G  andGFE  are  lejje  then  th>o  right  angles  :  but  if 
ypon  tivo  right  lines  fall  a  right  line  making  the  inward  angles  on  one  and  the 

fame 


I 


ofEuclides  Ekmentes.  FoL $£* 

fame fide  lejfe  then  tfro  right  angle  s^thofi  right  Itnes  being  infinitly  produced 

JhaU  at  the  length  mete  on  that  fide  in  which  are  the  angles  lejfe  then  tfro  right 

angtes(by  the  5,  petition).  VVherfore  the  lines  HBand  FE  being  infinitly 

produced  "frill at  the  length  mete, Let  them  be  produced^  let  them  mete  in  the 

point  K^And  (by  the  3 1  propofition)  by  the point  KJlrafr  to  either  of  thefe  lines 

EA  and  F  Ha  parallel  line  K^LfAnd  (by  the  2. petition)  extend  the  lines  H 

A  and  GB  till  they  cocurre  "frith  the  line  H\L  in  the  pointes  L  and  M. Where*  Dem»njtr*tio» 

fore  H  L  EJFis  a  parallelogramme yand  the  diameter  thereof  is  H  Kg  and  a» 

bout  the  diameter  HKjre  the  parallelogrammes  A  G  and  M Ey  and  the  flip* 

plementes  areLB  and  BFifrhere fore  (by  the  4  3 ,  propofition)  the  (up  plem  en  t 

LB  is  equall  to  thefupplement  BFibut  by  confiruttton  the  parallelograme  BF 

is  e  quail  to  the  triangle  Cifrherefore  aljo  the  parallelogramme  L  Bis  e  quail  to 

the  triangle  C,And forafmuch  as  the  line  F His  a  parallel  to  the  line  Ly  and 

Vpon  them  lighteth  the  line  G  Mother e fore  (by  the  27.  propofition)  the  angle 

FG  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  B  ML, But  the  angle  FG  B is  equal 1  to  the  angle 

!Dytherfore  the  angle  B  ML  is  equal  to  the  angle  D.  Wherfore  Vpo  the  right 

linegeuen  A  B  is  applied  the  par rallelogr ante  L  B, equal  to  the  triangle geuen 

Qand  contayning  the  angle  B  ML  equal  to  the  reFlilme  angle geuen  iD:  frhicb 

fras  required  to  be  done* 

Applications  of 

Applications  oflpaces  or  figures  to  lines  with  exceffes  or  wantes  is  (fayth  ^ff  soffalTs 
Eudemus)  an  auncient  muention  of  Pithagoras.  a»au»dent  inn 

Mention  of  Pi- 

When  the  fpace  or  figure  is  ioyned  to  the  whole  line, the  is  the  figure  fayd  it 

to  be  applied  to  thcline.But  if  the  lengthof  the  fpace  be  longer  then  the  line, the  fajde  to  be  ap- 
it  is  fay  de  to  exceede:  and  ifthe  length  of  the  figure  be  fhorter  then  the  hne,fo  r^dtoaiine. 
that  part  of  the  line  remay  neth  without  the  figure  deferibed,  then  is  it  fayde 
to  vant. 

In  this  probleme  arc  three  thinges  geuen*A  right  line  to  which  the  applica-  ffZfJthss 
tion  is  made, which  here  muftbe  the  onefideofthe  parallelogramme  applied,  A  propofition , 
triangle  whereunto  the  parallelogramme  applied  muft  bee  equall :  and  an  angle 
wheruntothe  angle  of  the  parallelograme  applied  mull:  be  equally  And  if  the  an¬ 
gle  geuen  be  a  rightangle,the  fhal  the  parallelograme  applied  be  either  a  fquarc9 
or  a  figure  on  the  one  fide  longer*  But  if  the  angle  geuen  bean  obtufc  or  an 
acute  angle9then  flia.ll  the  parallelograme  appliedbe  a  Rhombus  or  diamond  fi- 
gurejor  els  a  Rhomboides  or  diamondlike  figure* 


The  Conuerfe  of  this  propofition  after  Peli  tarius* 

Vpon  a  right  line geuen ,to  applie  vnto  a  parallelograme  geuen  an  equall  triangle  hauyng  an  an* 
gle  equall  to  an  angle  geuen.  T^*  conuerfe  of 

tba  propofition. 


Suppofe  that  the  right  line  geuen  be  aA  J?,and  let  theparallelograme  geuen  be  C 
D  B  F*and  let  the  angle  geuen  be  G.  It  is  required  vpon  the  line  A  B  to  deferibe  a  tria- 
gleequall  to  the  parallelograme  CD  E F, hauing  an  angle  equall  to  the  angle  G.  Drawe 
the  diameter  CF&produceCD  beyond  the  pointD  to  the  point  H.  And  put  the  line 

P.iij,  D  H 


ThefirflUoohg 


Cong/uBion„ 


D£/ equall  to  the  lin eCD.  And 
draw  a  line  from  F  to  H.  Now  the 
(by  the  qi.prqpofition)  thetria- 
gle  C  H F  is  equall  to  the  paralle- 
lograine  CD  E F ^nd(by  this 
propofition)vppon  the  line  B 
defcribe  a  parallelograme  ABKL 
equall  to  the  triangle  CHi^ha- 
uing  the  angle  AUL  equal  to  the 
angle  geuen  G;  and  produce  the 
line  B  L  beyonde  the  pointe  L  to 

the  point  M.And  put  the  line  LM  equall  to  the  line  BL,and  draw  aline  from  A  to  Mv 
Then  I  fay-that  vpon  the  line  AB  is  defcribed  the  triangle  A  B  M,which  is  fuch  a  trian¬ 
gle  as  is  required.  For  (by  the  41  .propofition)the  triangle  A  BM  is  equal  to  the  paral¬ 
lelogramme  AB  K  L(  for  that  they  are  betwene  two  parallel  lines  B  M  and  A  K,  &  the 
bafe  of  the  triangle  is  double  to  the  bafe  of  the  parallelogramme)  :but  A  3  K  L  is  by 
conftrudion  equall  to  the  triangle  C  H F:and  the  triangle  CHFis  equall  to  the  pa¬ 
rallelograme  CD  E  F.Wherfpre  (by  the  firil.cpmmon  fentence)  the  triangle  ABM.  is 
equall  to  the  parallelograme  geuen  CD£  isandhath  his  angle  A  BM  equal  to  the  an¬ 
gle  geuen  C:  which  was  required  to  be  done.  *'■ 


vv 


-  .  i  *  •  s  v?  •  *, 

The  ifTrobleme,  The  ^Tropofition* 

r  ‘  '  1  u)  ri  ‘  '  •  'A ‘  ' 

l  Ky  r.  j  v  . 

To  defcribe  a  parallelograme  equal  to  any  reBiline figure  ge* 
uen^andcontayning  an  angle  equall  to  a  reUiline  angle  gene. 


i.  L’a 


Demon  fir  at  ion' 


Vppofe  that  the  re  Biline  figure  geuen  he  3  C(D,and  let  the  reBilim 

angle getie  he  E,It  isrequired  to  de/crihe  a  parallelograme  equall  to  the 
reBilme  figure  geuen  SiftCD^and  contayning  an  angle  equal  to  the  re* 
Bilim  angle  geuen  E.(Dra'to(by  thefirfi:  peticioma  right  line  fro  the  point 0  to 
the  point  n.And  (by  the  y2,propofition)vnto  the  triangle  Aft  l D  defcribe  an  e* 
quail  parallelograme  F  Mfiauing  his  angle  Fjf^FI  equall  to  the  angle  E.  And 
(by  the  4dtofthefirfi)  bpo  the  right 
line  G  H apply  the  parallelogramme 
G  A i equal  to  the  triangle  VBCfia* 
uing  his  angle  GUM  equall  to  the 
angle  E.  And for aj much  as  eyther  of 
thofe  angles  H  EfF and  G  H  M  is 
equall  to  the  angle  E :  therefore  the 
angle  MEfFis  equall  to  the  angle 
G  TIM:  put  the  angle  EfM  G  com * 
mon  to  them  both  fibber  fore  the  an * 
oles  F  KJFd and KJAG  are  equall 
to  the  angles  EfH.  G  and  GUM. 
but  the  angles  F  E^M  and  EfMG 
are  (by  the  ~g,propofition)  equall  to 
tn?Q  right  angles  yEherf ore  the  angles  KJA  G  and  G  MM  are  equall  to  two 

right 


ofEudtdes  Elementes.  FoL*>6 . 

right  angles.lSlow  then  Vnto  a  right  line  G  H,and  to  a  point  in  the  fame  H^are 
drathen  two  right  lines  Kjtdand  HM not  both  on  one  and  the  famejidey  ma <* 
king  the fide  angles  equall  to  ttvo  right  angles, W  her  fore  (by  the  i^propofiti* 
on)  the  lines  K^H  and  HM  make  dire  Elly  one  right  line.  And  forajnmch  asV* 
pon  the  parallel  lines  J\M  and  F  Gfalleth  the  right  line  H  Gy  therefore  the 
alternate  aagles  M  HG  and  H  G  Fare  (by  the  2<y  propofition  fequali  the  one 
to  the  other :  put  the  angle  H G  L  common  to  them  both^Vherfore  the  angles 
MHG  and  H G  Fare  equall to  the  angles  HG  F  andHG  L  'But  the  angles 
MHGejr  HGL  are  equall  to  ttvo  right  angles  (by  ey  29^ propofition), VF her* 
fore  alfo  the  angles  H  G  Fand  HG  L  ire  equall  to  tlvo  right  angles.  VVber* 
fore  (by  the  \4,propofitiori)  the  lines  FG  and  G  L  make  dire  Elly  one  right  line. 
And  f ora/much  as  the  line  E\Fis  (by  the  24.fr  opofition)  equal  to  the  lyne  H  Gs 
and  ft  is  alfo  parallel  Vnto  it:  and  the  line  HGisfby  the  fame)  equall  to  the  line 
MLjtherfore  (by  the  first  common fentence)  the  line  F  Kjs  equall  to  the  lyne 
MLyand  alfo  a  parallel  Vnto  it  (by  the  3  o,propofition),  But  the  right  lynes 
M and  F L  ioyne  them  together  yVherf ore  (by  the  $  $  ,propo(ition)  the  lines  E( 
M  andF  L  are  equall  the  on  to  the  other  and  parallel  Itnes.VVberfore  IfiFLM 
is  a  parallelograme.And  forafmuch  as  the  triangle  A  BID  is  equal  to  the  paraU 
lelogrameF  H}and  the  triangle  DBCto  the  parallelogramme  G  M ;  therfore 
the  whole  reEliline  figure  ABCDis  equall  to  the  tvhole  parallelograme  Kfih 
M.  VF her  fore  to  the  reEliline  figure  geuen  ABCDis  made  an  equall  parallel 
grame  KJE LM tyhoje  angle  F  KJM is  equal  to  the  angle  geuen jaamelyfo  E: 
iv fitch  'tv as  required  to  be  done. 

The  rc&ilinc  figure  geue  is  in  the  example  of  Euclide  is  aparallelograme.But 
if  the  re&ilinc  figure  be  of  many  fidcs,as  of  5.5. or  mo,themuftyo«  refoluc  the 
figure  into  his  triangles,as  hath  bene  before  taught  in  the  3 2 ♦  propofition.  And 
the  apply  a  parallelograme  equal  to  eucry  triangle  vpon  a  linegcue.as  before  in 
the  example  of  the  author.  And  the  fame  kind  of  reafoningwil  feme  that  was  be 
fore, only  by  reafoofthe  multitude  oftriangles,you  ihall  haue  neede  ofokener 
repeticio  ofchez^.and  i4*propofitiostoprouethatthebafes  ofal  the  parallel o« 
grames  made  equall  to  all  the  triangles  make  one  right  line,  and  (c  alfo  of  the 
toppes  ofthefaidparallclogramesJPelitarius  addeth  vnto  this  propofition  this 
Pro'oleme  following* 

T vne  quail  reEliline fuperficieces  beyng  geuen ,to find  out  the  excejfe  of  the  greater  aboue  the  lejfe. 

Suppofe  that 
there  be  two  vne- 
quall  re£filine  fu- 
perficieces  A8cB 
ofwhichlet^be 
thegreater.  It  is 
required  to  finde 
out  the  excefle  of 
the  (uperficies  A 
aboue  the  fuper- 
ficieces  B  .  De- 
feribefby  the  44. 

P.iiij.  pro- 


addition  of 
PelitarsM. 


'ThefifUHooke v 

propofition)the  parallelograme  CDE  F  equall  to  the  rediline  figure  -^,contayning  a 
right  angle. And  produce  the  line  CD  beyond  the  point  'Z>  to  the  point  (j  :  &  put  the 
line  T>  Cj  equall  to  the  line  C  D.  Andagaine  (by  the  44.propofition )  vpon  the  line  D  G 
dcfcribe  the  parallelograme  DG  H  X equall  to  the  rediline  figure  “2?,  and  hauyng  the 
angle  D  G  Ka  right  angle.  And  produce  the  line  K  H  beyond  the  point  H,vntiliit  cutte 
the.Iine  C  £  in  the  point  L.Then  I  fay  that  H  L  E.F,  is  the  excefie  of  the  rediline  figure 
c/Zaboue  the  rediline figure2?,Fornrft. that CGKL  isaparallelogrammeit  is  mani- 
feft, neither  nedeth  it  to  be  demonftrated.  And  forafmuch  as  the  lines  C'D  and  *D  G  are 
by  fuppofition  equal  and  either  of  them  isaparallel  to  K  L,therfore(by  the  3  G  propo- 
fitionjthe  two  parallelogrames  CH and  D  /fare  equall.  And  forafmuch  as  D  K  is  fup- 
pofed  to  be  equall  to  the  rediline  figure  £,C//alfolh  all  bo  equall  to  the  fame  rediline 
figure  rB. Wherfore  forafmuch  as  the  whole  parallelograme  CFis  equali  to  the  rediline 
figure  a^andL  F  is  the  exccffe  of  CF  aboue  D  L  or  D  K,it  followeth  that  L  F  is  the  ex- 
celfe  of  the  rediline  figure  aboue  the  rediline  figured  :  whiche  was  required  to  be 
done. 


An  other  more  redy  'fray, 

i 

Let  the  parallelograme  C  DEF  remayne  equall  to  the  rediline  figure  A,  &  produce 
the  line  C  £>  beyond  the  point  d  to  the  pointe  G  .  And  vpon  the  line  D  G  deferibe  the 
parallelogrameDG  HKequall  to  the  rediline  figure  B.  And  produce  the  lines  EC  & 
H  K  beyond  the  points  C  and  K  till  they  concurre  in  thepoiut  L.  And  by  the  pointe  D 
draw  the  diame¬ 
ter  LDM,  which 
let  cutte  the  line 
HGbcyng  pro¬ 
duced  beyonde  c 
the  pointe  G  in  ^ 
the  point  M,  & 
by  the  pointe  M 
drawc  vnto  the  E 


L  ] 

sc 

H 

. . . 

D  - - - 

• 

- - » 

"  • 

- - - ? - 

V J  '  A  ' 

J 

M 

lincHLaparal-  * 

fel  M  N  cuttyng  the  line  E  L  in  the  pointe  N :  and  by  that  meanes  is  H  L  M  N  a  paralle* 
lograme.Then  /  fay  that  N  F  is  the  eveefie  of  the  rediline  figure  aboue  the  rediline 
figure  £.For  forafmuch  as  the  parallelograme  H  D  is  equall  to  the  rediline  figure  /?,  & 
the  fupplementes H  D and D  N  ar  (by  the  43 .propofition )  equall :  therfore D  N  alfo 
is  equall  to  the  rediline  figure  B,which  rediline  figure  D  N  being  taken  away  fro  the 
parallelograme  C  F  (which  is  fuppofedto  be  equall  to  the  rediline  figure  A)  the  refi- 
due  N  F  mall  be  the  ezcelfe  of  the  rediline,  figure  A  aboue  the  rediline  figure  £:  which 
was  required  to  be  done. 


The  \\fProbleme \  The  45. Tropojition . 


Vppon  a  right  line geuen  Jo  deferibe  a  fquare. 

3  ^at  right  linegeuen  be  A  BJt  is  required  Vpo  the  right 
*  line  A  Bjo  deferibe  a  fquare. Vpon  the  right  line  A  (8,  and  from  a 
point  in  itgeuenynamely y  A9rayfe  Vp  (by  the  n  propojitton)  a  per # 
pen  diculer  line  A  C.  And  (by  the  $  propofition)  Vnto  A  B  put  an  e* 
quallline  AT).  And  (by  they.propojitm)  by  the  point  T)  dratve  Vnto  AT  a 
parallel  line  D  E.  And  (by  the  fame)  by  the  point  B  dr  awe  Vnto  A  V  a  parallel 

line 


Fol.ij. 


: ;  siolm: 

.  iH, 


a ! ;  t> f 


h::n  r:- 
■  5S2SJ 


£ 


of Euclides  Elementes • 

line  SB,  Wherefore  AD  E  B  is  a  pa* 
raUelogrammeVVberefore  the  line  A  3$ 
is  e  quail  to  the  line  D  Ey  and  the  line  A 
D  to  the  line  B  E:  but  the  line  ABise* 
quail  to  the  line  A  Dwherefore  thefefdtP 
"User  lines  B  AyA  DfD  E,E  B,  are  equall 
the  one  to  jthe  other.  Vlfhsrefore  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  ADEBconpfteth  of  e* 
quail  fides .  I  fay  alfo  that  it  is  re&angle. 

For  forafmuch  as  Vpon  the  parallel  lines  A 
B and  DEfa Ueth  a  right  line  AD:thtre * 
foref  by  the  i  ypropofition)  the  angle. :  B 

.AD  and  A  t)  Eare  equal  to  two  right  anglesihut  the  angle  BA  3)  is  a  right 
angkyV her fore  the  angle  AD  E  alfo  is  a  right  angle ,  But  in  parallelogrames 
the  fides  and  angles  which  are  oppojite  are  e  quail  the  one  to  the  other(by  the  $  4 
proportion).  Wherefore  the  two  oppojite  angles  A  B  Eand  BED  are  ech  of 
them  a  right  angle.  Where  fore  the  parallelograme  A  B  ED  is  reBangleiejr  it 
is  alfo  pr  oued  that  it  is  equilater .  VVherfore  it  is  a  (quart it  is  defer  ibed  Vpa 
on  the  right  tmegemnA  B\  which  Was  required  to  be  done # 


3 


tv  ;  'y.\  i. 


£ 


ftration-i 

ere&ed  the  perpendicular  line  CA  vpon  the  line  A  2?,and 
,put  the  line  A  E  equall  to  the  line  A  B  :  then  open  your 
compalfeto  the  wydth  of  the  line  ABorAE,tk  fetone 
foote  thcreofin  the  point  £,and  deferibe  a  peece  of  the 
circumference  of  a  circle:  and  againe  make  the  centre  the 
point  2?,and  deferibe  alfo  a  piece  of  the  circumference  of 
a  circle-jUamelydn  fuch  fort  that  the  peece  of  the  circum- 
ferece  of  the  one  may  cut  the  peece  of  the  circumference 
of  the  other,as  in  the  point  D :  and  from  the  point  of  the 
interfei5tion,draw  vnto  the  points  E  &  B  right  lines:  Sc  fo 
ihaibe  deferibed  a  fquare,As  in  this  figure  here  put,wher-  a  ^ 

in  / haue  not  drawen  the  lines  E  D  and  Z>  £,that  the  pee-  ** 

ces  of  the  circumference  cutting  the  one  the  other  might  the  plainlier  be  fene. 


To  defer i be  * 
Mire  mecket- 
ntcuUj, 


An  addition  ofProclus. 


If  the  lines  vpon  Vchich  the fquares 

Suppofe  that  thefe  right  lines 
A B and  CD  be  equall,  &vpon 
the  line  AB  deferibe  a  fquare  A 
BEG  :and  vpon  the  line  CD  de¬ 
feribe  a  fquare  CD  HF.  Then  I 
fay  that  the  two  fquares  ABE 
GScCDHF are  equal*  For  draw 
thefe  right  lines  C2?and  HD. 
And  forasmuch  as  the  right 
Iines./45andCDare  equall, & 
thelinesoA  G and HC  are  alfo 
equall,and  they  contayne  eqaul 


be  deferibed  be  equall, the /quotes  alfo  are  equall. 


angles 


The  eo'tuerfe 
fhertf* 


Conflruttiott, 


Thefir/ffiooke 

aogles,i|amely,right  angles  (by  the  definition  of  a  fqiiafe)thercforefby  the  4.  ptopo* 
fition  Jthe  bafe  B  G  is  equall  to  the  bafe//2).And  the  triangle  ABG  is  equal!  tothe 
triangle  C  D  //.Wherefore  the  doubles  of  the  faide  ttiaiiglcs  are  equall.  Wherefore 
the  fquare  A  E  is  cquall  to  the  fquare  CFi which  was  requited  to  be  proued. 

■■■  .  :  '  • '  4  .  ■  .  ■.  n ns 5 ’H-,  1  o;i  v'.. 

The  conuerfc  thereof  is  thus*.  \ 

If  the  fquares  be  equall:  the  lines  alfo  vppon  Vphicb  they  are  defeated  are  equall. 


Suppofe  that  there  be  two  cquall  fquares  A  F  and  C  Cdefbribed  vpon  the  lines  A 
B  Sc  B  (f.  The  I  fay,that  the  lines  A  B  andP  C  are  cquall.Put  the  line  *4£dire&ly  to  the 
line  2?C,that  they  both  make  on  right  line,  And 
forafmuch  as  the  angles  are  right  angles,ther- 
fore  alfo(by  the  i4.propofition)the  right  line 
FB  is  fet  dire&Iy  to  the  right  line  B  G •  Dr  awe 
thefe  right  lines  FC^  AG,AF,  and  C  G .Now  for 
afmuch  as  the  fquare  AF  is  cq ual  to  the  fquare 
CC,the  triangle  alfo  A  F B  (halbe  equall  to  the' 
triangle  CB  G:  put  the  triangle  BCF  comon  to 
them  both.  Wherfore  the  whole  triangle  A C  ( 

Pis  equall  to  the  whole  triangle  C F  G.Where- 
fore the line  AG  is  a  parallel  vnto  the  line  CP 
(by  the  38.propofiti6)-.for  the  triangles  confifl 
vpon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe,  namely  C  P. 

Againe  forafmuch  as  either  of  thefe  angles  AF 
G  Sc  CBG is  the  halfe  ofaright  angle, therfore 
{  by  the  1 7  .propofition  jthe  line  AF  is  a  paral¬ 
lel  to  the  line  C  G.  Wherfore  the  right  line  AF  is  equal  to  the  right  line  C  G( for  the  op- 
pofite  fides  of  a  parafielograme  are  equal! ).  And  forafmuch  as  there  are  two  triangles 
A'BF  and  B  C^.whofe  alternate  angles  are  equali,namely,  the  angle  A  FB  to  the  an¬ 
gle  BGC,  and  the  angle  B  AFto  the  angle  B  C  G’,and  one  fide  of  the  One  is  equall  to 
one  fide  of  the  other,namely,the  fide  which  lieth  betweue  the  equal  angles,that  is,  the 
fide  A  F  to  the  fide  CG,  therefore  (by  the  26.  proposition)  the  fide  A  Bis  equal  to  the 
fide  B  C,andthe  fide  B  F  to  the  fide  B  G.  Wherefore  it  is  proued  that  the  fquares  of  the 
finest  P  andCC  being  equalhtheir  fides  alfo  llialbe  equall:  which  was  required  to  be 
proued. 


he 33.  Theoreme*  ^The 4.7. 'Profofition. 

In  rectangle  triangles  y  the  fquare  whiche  is  made  of  the  fide 
that  fubtendeth  the  right  angle Js  equal  to  the fquares  which 
are  made  of  the fides  containing  the  right  angle. 


^'Vppofe  that  ABC  be  a  reSlangle  triangle,  hauyng  the 
angle  BAC  a  right  angle. The  I  fay  y  the  fquare  Tubieh 
is  made  of  the  line  BC  is  equall  to  the  fquare  s'fthkb  are 
]made  of  y  lines  AB  and  JiC.  Defcribe(by  y  ^6.propoJti 
cion )  Vpotiy  line  BCa  fquare BBCE^and  (byy  fame) 
Vpon  the  lines  'BA  and  AC  deferibe  the fquares  ABEG 
and  AC  f^H.Jnd  by  the  point  A  draH>  (  by  the  pro * 
'pofttion )  to  either  of  thefe  lynes  BID  and  CE  a  parallel 

line 


ofEuclides  Elements s. 


F0/.58. 


line  A LtAnd  (by  the  firEt  petition)  draw  a  right  If  ne  from  the  point  A  to  th  e 
point  B)yand  an  other  from  the  point  C  to  the  pomt  KAnd  fora /much  as  the  an* 
gles  B  A  Cand  B  A  G  are  right  angles ,therf ore  Vntoa  right  line  B  Ay  and  to  a 
point  initgeuen  Ay  aredrawen  two 
right  lines  A  C  and  AGynot  both  on 
one  and  the  fame  fide ,  makyng  the 
two  fide  angles  equall  to  two  right 
angler.  wher  for  e(by  the  14.  propofi * 
tion)the  lines  A  C and  A  G  make  di* 
re  Elly  one  right  line.  And  hy  the  fame 
reafon  the  lines  B  A  and  A  H  make 
alfo  dire  Elly  one  right  line ,  And  fora 
afmtich  as  the  angle  B)BC  is  equall 
to  the  angle  FBA  ( for  either  of  the 
is  a  right  angle)put  the  angle  A  B  C 
common  to  them  both :  wherfore  the 
"whole  angle  D  BA  is  equal!  to  the 
' whole  angle  F  B  CAnd  forafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  B  B)  are  equal  to 
thefe  two  lines  B  F  and  B  C,the  one  to  the  other ,and the  angle  t>B  A  is  equal 
to  the  angle  FBC:  therfore(by  the  ^.propofitionfihe  bafe  A  B)  is  equall  to  the 
bafe  F  Cyand  the  triangle  ABB)  is  equal!  to  the  triangle  FB  C,  But  (by  the  ji. 


lellynes,  that  isyBB)and  A  Land  (by  the fame)  the / quart  GBit  double  to 
the  triangle  FBC,  for  they  haue  both  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe ,  that  is y  B 
F,  and  are  in  the felfe fame  parade  Hynes ,  that  is,  FB  and  G  C.  But  the  dou* 
hies  oft  hinges  equal f  are  (bythejixte  common  f entente)  equall  the  one  to 
the  other.  Wher fore  the parallelograme  B  L  is  equall  to  the  fquare  G  B%  And 
in  like forte  if (by  the firft  peticion )  there  be  drawen  a  right  line  from  the  point 
A  to  the  point  E^and  an  other  from  the  point  B  to  the  point  We  may  prone  y 
the  parallelograme  CL  is  equal  to  the fquare HCyVher fore  the  whole fquare 
BB)  EC  is  equall  to  the  two fquares  G  B  andHC.But  the  fquare  BP  EC  is 
defcribed  Vpon  the  line  B  Cymd  the  fquares  G  B  and  HC  are  defcribedvppon 
the  lines  BA^rAC:  wher  fore  the  fquare  ofthefideBCjs  equal  to  the  fquares 
of  thefidesBAand  A  CyVhereforein  reElangle  triangles,  the  fquare  whiche 
is  made  of  the  fide  that  fubtendeth  the  right  angle  js  equal  to  the  fquares  which 
are  made  of  the  j ides  contayning  the  right  angle:  which  was  required  to  be  de* 
monfirated. 

This  moft  excellent  and  notable  Theoremc  was  firft  inacntedof  the  create 
philofopher  Pithagorasawho  for  the  exceeding  icy  concerned  of  the  indention 
therofjofferedin  facrificcan  Oxeaas  recorde  Hierone,  Proclus,  Lycius,&  Vi- 
trmmis.And  it  hath  bene  commoly  called  of  barbarous  writers  of  th"  latter  time 
Dulcarnon. 

Q.ji.  An 


I’ithagoras  the 
firft  snuenter  of 
this propofttion. 


An  addition  of 
Pektarius. 


An  other  adit  to 
of  Pelstarius. 


Another  additi 
on  of -Pelt  farms. 


Thefir/lTloofy 

An  addition  of  F  elitarius. 

To  reduce  two  vncquall  fquares  to  two  equall  fquares* 

Suppofe  that  the  fquares  of  the  lines  tA  B  and./!  C  be  vnequall.lt  is  required  to  re¬ 
duce  them  totvoequallfquares./oynethetwolinese^Sand^Cat  theirendes  in 
fuch  fort  th  at  they  make  a  right  angle  B  A  C.And  draw  a  line  from  B  to  C.  Then  vppon 
the  two  endes  B  and  C  make  two  angles  eche  of  which  may  be  equal  to  halfe  a  right  an¬ 
gle  (This  is  done  byereftingvpon  the  line  3  Cperpe- 
diculer  lines.from  the pointes B and C :  and fo  (by  the 
p.  propofition )  deuiding  eche  of  the  right  angles  into 
two  equall  partes) :  and  let  the  angles  3  CD  and  CBD 
beeither  of  the  halfe  of  a  right  angle.  And  let  the  lines 
B  D&ndCD  concurre  in  the  point  D.  Then/fav  that 


© 

the  angle  at  the  pointe  D  is  (by  the  3  2.  propofition)  a 
right  angle.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  fide  3  Cise- 

qual  to  the  fquares  of  the  two  fides  D  B  and  D  C  (by  the47.  propofition)  :butitis  alfo 
equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  two  fides  A  Bund  A  C(by  the  felffame  propofition)  wher- 
forer  by  the  common  fentencejthe  fquares  of  the  two  fides  B  D  and  D  Care  equall  to 
the.fquares  of  the  two  fides  ABztxdA  C ;  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

An  otheradditionofPelitarius* 

If  mo  right  angled  triangles  haue  equall  bafes.  the  fquares  of  the  tVeo  fides  of  the  one  are  equall 
to  the fquares  oft  he  ttyo  fides  of  the  other. 

1  his  is  manifeft  by  the  former  conftmftionand  demonftration* 

An  other  addition  of  pelirarius. 

Two  vnequall  lines  beinggeuen,  to  knoty  hoW  much  the  fquare  of  the  one  is  greater  then  the 

fquare  of  the  other , 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  vnequal  lines  AB  and  B  C.-of which  let  A3  be  the  grea¬ 
test  is  required  to  fearch  out  how  much  the  fquare  of  A  B  excedeth  the  fquare  ot'3 
C.Thatis  I  wil  finde  out  the  fquare,  which  with  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  C  lhalbe  equal 
tothefquare  ofthelinev!  .8.  Put  the  finest 
Aand^Cdircftly,that  they  make  both  one 
righ  t  line.-and  making  the  centre  the  point  B, 
and  the  fpace  BA  deferibe  a  circle  ADE,&txd 
produce  the  line  tAC  to  the  circumference, 
and  let  it  concurre  with  it  in  the  point  f’.And 
vpon  the  lyne  A  E  and  fro  the  point  C  ere& 

(bv  the  1 1. propofition)  aperpendiculerline 
CD, which  produce  till  it  concurre  with  the 
circumference  in  the  point!):  &  drawaline 
from  B  to  Z>.Then  I  fay,that  the  fquare  of  the 
line  CD, is  the  excefle  of  the  fquare  of  the  line 
A  B  aboue  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  C.  For  for- 
afmuch  as  in  the  triangle  8CjD,theangle  at 
the  point  C  is  a  right  angle,  the  fquare  of the 
bafeZ?D  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  two 
fides  B  Cand  C  D(by  this  47.  propofition).Wherefore  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B 
is  equall  to  thefelfe  fame  fquares  of  the  lines  rBC  and  CD.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of 
the  line  B  C  is  fo  much  leflfe  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B,  as  is  the  fquare  of  the  line 
C D;  which  was  required  to  fearch  out,  Aq 


the  two  fquares  of  the  fides  B  D  and  C  D,  are  equall  to 
the  two  fquares  of  the  fides  A  B  and  A  C.For  (by  the  6 
propofition)the  two  fides  and D  Carceauall  and 


Fol^p. 


ofEuclides  Elements* . 

An  other  additionofPelitadus. 

T he  diameter  of  a  fij  Hare  bcinggeuenjtogcM  the fquare  thereof  An  other  aditio 

of  Pehtarius, 

This  is  eafie  to  be  done.  For  ifvpon  the  two  endes  of the  line  be  drawen  two 
halfe  right angles,and  fo  be  made  perfed  the  triangle  then  flialbe  defcnbed  half 
of  the  fquarejthc  other  halfe  whereof  alfo  is  after  the  fame  manner  eafie  to  be  de? 
fcribed. 

Hereby  it  is  manifejfthat  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  is  double  to  that Square  Vphofe  diameter  it  is.  ^  Corroltarj 

The  i\.Theoreme.  The  4.8.  Tropofition \ 

If  the  fquare  which  is  made  of one  of  the fides  of  a  triangle? 
he  equal!  to  the  fquare s  which  are  made  of  the  two  other  fides 
of  the  fame  triangle:  the  angle  comprehended  vnder  thofe 
two  other  fides  is  a  right  angle . 

“  Vppofe  that  ABC  be  a  triangle, and  let  the  fquare  "tobich  is  made  of one 

!  of  the  fides  there  jiamely  yof the fide  B  Cfe  squall  to  the  fquares  which 
are  made  of  the  fides  BA  and  A  C.Then  I fay  that  t  he  angle  B  AC  is  a 
right  angle.  3(yyfe’vp(by  the  u.propofitio) from  the  point  Avnto  the  right  line 
A  C  a  perpendicular  line  A  V,  And  (by  the  thirde  propofition)  Vnto  the  line  A 
B  put  an  equall  line  A  3),  And  by  the  firfl  petition  draSo  a  right  line  from  the 
point  V  to  the  point  C.  And for af much  as 
the  line  3)  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  B«  the 
fquare  Tbhich  is  made  of  the  line  3)  A  is  e* 
quail  to  the  fquare  Srhiche  is  made  of  the 
line  A  B  But  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C, 
common  to  them  both .  Wherefore  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  3)  A  and  AC  are  equal 
to  the  Jquares  of  the  lines  BA  and  AC, , 

But  (by  the  propofition  going  before)  the 
fquare  of  the  line  3)C  is  equal  toy  fquares 
of  the  Imes.AV  and  A  C.  (For  the  angle 
VAC  is  a  right  angle)  andthe  fquare  of 

B  C  is  (by  fupp  option )  equall  to  the  fquares  of  A  Band  AC,  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of  3)  C  is  equal!  to  the  fquare  ofB  C  therefore  the  fide  V  Cis  equall  to 
the  fide  BC,  And  (ora/much  as  A  B  is  equall  to  A  V  and  AC  is  common  to  them 
loth,  therefore  the fe  two  fides  V  A  and  AC  are  equall  to  thefe  t^o  fides  BA 
and  A  C,  the  one  to  the  other,  and  the  hafe  V  C  is  equall  to  the  hafe  B  C\St>her - 
fore  (by  the  propofition)  the  angle  1)  ACis  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  C  But  the 
angle  VAC  is  a  right  angle  therefore  atfo  the  angle  B  AC  is  a  right  angle.  If 

Q.dtj.  there * 


This  propofition 
it  the  Conner  (e 
of  the  former. 

*in  other  De- 
monflration  af¬ 
ter  Pelt  tart  us. 


cThefirHcBooke 

therefore  the  fquare  Tbhich  is  made  of  me  of  the  fides  of  a  triangle^  he  equal 1  to 
the  fquaresfbhicb  are  made  of the  ftoo  other fides  of  the  fame  triangle ,  the  an * 
gle  comprehendedvnder  thoJetTro  other Jide sis  a  right  angle  :  "tohich  was  re* 
qniredtohe  proued.  - 

This  propofition  is  the  conuerfeofthe former,*  d  is  of  Pelitarius  demon* 
ftrated  by  an  argument  leading  to  an  impoffibilitie  after  this  maner* 

S  uppGfe  that  ABC  be  a  triangle :  &  let  the  fquare  of  the  fide  AC, be  equal  to  the  fquare  s 
of  the  two  fides  A  B  and  B  C.Then/ fay  that  the  angle  at  the  point  ^which  is  oppofite 
to  the  fide  AC  yis  a  right  angle. For  if  the  angle  at  the  point  c 

B  be  not  a  right  angle,  then  fhal  it  be  eyther  greater  or  lefle 
the  a  right  angle.  Firft  let  it  be  is  greater.  And  let  the  angle 
DBC  be  a  right  angle,  by  erecfing  from  the  point  B  a  per¬ 
pendicular  line  vnto  the  line  BC( by  the  n, propofition) 
which  let  be  B  D:  and  put  the  line  #£>  equall  to  the  lyne 
A  B  (by  the  thirde  propofition  And  drawe  a  line  from  Q 
to  D.  Now  (by  the  former  propofition)  thefquare  of  the 
fide  CDfhalbe  equall  tothefquares  of  the  two  fides  BD 
a nd#  C :  wherefore  alfo  to  the  fquares  of  the  two  fides  B 
yjfand  BC.  Wherefore  the  bafe  CD  fiialbe  equall  to  the 
bafe  C  A,  when  as  their  fquares  are  equall :  which  is  con¬ 
trary  to  the  24.propofition.Forforafmuchasthe  angled 
BCis  greater  then  the  angle  DBC,  and  the  two  fides  A  B 
and  BC  are  equall  to  the  two  fides  D  B  and  B  C,  the  one  to  the  other,  the  bafe  C  A  (hall 
be  greater  then  the  bafe  CD,  It  is  alfo  contrary  to  the  7.propofition,  for  from  the  two 
endes  ofone  &  the  fame  line,  namely,  fro  the  points  B  &  Cihould  be  drawn  on 
one  and  the  fame  fide  two  lines  B  D  and  D  C  ending  at  the  pointe  D,  e- 
quall  to  two  other  lines  BA  and  A  Cdrawen  From  the  fame  endes 
and  endin  g  at  an  other  point,  namely,at  A, which  is  impof- 
fible.By  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  we  proue  that  the 
whole  angle  at  the  pointe  B  is  not  lefle  then  a 
right  angle.  Wherfore  it  is  a  right  angle: 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

(’••) 

The  endc  of  the  firft  hoo^e  ofSucl'tdes  Slementes , 


€j  The  fecond  booke  of  Eu- 


60 * 


elides  Elementes* 


N  this  fecond  booke  fidclide  ilie^etK ,  t-ha^  is  a 
Gnom6,anda  right  angled  parallelogramme.  Alfo 
in  this  bobke are  let  forth  the  powers  cilines,deui- 
ded  euenly  and  vneuenly , arid  of  lines  added  one  to 
an  other.  Thepower  ofaline ,  is  the  fquare  of  the 
fame  line:  tffttis,  afqitat^  euery  fide  of  which  is  e- 
quail  to  tire  line*  So  that  here  are  fct  forth  the  quali¬ 
ties  and  proprieties  of  the  fquarcs  and  right  lined  fi- 
guresjwntch are  made oilines  &  oftheir  parts.  The 
Arithmetician  alfo  out  ol  this  booke  gathered!  ma? 
ny  compendious  rules  of  reckoning, and  many  rules 
alfo  of  Algebra, with  the  equatios  therein  vied.  The 
groundes  alfo  ofthoie  rules  are  for  the  m  oft  part  by  this  fecond  booke  dernon- 
ffrated*  This  booke  moreouer  contayncth  two  wondbrfull  propoficions*  one  of 
an  qbtufe  angled  triangle,  andthe  other  ofan  acuterwhich  with  the  ayde  of  the 
47*propofition  ofthefirft booke ofEuclide,  which  isofa  re&angle  triangle,ol 
how  great  force  and  profite  they  are  in  matters  ofaftronomy,they  knowe  which 
haue  trauayled  in  that  arte*  V  Vherefore  if  this  booke  had  none  other  profite  be 
fide*  onely  forthcfez*prapofitions  fake  it  were  diligently  to  be  cmbracedand 
ihidied. 


The  argument 
of  the Jecond 
books • 

fVhat  it  the 
poTver  of  a 
tine . 


Manycompe * 
dious  rules  of 
reckoning  ga- 
theredout  of 
this  bookstand 
aljo  many 
rules  of  Alge¬ 
bra* 

Ttpo  Wonder* 
full  proporti¬ 
ons  in  this 


ejimtions . 


i.  Suery  reBangled parallelogramme,  is [ayde  to  be  contayned 
vnder  two  right  tines  comprehending  a  right  angle* 

A  parallelogramme  is  afigure  effower  fi  Jes,whofe  two  oppofite  or  contra?  hatapa * 

ry  fides  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  There  are  of  paralldogrammcs  fower  ™Uelogrammf 
kyndes,afquareJafigureofonefidelonger,aRombusordiamond,andaRom-  ,  . 
boides  or  diamond  like  figure,as  before  was  fayde  in  the  ^.definition  of  thefirif  otparaMod* 
booke.  Ofthefe fower  fortes,  the  fquarc  andthefigure  of  one  fide  longer  are  grammes* 
onely  right  angled  Parallclogrammes;  for  that  all  their  angles  are  right  angles. 

And  either  of  them  is  contayned  (according  to  this  definition )  vnder  two  right 
ly  ties  which  concurre  together ^nd  caufe  the  right  angle,and  concaine  the  iame. 

Of  which  two  lines  the  one  is  the  length  of  the  figure,  &  the  other  the  breadth. 

The  parallelogramme  is  imaginedto  be  made  by  thedraught  or  motion  ofone 
efthe  lines  into  the  length  ofthe  other,As  if  two  numbers  ihoulde  be  multipli¬ 
ed  the  one  into  the  other*  AS  the  figure  AB  C  D  is  a  parallelograme,  and  is 
fayde  to  be  contayned  vnderthetwo  right  lines  A  B  and  A  C,which  contayne 
the  right  angle  B  A  C,or  vnder  the  two  right  lines  AC  and  j  ^ 

C  D,  for  they  likewife  contayne  the  right  angle  A  C  D:  of  ~ ' 1 — — “ — 
which  Julfnes  the  one,namely  ,A  B  is  the  length ,  and  theo- 
ther,namely,AG  is  the  breadth*  And  ifwe  imagine  the  line  c  ~  v 
AC  tobe  drawen  or  moueddir e&ly  according  to  the  legth 

Q»uii,  q£ 


* 


Stmddt- 

fimtioHt 


r  ?  *  The/econd^Boo^e 

of  the  line  A  B,or  contrary  wife  the  line  A  B  to  be  moiled  dire&ly  according  to 
the  length  of  the  line  AC,  you  fhall  produce  the  whole  re&anglc  parallelo- 
gramme  AB  CDwhichisfaydctobccontaynedofthem:  eucn  as  one  number 
multiplied  by  another  produccth  a  plaine  and  rightc  angled  fuperficiall  num¬ 
ber, as  yc  fee  in  the  figure  here  fet,  -where  the  number  of  fixe  *  % 

or  fixe  unities,  is  multiplied  by  the  nupiber  of  fiuc  or  by 
flue  vnities:  ofwhich  multiplication  are  produceijo^which 
number  being  fet  downe  and deferibed  by  his  vn ides  repre- 
fenteth  a  play  ncanda  right  angled  nurr^ter*  Wherefore  c- 
ucn  as  cquall  numbers  multiplcd  by  cqua^l  numbers  produce 
numbers  cquall  the  one.  to  the  other: fo reaangle  parallelo- 
grames  which  are  comprehended  vnder  equal  Lines  are  equal 
the  one  to  the  other. 


3o 


$ 


.  . 

1  ■  S.‘/tL  ■ 

.  . 

*  ; ; 

-  *-  "  ♦  '  .  : 

*  * 


2. 


jl  ’Jr,  mu 

n-J 

■ft 


In  euery parattelogramme ,  one  of thofi  parallelogrammes , 
which  foeueritbe,  which  are  about  the  diameter ,  together* 

•  11  s-  ,  •  ft  t  V-V  ‘  - 

lementesyi 


nomon. 


■1 


Thofe  perticulcr  parallelogramcs  are  faydeto  be  about  the  diameter  of  the 
parallelograme, which  hauc  the  fame  diameter  which  the  whole  parallelograme 
hath^And  fupplementesareluchjwhich  arc  without  the  diameter  ofthe*  whole 
parallelograme.  a  s  of  the  parallelograme  ABCD  the  partial  or  perticulef  paral  - 
lelogrames  GKCF  and  E  B  K  H  are  parallelogramcs  about  the  diameter,  for 
that  ech  ofehem  hath  for  his  diameter  a  part  o.f  the  diameter  ofthe  whole  paraL* 


lelogramme.  As  C  K  and  K  B  the  pcrticuler  diameters,  are  partes  of  the  line 
C  B,which  is  the  diameter  ofthe  whole  parallclogramme.And  the  two  paralle- 
logrammes  A  E  G  K  and  KHF  D,are  fupplcmentes,becaufe  they  are  wy  thout 
the  diameter  ofth  c  whole  parallelogramme,namely ,C  B.Now  any  one  ofthofe 
partiall  parallelogram mes  about  the  diameter  together  with  the  two  fupple- 
mentes  make  a  gnomon.  As  the  parallelograme  EB  K  H,  with  the  two  fupple- 
mentes  A  EG  K  andK  HF  Dmake  the  gnomon  FGEfL  Ltkewifetheparal* 
lelogramme  G  K  C  F  with  the  fame  two  fupplemcntcs  make  the  gnomon  E  H 
F  G.Andthtsdiffinitionofagnomonextendethitfclfc,  and  is  general!  to  all 
ky  tides  of  parallelogrammes, whether  they  be  fquarcs  or  figures  of  one  fide  lon¬ 
ger  or  Rhombus  or  Romboides.  To  be  fliorte,ifyou  take  away  from  the  whole 
parallelogramme  one  ofthe  partiall  parallelogrammes  which  are  about  the  di¬ 
ameter 


Fol.6  f. 


ofEucUdes  Elementes. 


amctet  whether  ye  wilijthe  reft  of  the  figure  isa  gnomon. 


Campa  eafterthelau  propofitionof thefirftbookeaddeth  this  propofitio. 
Tvpo  Squares  bemggeuen ,  to  adioyne  to  one  of  them  a  Gnomon  equali  to  the  other fquare  .-which,  for 

that  as  then  it  was  not  taught  what  a  Gnomon  is,1  there  omitted,  thinking  that 
it  might  more  aptly  beplacedherc.The  doing  and  demonftration  whereat,  is 
thus . 


proportion 
aided  by  (am* 
pane  after  the 
tajl  proporti¬ 
on  of the firfk 
hooks* 


Suppofe  that  there  be  two  fquares  A  B  and  C  D:  vnto  one  of  which,  namely ,  vnto 
A  £, it  is  required  to  addc  a  G  nomon  equali  to  the  other  fquare,  namely,  to  C  lD .  Pro¬ 
duce  the  fide  B  F  of  the  fquare  AB  di- 
reftly  to  the  point  £.and  put  the  line  F 
£  equali  to  the  fide  of  the  fquare  CD. 

And  draw  a  line  from  E  to  A.  Now  then 
forafmuch  as  E  F  Ais  a  rediangle  trian- 
gle,therefore(by  the  47.  of  the  firft)  the 
fquare  of  the  line  EA  is  equali  to  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  EF  &  FA.  But  the 
fquare  of  the  line££  is  equali  to  the 
fquare  C2>,&  the  fquare  of  the  fide  FA 
is  the  fquare  A  ^.Wherefore  the  fquare 
of  the  line  AE  is  equal!  to  the  two  fquares  CD  and  A  £.But  the  fides  E  F  and  F  A  arc 
(by  the  ai.  of  the  firftj  longer  then  the  fide  <sA  £,andthe  fide  F  A  is  equali  to  the  fide 
£  £.  W herfore  the  fides  £  F  and  FB  are  longer  the  the  fide  A  £♦  Wherefore  the  whole 
line  BE  is  longer  then  the  line  A  £,From  the  line  £  £  cut  of  a  line  equali  to  the  line  A 
£,which  let  be  B  C.And  (by  the  q-tf.propofition )  vpon  the  line  B  C  deferibe  a  fquare, 
which  let  be  BCGHtwhich  lhalbe  equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  £,but  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A  E is  equal  to  the  two  fquares  A  B  andD  C.Wherefore  the  fquare  B  CGH  is 
equal  to  the  fame  fquares.  Wherfo  re  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  BCG  His  compofed  of 
the  fquare  o 4  B  and  of  the  gnomon  £  G  A  H ,  thefayde  gnomon  flialbe  equali  vnto 
the  fquare  C‘D:which  was  required  to  be  done. 


An  other  more  redy  way  after  Pelitari  us* 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  fquares,whofe  fides  let  be  iAB 
and£  C.It  is  required  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  <*^££,to  adde 
a  gnomon  equali  to  the  fquare  of  the  line's  C.Setthc  lines 
B  and  B  Cin  fuch  fort  that  they  make  a  right  angle  ABC,  And 
draw  a  line  fro to  C.And  vpo  the  line  AB  deferibe  a  fquare 
which  let  be  A  B  ‘Z>  £,And  produce  the  line  B  A  to  the  point 
£,and  put  the  line  BF  equali  to  the  line  AC,  And  vpon  the 
line  B  F  deferibe  a  fquare  which  let  be  B  F  G  H :  which  flialbe 
equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C,whe  as  the  lines  B  F  and  A 
Care  equal  land  therefore  it  is  equal  to  the  fquares  of  the  two 
hnes^Aand  £C  N°w  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  BFG  His  made  complete  bv 
the  fquare  A  £  D  £  and  by  the  gnomon  £  £  GD,the  gnomon  F  E  CD  flialbe  * 
equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  £  Cjwhich  was  required  to  be  done. 


Conjlruttm, 


Vemottjlratio 


The feconcffiookg 

§&Thei  fit heoreme .  The  iSPropofition* 

ff there  be  typo  right  lines ,  and  if  the  one  of  them  be  deuided 
into  partes  hovoe  many foeuer  :  the  reBangle figure  compre - 
hended vnder  the  two  right  lines  js  e quail  to  the  reBangle y£- 
gures  yphiche  are  comprehended vnder  the  line  vndeuided% 
and  vnder  euery  one  of  the partes  of  the  other  line . 


HH  Vppofe  that  there  be  typo  right  lynes  oyf 
and  3  C  and  let  one  of  them y  namely  y  3  Che  deui* 
dedatalladuenturesin  the  pointesDand  E.Then 
I/ay  that  the  reBangle  figure  comprehended  Vn» 
jder  the  lines  A3and  3  Cyis  e  quail  Vnto  the  re  Ban * 
if*  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  lines  Jyand  3 
'~D,oVnto  the  reBa?igle  figure  which  is  coprehen » 
ded  Vnder  the  lines  A  and  3)  Ey  and  alfo  Vnto  the 

_  ^reBangle  figure  which  is  comprehended  Vnder  the 

lines  A  and  E  C,  For  from  the  point  e  3rayje  Vp  (by  the  u.of the  firfi)  vnto  the 
right  line  3C  a  perptndiculer  line  3  EyO  Vnto  the 
line  A  (by  the  third  of  the fir  It)  put  the  line  3Ge* 
quail ,  and  by  the  point  G  (by  the  $  1 ,  of  the  firfi ) 
draw  a  parallel  line  Vnto  the  right  line  3  C  and  let 
the  fame  be  G  Myand(by  the  felfe fame)  by)  points 
DyE^andCy  draw  Vnto  the  line  3  G  the/e  parallel 
lines  ID  E  L  and  C  H.  TSloW  then  the  parallelo- 

grame3  His  equallto  thefe  parallelogrammes  3 
KJD  L}and  E  H.3ut  the parallelograme  3  His 
equall  Vnto  that  which  is  contayned  Vnder  thelinesAand3C.  (For  it  is  com* 
preheded  Vnder  the  lines  G3  O  3Cyand  the  line  G  3  is  equall  Vnto  the  line  A) 
And  the  parallelograme  3  Kjs  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  Vnder  the  lines 
A  and  3  D:  (for  it  is  comprehended  Vnder  the  line  G  3  and  3  D}and  3Gise» 
quail  Vnto  A)  And  the  parallelograme  D  L  is  equall  to  that  winch  is  contayned 
Vnder  the  lines  A  and  D  E(for  the  line  D  that  is/3  Gis  equal  Vnto  A) And 

moreouer  likewife  the  parallelograme  E  His  equall  to  that  which  is  contained 
Vnder  the  lines  A  o  EC.  VVberfore  thd  t  whtch  is  compreheded  Vnder  ji  lines  A 
O  3C is  equall  to  that  which  is  comprehended  Vnder  the  lines  A  O' 3  D-,0  Vn* 
toy  which  is  compreheded  Vnder  the  lines  A  and  D  Ey  and  moreouer  Vnto  that 
which  is  comprehended  Vnder  the  lines  A  and  E  CJf  therfore  there  be  two  right 
lines  }and if \ the  one  of them  be  deuided  into  partes  how  many  foeuer  yt  he  reBan* 


Fol.dl. 


ofEuclides  Elementes. 

gle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  ttoo  right  lines  js  squall  to  the  re&angle  fi* 
gures  ‘tohich  are  comprehended  Vnder  the  line  Vndeuided  and  Vnder  euery  one 
of  the  partes  of  the  other  linei'tobicb  ‘tods  required  to  be  demonstrated* 

Becaufe  that  all  the  Proportions  of  this  fecond  booke  for  the  moft  part  are 
true  both  in  lines  and  in  numbers,  and  may  bedeclaredby  both:  therefore  haue 
I  haue  added  to  euery  Propofition  conuenient  numbers  for  themanifeftation  of 
the  fame.  Andto  the  end  the  ftudiousand  diligent  reader4  may  themore  fully 
perceaue  and  vnderftand  the  agrementof  this  art  ofc  Geometry  -with  the  fcience 
of  Arithmetiquejandhow  nere  Sc  deare  fillers  they  are  together,fo  that  the  one 
cannot  without  great  blemifh be  without  theother,  1  haue  here  alfo  ioyneda 
little  booke  of  Arithmetique  written  bv  on c'Barlaam,  a  Greekc  authour  a  man 
of greate  knowledge*  In  whiche  booke  arc  by  the  authour  demonftrated 
many  of  the  felfe  fame  proprieties  andpafihons  in  number,  which  Euclideia 
this  his  fecondboke  hath  demonftrated  in  magnitude, namely  .the  firft  ten  pro- 
pofitidns  as  they  follow  in  order.  Which  is  vndoubtedly  great  pleafure  to  co- 
fider,alfo  great  increafe  SC  furniture  ofkno  wledge.  Whole  P  ropofitiSs  are  fee 
orderly  after  the  propofitiSs  of Euclids,  euery  one  of^/^iwcorrefpodent  to  the 
fame  o£Euclide.An&  doubtles  it  is  wonderful  to  fee  howthefe  two  cotrary  kynds 
of  quantity ,  quantity  diferete  or  number, and  quantity  continual  or  magnitude 
(whicharethe  fubie&es  or  matters  of  Arithmitique  and  Geometry  )  fhoulde 
haue  in  them  oneand  the  fame  proprieties  common  to  them  both  in  very  ma¬ 
ny  pomts.and  affc<ftions,although  not  in  all. For  a  line  may  in  fuch  fort  be  dc- 
uided,  that  what  proportion  the  whol  e  hath  to  the  greater  parte  the  fame  {hall 
the  greater  part  haue  to  the  leCIc^  But  that  can  not  be  in  number.  For  a  number 
cannot  fo  be deuidedjthat.the  whole  number  to  the  greater  part  thereof,  ftiall 
haue  that  proportion  which  the  greater  part  hath  to  the  leffe,  as  lordanevery 
playnely  protieth  in  his  booke  of  Arithmetike,  which  thynge  Campane 
alfo  fas  we  ftialiafterwardinthe9*  booke  after  the  15*  propofition  fee)  proueth* 
Andas  touching  thefe  tenne  firfte  propofinonsof  the  feconde  booke  of  Eu- 
clide,demonftratedby  Barlaam  in  numbers,they  are  alfo  dembftrated  of  Cam- 
pane  after  the  i^propofition  ofthe9- booke,  whofe  demonftrations  I  mynde 
by  Godshelpe  to  fetforth  when  I  fiiai  come  to  the  place.  They  are  alfo  demo- 
llrated  of  lordane  that  excellet  learned  authour  in  the  firft  booke  of  his  Arith¬ 
metike. Inthc  meane  ty  me  I  thougheit  not  amilfe  here  to  fet  forth  the  demon- 
ftrations  of  Barlaam, for  that  they  geue  great  light  to  the  feconde  booke  ofEu- 
clide,befides  the  ineftimable  pleafureywhich  they  bring  to  the  ftudious  confidc- 
rer,Andnowto  declare  the  firft  Propofition  by  numbers.  I  haue  put  this  exam¬ 
ple  following. 

Take  two  numbers  the  one  vndeuided as  74, the  other  deuided  into  what  partes 
37*  deuided  into  20. 10.?.  and  2:which  altogether  make 
the  whole  57.  Then  ifyou  multiply  the  number  vndeuided,  namely,  74,  into  all  the 
partes  ofthe  number  deuided  as  into  20. 10.  ?.and  2.  you  (hall  produce  1480.  740* 

3  70  .  i^S.which  added  together  make  273  8  :which  felf  numberis  alfo  produced  if  you 
multiplye  the  two  numbers  firft  geuen  the  one  into  the  other.  As  you  fee  in  the  exam¬ 
ple  on  the  other  fide  fet. 


Barlaam, 


Barham, 


The fecondBoofy 


74 

Multiplication  of  the  whole 

1480 

nuber  vndeuided  into  the 

740 

partes  of  the  whole  num- 

370 

ber  deuided. 

148 

•s 

2738 

- 

Multiplication  of  the  one 

74 

whole  number  into  the  0- 

3  7 

ther.  y/e 

L  '  ?  -y 

518 

X  * 

t "  7  "l—  ” 

-  2  7  3  8 

5 


2 

the  number  produced  of  the  one-s 
whole  number  into  the  partes  of 
the  other  whole  number 

^equall  to 


^the  number  produced  of  the 
fame  whole  into  the  other  whole  - 


So  by  the  aide  of  this  Propofition  is  gotten  a  compendious  way  of  multiplication  by 
breaking  ofoneof  the  numbers  into  his  partes:  which  oftentimes  ferueth  to  great  vie 
in  working, chiefly  in  the  ruleofproportions.Thedemonftration  ofwhich  propofition 
followeth  in  Barlaam.But  firft  are  put  of  the  author  thefe  principlesfoIlowin<*, 

<7  (principles. 

1 .  <zA  number  is fayd  to  multiply  an  other  number:  When  the  number  multiplied  is fo  oftentymes 
added  to  it  felfe, as  there  be  vmties  in  the  number, Which  multiplied:  Vo  her  by  is  produced  a  certame 
number  Which  the  number  multiplied  meafureth  by  the  unities  Which  are  in  the  number  Which  mul¬ 
tiplied  . 

2 .  And  the  number  produced  of  that  a  multiplication  is  called  apUine  or fuperfciall  number. 

3  .  *s4 fquare  number  is  that  which  is  produced  of  the  mnltiplicatian  of  any  number  into  it  felfe. 

4.  Entry  lejfe  number  compared  to  a  greater  is  fayd  to  be  a  part  of  the  greater, Whet  her  the  lejfe  mea~ 
fare  thegr  eater, or  meafure  it  not. 

5 .  TfumberSiWhome  one  and  the felfe fame  number  meafureth  equally,  that  is, by  one  and  the felfe 
fame  num  beY  are  e  quail  the  one  to  the  othet , 

6.  Numbers  that  are  equemultiplices  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  number, that  is, Which  contayne  one 
and  the  fame  number  equally  and  alike, are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

TbefirH  Proportion, 

T  tya  numbers  b  eynggeucnjfth  e  one  of  them  be  deuided  into 
any  numbers  how  many  foeuer:  the  playne  orfuperficiall number 
Which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  tWo  numbers  firft 
geiien  the  one  into  the  other, (hall  be  equall  to  the  ftpcrfciall  tiu- 
bers  Which  are  produced  of  the  multiplication of  the  number  not 
deuided  into  eusry  part  of  the  number  deuided. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  numbers  A B  and  C.  And 
deuide  the  number  A B  into  certayne  other  numbers 
how  many  foeuer.as  into  A  D,D  £,and£  B ,  Then  I  fay 
that  the  fuperficiall  number  which  is  produced  of  the 
multiplication  of  the  number  Cinto  the  number  zA  B 
is  equall  to  the  fuperficiall  numbers  which  are  produ¬ 
ced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  number  C  into  the  nu- 
ber  A  'Zhand  of  C into  D  £,and  of  C  into  £  B.  For  let  F 
be  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplica¬ 
tion  of  the  number  C  into  the  number  A  J3,and  let  GH 
be  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multipli¬ 
cation  of  Cinto  Aid  .-And  let  H I  be  produced  of  the 
multiplication  of  Cinto  D  £:  and  finally  of  the  multi¬ 
plication  of  Cinto  FB  let  there  be  produced  the  num-  c  A  F  G 

ber 


ofEuclides  Ekmentes .  Fol.  6^ 

ber/ ANowforafrniichas.^FmuItiplying  the  numberC  produced  the  number  F; 
therefore  the  number  C  meafureth  the  number/7  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  nnm- 
ber  A  B.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  be  proued  that  the  number  C  doth  alfo  meafure 
the  number  (7 //,by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number?^  A  and  that*  it  doth  mea¬ 
fure  the  number  HI  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  nuber  D  F  and  finally  that  it  mea¬ 
fureth  the  number  IK  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  E  B  .Wherefore  the  nu¬ 
ber  C  meafureth  the  whole  number  G  K  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  AB. 
But  it  before  meafured  the  number  F  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  ABywher 
fore  either  of  thefe  numbers  F  and  G’F'is  equcmultiplexto  the  number  C .  But  num¬ 
bers  which  areequemultiplices  to  one  &  thqfelfe  fame  numbers  areequall  the  one  to 
the  other  (by  the  tf.definitionJ.Wherfore  the  number  Fis  equadto  the  number  G  K. 
But  the  number  Fis  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  nu¬ 
ber  C  into  the  number  A  B :  and  the  number  Cj  K  is  ccmpofed  of  the  fuperficiall  num¬ 
bers  produced  ofthe  multiplication  of  the  nuber  Cnot  deuided  into  euery  one  of  the 
numbers  A  D,D  E,andEB.l£ therefore  there  be  two  numbers  geuen  and  the  one  of 
them  be  deuided  &c.  Which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


The  iJTbeoreme.  The  ?. .  Eropofition , 

If  a  right  line  be  deuided  by  chaunce >  the  nil  angles  figures 
which  are  comprehended  vnder  the  whole  and  euery  one  of 
the  partes ,  areequall  to  the  fquare  whiche  is  made  of  the 
whole .  - 

V ppofe  t  hat  the  right  line  AB  he  hy  chaunfe  de- 
nided  in  the  point  C .  Then  1 fay  that  the  reHan * 
file  figure  comprehended  Vnder  Aft  and  B  C  to* 
gether  "frith  the  reH  angle  comprehended  "Vnder 
A  B  and  AC  is  equal!  Vnto  the fquare  made  of  A  B,T)e* 
f cribs  (by  the  4.6,0 f  the firH)  Vpon  A  B  a  fquare  A  T)  E  B: 
and  (by  the  $  1 0}  the  fir  ft)  by  the  point  Cdrafr  a  line  paral * 
lei  Vnto  either  of  tbe/e  lines  A  T>  and  B  E,and  let  the  fame  be  CF.  Tfow  is  the  ^emwJlratiS 
parallelogramme  AE  equallto  the  paralltlbgrammes  A  Fand  C  Ey  by  the  firH 
of  this  books.  But  A  E  is  the  Jquaremadeof  A  B.  And  JF  is  the  re  cl  angle 
parallelogramme  comprehended  "vnder  the  lines  B  A  and  A  C:  for  it  is  compre¬ 
hended  Vnder  the  lines  V  A  and  A  C:  but  the  line  A  V  is  equallvnto  the  line  A 
B,Andlih"frife  the parr allelogramme  C Eis  e quail  to  that  "frhich  iscontayncd 
"Vnder  the  lynes  ABand  B  (for  the  line  BE  is  equal  Vnto  the  line  AB.Wher - 
fore  that  "frhich  is  contayned  "vnder  B  A  and  AC  together  "frith  that  "frhich  it 
contayned  "Vnder  the  lines  AB  and  B  C fis  e  quail  to  the  fquare  made  of  the  line 
A  B  Jf therefore  a  right  line  be  deuided by  chaunce ythe  re  Ha  file  figures  "frhich 
are  comprehended  Vnder  the  "frhole ,  and  euery  one  of  thepartes3are  t  quail  to 
the  fquare  "frhich  is  made  of the  whole: ", frhich  "fras  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

An  other  demonftration  of  Campane. 

...  R  iii.  Sup- 


A  C 

B 

Id  f 

TL 

Conjlruttion, 


’ThefecondBooke 

Suppofe  that  tKe  line  AB  be  deuided  into 
the  lines  AC}  C Z>,and  Di?  .Then  I  fay  that  the 
fquare  of  the  whole  line  A  B, which  let  beAE 
BF,is  equal  to  the  redangle  figures  which  are 
contayned  vnder  the  whole  andeuery  one  of 
the  partes  :  fo r  take  the  line  ICwhich  let  be  e- 
qual  to  the  line  Atf.Nowthen  by  thefirftpro- 
pofition  the  redangle  figure  contained  vnder 
the  lines  A  B  and  /<T,is  equal! to  the  redangle 
figures  contayned  vnder  the  line  K  and  althe 
partes  of  the  line  AB.  But  that  which  is  con¬ 
tayned  vnder  the  lines  K and  A B  is  equall  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B ,  and  the  redangle 
figures  contay  ned  vnder  the  line  K  and  al  the  ^  G  v  5 

partes  o£AB,  are  equall  to  the  redangle  fi¬ 
gures  contayned  vnder  the  line  A  B  and  all  the  partes  ofthe  line  AB:  for  the  lines 
B  and  K are  equall:  wherefore  that  is  manifefl:  whichwas  required  to  be  proued. 

Anexampleofthis  Propofitionin  numbers. 


Take  a  number, as  1 1  .and  deuide  it  into  two  partesmamely,  7. and  4.’  and  multiply 
x  x  .into  7 ,andthen  into  4, and  there  lhalbe  produced  77. and  44.‘both  which  numbers 
added  together  make  r  2 1  .which  is  equall  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  mul¬ 
tiplication  of  the  number  1 1  .into  himfelfe,as  you  fee  in  the  example, 

•*',  .  .  .  .  ^  *  .  \  ■  . 
ft4'  .  •  t  H  -  ?  *% 


^Multiplication  of  the  whole- 
’  intohispartes. 


A 


|  Multiplication  ofthewhole 
Mnto  himfelfe. 


11 


77 

44 


1 21 


11 
1 1 


11 
1 1 


121 


the  number  produced  ofthe-% 
whole  into  his  partes* 


-equal  to 


'-the  number  produced  of  the. 
whole  into  himfelfe. 


CqT- 


Barlaam. 


The  demo  nftration  whereof  folio  weth  in  Barlaam, 

ThefecondTropofition. 

If  a  number  geuen  be  decided  into  two  other  numbers :  the fuperficiall  numbers ,  Which  arepro* 
disced  ofthe  multiplication  ofthe  Whole  into  either  part, added  together ,are  equall  to  the  fquare  num¬ 
ber  ofthe  whole  number  geuen. 

Suppofe  that  the  number  geuen  be  A  B  : and  let  it  be  deuided  into  two  other  num¬ 
bers  A  C  and  CB.  Then  I  fay  that  the  two  fuperficiall  numbers ,  which  are  produced 
ofthe  multiplication  of  A  B  into  A  C,  and  of  A  B  into  B  C ,  thofe  two  fuperficiall  num¬ 
bers  (I  fay)  beyng  added  together,  lhalbe  equall  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of 
the  multiplicand  of  the  number  AB  into  it  felfe.For  let  the  number  <eA  B  multiplying 
it  felfe  produce  the  number  Df  Let  the  number  A  C  alfo  multiplying  the  number  A  B 

produce 


/ 


of  Euclides  Elementes, 


Fol6\. 


B 


\i% 


'F 


4* 


produce  the  number  £F:agayne  let  the  numberCi?  multiply¬ 
ing  the  felfe  fame  number  AB  produce  the  numberFG.  Now1 
foraftnuch  as  the  number^  C  multiplying  the  number  zA  B 
produced  the  number  EF:  therefore  the  number  zAB  meafu-* 
reth  the  number  E  F  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  A  C.Againe  for- 
afmuchasthe  number  CB  multiplied  the  number  ^4 £,andpro 
duced  the  number  F  G  =  therfore  the  number  A  B  meafureth  the 
number  FG  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  Ci? .But  the 
fame  number  AB  before  meafured  the  number  E  F  by  the  vni- 
tieswhich  are  in  the  number  AC.  Wherefore  the  number  A  B 
pieafureth  the  whole  number  S  G’by  the  vnities  whcih  are  in  A 
^.Farther  fo rafmuch  as  the  number  2?  multiplying  it  felfe  pro 
duced  the  number/?:  therefore  the  Humbert'S  meafureth  the  --,C  ^ 

number  D  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  himfelfe.Wherfore  it  mea  % jp 

fureth  either  of  thefe  numbersmamelyjthe  number  £>,{and  the 
number  E  G, by  the  vnities  which  are  in  himfelfe .  Wherfore  how 
multiplex  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  AB ,  fo  multiplex  is 
the  number  EG  to  the  fame  number  AB.  But  numbers  which 
are  equemultiplices  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  number^re  equal 
the  one  to  the  other.  Wherefore  the  number  *D  is  equallto  the 
number  E  G .And  the  number  D  is  the  fquare  number  made  of  ^ 
the  n  urn  ber  A  £,and  the  number  E  G  is  compofed  of  the  two  fu- 
perficiall  numbers  produced  o£A B  into BC,  and  o£ B  Ainto  A 
C.  Wherefore  the  fquare  numberproduced  of  the  number  <A  B 
is  equall  to  the  fuperficial  numbers,produced  of  the  number  A  B  into  the  number  £  Cs 
and  ofAB  into  AC,added  together  .If  therefore  a  number  be  deuided  into  two  other 
number  s  &c,  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


1 

D 


i 

B 


be  3.  The  or  erne,  The  3.  Tropofition . 

ff a  right  line  be  deuided  by  chaunceithe  reBanglefigure  com¬ 
prehended  vnder  the  whole  and  one  of  the  partes  ,is  equall  to 
the  reft  angle figu>  e  comprehended  vnder  the partes ,  &  "vnto 
the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the for ef aid part . 


Vppofe that  the right linegeuen  AB  be  deuided  bycbaunce  in  the 
point  C.Tben  1  fay  tbat  the  re  Handle  figure  compreheded  Vnder  tbe 
lines  A  &  and  B  C  is  equall  Vnto  tbe  re  Bangle  figure  comprehended 
Vnder  tbe  lines  A  C  and  C  B^and  alfo  Vnto  tbe  fquare  which  is  made 
of tbe  line  B  C.  fDefcribe(by  tbe  4.6, of  the  firfifvpon  tbe  line  B  Ca  fquare  CfD 
EB :  and  (by  tbe  fecond  peticion)extendE  Vnto  F.  And  by  tbe  poitit  A draw 
(by  tbe  3 1  .of  tbe  firft)a  line  parallel  Vnto  either  of  thefe  lines  C  B)  and  BE^and 
lettbe  fame  be  AFJSLow  tbe  paraUdo*  b  c  4 

grame  A  E is  equall  Vnto  the parallelo*  [~  1  — 

grammes  A  B)  and  C E,And  A  E  is  tbe 

re  Bangle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  |__ _ _ _ _ _ 

tbe  lines  A  B  and  B  C,For  it  is  compre*  E  b  p 

bended  Vnder  tbe  lines  A  B  and  B  E. 

%iif  but 


Conflmtlm, 


Demnftmio 


Thefecond'Booke 

"fohich  line  BE  if  e quail Vnto  the  line S Ct  jind the paradelograme  A D is  e* 
quail  to  that  which  is  contayned Vnder  the  lines  A C and  C  <B\  for  the  line  5)  C is 
equall Vnto  the  line  C  B .  And ID  B  is  the  fquare  Tbhich  is  made  of  the  lyne  C  B. 
VVherfore  the  re  Handle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  lynes  A  B  and  BC  is 
equall  to  the  re  Bangle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  3  Ural* 
fo  Vnto  thefquare  Tbhicb  is  made  of  the  line  3  Ct  If  therfore  a  right  line  he  de* 
uided  by  chaunce%the  reBangle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  tohole  and  one 
of  the  partes fis  equall  to  the  reBangle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  parte  f, 
andvnto  the  fquare  ^hichis  made  of  the  forefayd  part:  H>hich  'to  as  required  to 
he  proued , 


An  example  ofthis  Propofition  in  numbers, 

Suppofe  a  number,namely,i4.to  be  deuided into  two  partes  8,and  6.  The  whole 
number  ^.multiplied  into  8.  one  of  his  partes,produceth  i  i2:the  partes  8. &<5.  mul¬ 
tiplied  the  one  into  the  other  produce  48,whicn  added  to  6^( which  is  the  fquare  of  8. 
the  former  part  of  the  number  Jamounteth  alfo  to  1 1 1 :  whiche  is  equall  to  the  former 
fumme.Asyou  fee  in  the  example. 


r  Multiplication  of  the  whole" 
into  one  of  his  partes. 

r  14 

8 

O: 

j-the  partes. 

■ 

II2_ 

— 

"the  number  produced  of  the-. 

whole  into  one  of  hispartes- 

Multiplication  of  the  one 

8 

part  into  the  other. 

' 

- 

6 

:>equa!  to 

- 

48 

48 

■ 

J± 

Multiplication  of  the  for¬ 
mer  part  into  it  felfe. 

8 

8 

112 

^the  number  compofed  of the 
one  partinto  the  other,  and- 
of  the  former  part  into  him- 
felfe. 

*4. 

J 


BarUam* 


The  demonftratton hereof folloveth  in  Barlaam, 

The  third  propofition. 

If  a  number geuen  be  deuided  into  tWo  numbers:  the fiperfciall  number  Which  is  produced  of 
the  multiplication  of ih  e  Whole  into  one  of  the  partes, ts  equall  to  the/uperficiall  number  which  it  pro - 
duced  of  the  partes  the  one  into  the  olher,andtotbe fquare  number  produced  of  the  forefayd  part. 


Suppofe  that  the  number  geuen  be  v4  #,which  let  be  deuided  into  two  numbers  A 
Cand  C  #  .Then /fay  that  the  fuperficiall  number  whiche  is  produced  of  the  multipli¬ 
cation  ofthe  number^.# into  the  number;#  C  is  equall  to  the  fuperficiall  number 
w'hich  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  number  A  C  into  the  number  C  #,and 
to  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  number  C  '3. For  let  the  number  a A  B  muitipli- 
eng  thq.  number  C B  produce  the  number  D.And  let  the  number  A  C  multiplieng  the 
number  CB  produce  the  number  E .Ftand  finally  let  the  number  C B  multiplieng  him- 
felfe  produce  the  number  F  G.  Nowforafmuchas  the  number,//#  multiplieng  the 
'  -  number 


ofEuclides  Elements s. 


. 6 5* 


t 


4r 


A 


number  CB  produced  the  huitibefi)  .Therfore  the  number  C 
B  meafureth  the  number  D  by  the  vnities  whiche  are  in  the 
number  A  5.Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  number^  Cmultipli- 
ed  the  numberCi?,and  produced  the  number  E  F}  therefore 
the  number  C  B  meafureth  the  nuber  EF  by  the  vnities  which 
are  m  A C.Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  number  C B  multiplied  it 
felfe  and  produced  the  number  EG1-.  therfore  the  numberC# 
meafureth  the  number  F  G  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  it  felfe. 

But  as  we  haue  before  proued  the  felfc  fame  nuber  CB  mea¬ 
fureth  alfo  the  number  EF  by  the  vnities  which  ate  in  the  nu¬ 
ber  A  C,w herfore  the  number  CB  meafureth  the  whole  num¬ 
ber  EG  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  AB,  And  it  al¬ 
fo  meafureth  the  number  D  by  the  vnities  whiche  are  in  the 
number  A 2>  .Wherfore  the  number  CB  equally  meafureth  ei¬ 
ther  number,namely,the  number  ZJ^and  the  number  EG. But 
thofe  numbers  whomc  one  and  the  felfe  fame  number  mcafu- 
reth  equally,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherfore  the 
number  D  is  equall  to  the  number  E  G .But  the  number  D  is  a 
fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the 
number  AB  into  the  number  2>C, and  thenumberACis  the 
fuperficial  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  nu¬ 
ber  AC  into  the  number  CB,  and  of  the  fquare  of  the  number 
CB. Wherfore  the  fuperficial  number  produced  of  the  multi¬ 
plication  of  the  number -^5  into  the  numbered  is  equal  to  the  fuperficiall  number 
produced  of  the  number  A  Cinto  the  number  CB,  ana  to  the  fquare  of  the  number  C 
.S.If  therfore  a  number  be  deuidedinto  two  numbers.the  fuperficiall  nuber  &c:  which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 


S 


1 

E 


\ The  ^Theorems.  The  4..  Tropofition , 

If  a  right  line  be  deuided by  chaunce,  the  fquare  whiche  is 
made  of  the  whole  line  is  equal  to  thefqmres  which  are  made 
of  the  partes,  &  vnto  that  rectangle figure  which  is  compre* 
bended  lender  the  partes  twife. 

B yppo/e  that  the  right  lyne  A  ©  he  hy  chaunce  deuided  in  the pointe  C. 
™|  Then  l Jay  that  the  fquare  made  of  the  line  A  ©  is  equall  Vntoy  [quarts 
which  are  made  of the  lines  A  CandC  B,  and  Vnto  the  re  Bangle  figure 
contained  Vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  ©  tftife.  Defer  the 
(by  y  46.0  f  the  first)  Vpon  the  line  AB  a  fquare  ADE 
©  land  draft  a  line  from  B  to  fD,and(by  the  3 1  .oft  he  h 
firft)by  the  point  C  draw  a  line  parallel  Vnto  either  of 
theje  lines  A  Bland  ©  E cutting  the  diameter  ©  X)  in 
the  point  G,and  let  the  fame  be  C  E.And(by  the  point 
G  (by  the  felfe  famefdraft  a  line  parallel  Vnto  eyther 
of the fe  lines  A  ©  and  BE,  and  let  the  fame  be  H 
And forafmuch  as  the  line  CF  is  a,  . parallel  Vnto 

S.L 


CwJlrH&ion • 


the 


Vemonfiratio 


(eft 

theline  AD,andvponthemfalletb  arigbtlineft  ft):  therfore(by  the  2  9, of  the 
firft)the  outward  angle  CG  ft  is  equallVnto  the  inward  and  oppojite  angle  A 
ft  ftJBut  the  angle  Aft  ft  is  (by  the  5*  of  the  fir  ft)  equali  Vnto  the  angle  A  ft 
ft:  for  the  fide  ft  A  is  equali  Vnto  the  Jide  A  ft  (by  the  definition  of  a  fquare ). 
Wherfore  the  angle  CG  ft  is  equali  Vnto  theangleG  ftC:  wherfore(  by  the  6, 
of  the  fir  ft  )t  he fide  ft  C  is  equali  Vnto  the  fide  C  G.ftut  C  ft  is  equallVnto  G 
and  C  G  is  equali Vnto  Kfft:  wberforeGJfjs  equallVnto  ft.  VVherfore  the 
figure  CGKfift  confifteth  of  four e  equali  ftdes.l  fay  alfo  that  it  is  a  reHangle  fi¬ 
gure. For  for  ajmacb  as  CG  is  a  parallel  Vnto  ftK&vpon  the  falleth  a  right  line 
Cft,therfore(byy  9. of the  i,)tbe  angles  JfJB  C^andG  C  ft  are  equal  vnto  two 
right  angles /But  the  angle  KfftC  is  a  right  angle  givher fore  y  angle  ftCGis  alfo 
a  right  angle VV her f  or e(by  the  3  4 yfthe  first )tbe angles  oppojite  Vnto  them, 
namely  yC  G  If,  and  G  Kjft  are  right  angles,  Wherfore  C  G  If  ft  is  a  re  Han* 
gle  figure.  And  it  Was  before  proued  that  the  fides  are  equali.  VVherfore  it  is  a 
fquare  ^andit  is  defcribedvpon  the  line  ft  C  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  H  Fis 
a  fquare  ,and  is  defcribed  Vpon  the  line  H  Gjhat  isy>* 
p  on  the  line  A  C.VVberfore  the  f'quares  Ff  F  and  C  If 
are  made  of  t  he  lines  A  C  and  C  ft  And  forafmucb  as  H 
the  parade  lograme  AG  is  (by  the  45,  of  the  fir  ft)  e* 
quail  Vnto  the  parallelogramme  G  E.And  A  G  is  that 
which  is  contayned  V rider  AC  and  Cftjor  CGis  equal 
Vnto  C  ft,wherforeG  E  is  equali  to  that  which  is  con» 
tained  Vnder  A  C  and  C  ft,  V therefore  A  G  audG  E 
are  equali  Vnto  that  which  is  comprehended  Vnder  A 
CandC  ft  twife.  And  the  /quay  es  H  Eand  C  Jfaremade  of  the  lines  AC  and  C 
ft. VVherfore  theft  foure  reHanglefigures  HFflf^A  Go  and  G  E  are  equali 
Vnto  the Jquareswbiche  art  made  cf the  lines  AC  and  C  ft,andto  the  reH  angle 
figure  which  is  comprehended  Vnder  the  lines  AC  and  C  ft  twife.  ftut  the  reH * 
angle  figures  HF>  C  If,  A  G,and  G  Eare  the  whole  reHangle  figure  At)  Eft 
Which  is  the  fquare  made  of  the  line  A  ftJWherf ore  the  fquare  which  is  made 
of  the  line  Aft  is  equal!  to  the  fqmreswhicharemade  of  the  lines  A  CandC  fty 
and  Vnto  the  reHangle  figure  which  is  comprehendedvnder  the  lines  AC  and 
C  ft  t  wife. If  therfore  a  r  ight  line  be  deuided  by  chaunce ,  the  fquare  which  e  is 
made  of  the  whole  line  fis  equali  to  the  (quarts  which  are  made  of  the  partes^ 
Vnto  the  reHangle  figure  which  is  comprehended  Vnder  the  partes  twifeiwhich 
Was  required  to  be  proued * 


\{t- 


ration * 


:.u\ 


5'  v\ .  > 


I  fay  that  the  fquare  of  the  line  AftisequaH  Vrito  the  fquare  s  Wbiche  art 
made  of  the  lines  A  C  and  Cftjt?  vnto  the  reitangle  figure  which  is  compnbe* 
ded  Vnder  the  lines  AC  and  Cft  twife.Fpr the felfe fame  difcription  abiding for* 

5  afmuch 


B 


7 

/ 

/ 

ofEuclidcs  Elementes.  FoL  6  6 . 

a/much  as  the  line  AB  is  equal l  Vnto)  Ime  At>yy  angle  AB  t>  is(hy  the  of  the 
firH)  equal 7  Vnto  the  angle  A  T>  B. And  fora fmuch  as  the  three  angles  of  euery 
triangle  areequalto  two  right  angles  (by  the  5  2  of  the  fir  ft). therefore)  three 
angles  of  the  triangle  A  BS)ynamely^  the  angles  A  EDBfD  B  Afand  B  A  Dyare 
e  quail  to  two  right  angles.But  the  angle  B  AT>  is  a  right  angle  therefore  the 
angles  remayning  A  B  D>and  A  T)  By  are  equallvnto  one  right  angleiand  they 
are  equally  one  to  the  other ywher fore  either  of  thefe 
angles  A  B  Bdyzs'  A  Bfts  the  halfe  of  a  right  angle, 

And  the  angle  BCG  is  a  right  angle ,  for  it  is  equall 
Vnto  the  oppofite  angle  at  the  point  A  (by  the  2  9.  of 
the  fir  ft). V therefore  the  angle  rtmaymng  CG  Bis 
the  halfe  of  a  right  angle.  Wherefore  the  angle  CGB 
is  equal Vnto  theangle  CBG:  therefore  alfo  the  Jide 
BC is  equallvnto  thefide  CG.But  BC is  equall  Vnto  u 
G  and  C  G  is  equal  Vnto  B  Wherefore  the  fin 

gureC  K^confiftetb  of  equall fidesiand  in  it  is  a  right  angle  C  Bl<f.  Where » 
fore  C  Kjs  a  fquare, and  is  made  of  the  line  B  C.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  H  F 
is  a fquare,and  is  equall  Vnto  that fquare  which  is  made  of  the  line  A  Q  Where* 
fore  C  Kjnd  El  Fare  fquares^and  are  equall  to  thofefquares  which  are  made 
of  the  lines  A  Cand  C  B.  Andforafmuck  as  AG  is  equall  Vnto  E  G:and  AG  is 
that  which  is  contaynedvnder  A  Cand  C  BJorGC  is  equal  Vnto  C  Biwhere* 
fore  E  G  alfo  is  equall  to  that  which  is  coprehended  Vnder  A  C  and  C  B:  where* 
fore  AG  and  EG  are  equall  Vnto  that  r  eBangle figure  which  is  comprehended 
Vnder  A  Cy  and  C  B  twife.AndCK^and  H  Fare  equal  Vnto  the f quires  which 
are  made  of  A  Q  and  (fB:  wherefore  C^HFjAG,  and  GE  are  equal  Vn - 
to  thofefquares  which  are  made  of  A  C,and  CBjnd  Vnto  that  re  El  angle  figure 
Which  is  comprehended  Vnder  A  Cand  C  B  twife.  But  C  Jf^ElFA  GyandG  E 
are  the  whole  fquare  A  E  which  is  made  of  A  B ,  Wherefore  the  fquare  which 
is  made  of A  Bfts  equall  to  the  fquares  which  are  made  of  AC  and  C  By  and  Vn* 
to  t  he  r  eft  angle  figure  which  is  comprehended  Vnder  A  C  and  CB  tWife:  which 
was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 


Hereby  it  ismanifeft  that  the  farallelogrames  Vebich  conftfl  about  the  diameter  of  a fan  art  mtfi  ^  Corollary* 
needes  be /quarts. 

This  proportion  is  of  infinite  vfe  chiefcly  infurde  numbers.By  helpeofitis 
made  in  theadditio  Sc  fubftra&ion,alfo multi plicatio  in  Binomials  &  refidu- 
als.  And  by  hclpc  hereofalfo  is  demonftratcd  that  kinde  of  equation,  which  is 
when  there  are  three  denominations  in  naturail  order,  or  equally  diftant,  and 
two  of  the  greater  denominations  are  equall  to  the  thirde  being  lefie  Onthis 
propofition  is  grounded  theextraftion  of  fquare  roots.And  many  other  things 
are  alfo  by  it  demonftrated* 

s.tj. 


An 


Balaam, 


fe  The  fecondBookg 

An  example  of  this  Tropofition  in  numbers . 

Suppofe  a  number  namely,  x  7. to  be  deuided  into  two  partes  9.  and  8.  The  whole 
number  1 7  .multiplied  into  him  felfe,produceth  289. The  fquare  numbers  of  9.  and  8. 
are  8 1.  and  64:  the  numbers  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  partes  the  one  in- 
to  the  other  twife  are  72,  and  72:  which  two  numbers  added  to  the  fquare  numbers 
°t  9,and  8.namely,to  81.  and  6 4.  makealfo  3  8p.whichiscquall  to  the  fquare  number 
of  the  whole  number  1 7 .  As  you  fee  in  the  example. 


The  multiplication  of  the-', 
whole  into  himfelfe. 

r 17 

17 

{%: 

>-the  partes  of  the  whole 

n  9 

17 

28p 

r  the  number  produced  of  the 

whole  into  himfelfe. 

The  multiplication  ofeche 

9 

part  into  himfelfe. 

9 

81 

^equall  to 

8 

81 

8 

*4 

<54 

7a 

7* 

-  .  •  .  .V.  ‘ 

289 

"•the  number  compofed  of  cche 

The  multiplication  of  the 
one  part  into  the  other 

9 

8 

part  into  himfelfe.andof  the  one 
into  the  other  twife. 

twife. 

72 

-  -  . . ,  ..  J  A  * 

9 

8 

- 

L  7» 

The  demonftration  wherof  followcth  inBarlaam, 


The  fourth  Tropofition . 

If  a  number  geuen  be  deuided  into  tWo  numbers :  thejejuare  number  ofthewbole,is  c/juatt  to  the 
fcjuare  numbers  of  the  partes,  and  to  thefuperficiall  number  which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication 
of  the  partes  the  one  into  the  other  tWtfe. 

Suppofe  that  the  number  geuen  bet  AH:  which  let  be  deuided  into  two  numbers 
A  C  and  CB.  Then  I  fay  that  the  fquare  number  of  the  whole  number  -/42?,is  equall 
to  the  fquares  of  the  partes,that  is,to  the  fquares  of  the  numbers  C  and  CA,and  to 
the  fuperfkiali  n  umber  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  AC  and  CB  the 
one  into  the  other  twife.  Let  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of 
the  whole  number  AB  into  himfelfe  be  D .  And  let  C  A  multiplied  into  himfelfe 
produce  the  number£-F;  KndfB  multiplyed  into  it  felfe  let  it  produce  GH:  andfi- 
nallyofthemultiplicatioofthe  numbers  A  CandCAthe  one  into  the  other  twife  let 
there  be  produced  either  of  thefe  fuperfkiali  numbers  F  G  and  Ft  K .  Now  forafmuche 
as  the  number  e^/Cmultiplyingit  felfproduced  the  number  .E  A;  therefore  the  num¬ 
ber  zAC  meafureth  the  number  EF  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  it  felfe.  Andforafmuch 
as  the  number  CB  multiplyed  the  number  C  A  and  produced  the  number  F  G :  there- 


ofEuclides  Elementes «  Fc-Ldj. 

fore  the  number  ^Cmeafureth  the  nuber  F  G  by  the  vnities 
whiche  are  in  the  number  CB.  But  it  before  alfo  meafured 
the  number  SFby  the  vnities  which  arein  it  felfe.  Where¬ 
fore  the  number  A  B  multiplying  the  number  -4Cprodu- 
ceth  the  number  E  G\And  therefore  the  number  EG  is  the 
fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the 
number  B  A  into  the  number  C,  And  by  the  fame  rea- 
fonmay  weproue  that' the  number  G K  is  the  fuperficiall 
number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  number  A  B 
into  the  number  #C.Farther  the  number  Z> is  thefquare  of 
the  number  A  B.  But  if  a  number  be  deuided  into  two  num¬ 
bers,  the  fquare  of  the  whole  number  is  equall  to  the  two 
fuperficiall  numbers  which  are  produced  of  the  multipli¬ 
cation  of  the  whole  into  either  the  partes  ("by  the  2«Theo- 
reme.)  Wherefore  the  fquare  number  D  is  equall  to  the  fu¬ 
perficiall  number  E  K.  But  the  number  EKis  coinpofed  of 
the  fquares  of  the  numbers  A  C  and  C  B,  and  of  the  Superfi¬ 
cial  number  which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the 
nuber  A  C and  C B  the  one  into  the  other  twife:&  the  num¬ 
ber  D  is  the  fquare  of  the  whole  number  AB.  Wherfore  the 
fquare  nu  mber  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  num¬ 
ber  A  B  into  himfelfe,  is  equall  to  thefquare  numbers  of 
the  partes,  that  is,to  the  fquare  numbers  of  the  nuber  sAC 
and  C2?,and  to  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  num¬ 
bers  A  C  and  C  B ,  the  one  into  the  other  twife.  If  therefore  a  number  geuen  be  deui¬ 
ded  into  two  numbers  &c  .Which  was  required  to  beproued. 

The  5.  T beoreme .  The  jfPropofition, 

%  If  a  right  line  he  deuided into  two  equall partes^  &  into  two 

ynequall partes:  the  reUangle  figures  comprehended  ynder 
the  ynequaH partes  of  the  whole ^together  with  the fquate  of 
that  which  is  betwene  the  feUiosJs  equal  to  the  fquare  which 
h  made  of  the  halfe. 

mqyppof6  that  the  right  line  A  B  be  derided  i  nto  tWo  equall  partes  in  the 
Cydnd  into  two  wequall  partes  in  the  point  D.Tben  I  fay  that  the 
reSlangle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  AD  and  D  B  together  With  the 
fquare  which  is  made  ofC  Dy  is  equall  to  thefquare  which  is  made  ofC  B,  De*  ConftrutHon . 
Jcribe(by  the  4 6.  of  the  firfi) 

VpponCB  a  fquare y  and  let  the 
Jame  be  C  EFB,  jfnd(hy  the 
firfi  peticion)draWe  a  line  from 
E  to  B.And  byy point  Ddrawe 
(by  the  $  \tof the  firfi )  a  line  pa • 
rallelvnto echo/ the fe  lines  CE 
and  B  E  cutting  the  diameter  B 
E  in  the  point  H}  and  ktey  fame 
be  ID  C.  And  agayne(by  the  felfe 


Satj. 


6-f 


’  L 

41 

b 

\x 


-H 

■  F 


b-  A** 


3* 


A  V  E, 


fame 


Dmenfiratio 


a 


TheJiconcNSookg 

fame)  by  the  point  H  dr aWe  aline  parallel  Vnto  ecbe  oftbefe  lines  A  B  and 
EFyand  let  the  fame  be  KJ)  \  and  let  Kj)  be  equall  'Vnto  AB,  Andagaine 
(by  the  ( elfe Jame  )by  the  point  A  draw  a  line  parallel  Vnto  either  of  thefe  lines 
C L  and  B  0,  and  let  the  fame  be  AI\.  Andforafmuch  as  (by  the  43 ,of  the 
firfl )tbe  f  upplement  CH is  equall  to  the  fupplemet  HF.put  the  figure  ID  0  co* 
mon  Vnto  them  both .  VF'herefore  the  whole  figure  CO  is  equall  to  the  whole  fi * 
gure  DF.But  the  figure  CO  is  equallvnto  the  figure  ALt  for  y  line  AC  is  equall 
Vnto  the  line  C  B.  Wherefore  the  figure  AL  alfo  is  equal  Vnto  the  figure  ID  F. 
But  the  figure  C  H  common  Vnto  them  both  J/V her fore  the  whole  figure  AH. 
is  equall  Vnto  the  figures  D  L  and  D  F.  But  A  H  is  equall  to  that  which  is  co* 
tayned  Vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  Bfor  D  His  equall  Vnto  D  B.And  the  fi¬ 
gures  F  D  &DL  are  the  Gno - 
tnon  MKXynerfore  y  Gno*  A 
mon  MNX  is  equall  to  that 
Which  is  contayned  Vnder  A  D 
and  V  BjPut  the  figure  LG  co • 
mon  Vnto  them  both^which  is  e* 
qual  to  the fquare  Which  is  made 
of  C  (D,  VFherefore  the  Gnomo 
M  2^1  X  and  the  figure  L  G  art 
equall  to  the  rectangle  figure  co - 

prehended  Vnder  X  D  and  D  B  and  Vn(o  the  j quart  which  is  made  ofODjBut 
t  he  Gnomon  M  TL  Xfand  the  figure  L  G  are  the  whole  fquare  C  E  FB%whick 
is  made  ofBC.VF  here  fort  the  reft  angle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  A  ID  and 
1)  B,  together  with  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  CD yis  equall  to  the  fquare 
Which  is  made  ofCB,  If  therefore  a  right  line  be  deuided  into  two  equall parts  > 
and  into  two  Vnequall partes  yhe  re  ftangle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  Vn» 
equall  partes  of  the  whole  ^together  with  the  fquare  of  that  which  is  betWene 
the  /eft  tons,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  halfe:  which  Was  requia 
redtobeproued , 

This  Propofitionalfoisofgrcate  vfein  Algebra.  By  it  is  demonftrated 
that  equation  wherein  the  grcatell  and  IcaitWe&es  or  numbers  are  equall  tj 
the  middle. 


r 

M 

K 

L 

M  / 

H  / 

AS 

P 


An  example  of  this  propofition  in  numbers. 

Take  any  number  as  20:  and  deuide  itinto  two  equall  partes  xo-and  10.  and  then 
into  two  vnequall  partes  as  15.  and  7.  And  take  the  differcce  of  the  halfe  to  one  of  the 
vnequall  partes  which  is  5.  And  multiplythevnequallpartcs,thatis,i?  andy.theone 
into  the  other,which  make  pi.take  alfo  the  fquare  of  3  . which  is  p.  and  adde  itto  the 
forefaydenumberpuandfolhallthercbe  made  xoo.  Then  multiply  the  halfe  of  the 
whole  number  into  himfelf,  that  is,  take  the  fquare  of  10. which  is  100. which  is  equal 
to  the  number  before  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  vncqual  parts  the  one  in¬ 
to  the  othcr,&  of  the  difference  into  it  felfe  which  is  alfo  1  oo,As  you  fe  in  the  example* 

The 


of Euctides  Elmtntes* 

The  whole  euefl  ^  ao  fio 


iuy» 


Multiplication  of  the  vn¬ 
equall  partes  the  one  into 
the  other* 


Multiplication  of  the  dif¬ 
ference  into  it  felfe. 


Multiplication  of  the  half 
into  it  felfe* 


io 

xo 


1  ^  ^-the  vnequall  partes 


w  3  f^The  difference  of  ohe  of 
the  vnequal  partes  to  the 
halfe. 


X 


*1 

7 

9*  Pl 

9 


j  iOo 

3 


io 

io 


too 


'  the  huber  coiiipofed  of  the  mul¬ 
tiplication  of  the  vnequal  partes 
the  one  into  the  other*  &  of  the 
difference  into  it  felfe 

■cquall  to 


H  X 


the  number  produced  of  the 
halfe  into  it  felfe. 

The  demonftration  'wher°ffDllowech  in  Barlaam, 

The  fifth  proportion. 

If  an  earn  number  be  derided  into  Wo  e  quail  partes^and  againealfo  into  Wo  vnequall  partes: 
the fuperfit'iull  number  Which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  vnequall  partet  the  one  into1 
the  other  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  numberfet  betwene  the  parts ,  is  equal  to  the  fquare  efhalft 
the  number. 

■Suppofc  that^Abeaneuen  number :  which  let  be 
deuidfcd  into  two  equal!  numbers  A  Cand  CBy and  into 
two  vnequall  numbers  A  Jf  &nd  D  B.  Then  7  fay, that  the 
fquare  number  which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication 
Ofthe  halfe  number  CJ3  into  it  felfe  Js  equal!  to  thefu- 
perficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the 
vnequall  numbers  A I)  and  D  B  the  one  into  the  other, 
and  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  number  C  D 
which  is  fet  betwene  the  fay de  vnequall  partes.  Let  the 
fquare  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  thb 
halfe  number  CB  into  it  felfe  be  E .  And  let  the  fuperfU 
ciall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  vne-, 
qual  nuber  s  A  D  and  D  B  the  one  into  the  other,be  the 
number  FCj-.  and  let  the  fquare  of  the  number  DC  which 
is  fet  betwene  the  partes  be  G  H,  Now  forafmueh  as  the 
number  B  Cisdeuided  into  the  numbers  BD  and  DCj 
therforethe  fquare  of  the  number  2?  C,that  is,  the  num¬ 
ber  E,is  eq  uall  to  the  fquares  of  the  num  bers  B  D  and  t) 

C3andto  the  fuperficiall  number  which  is  compofed  of 
the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  B  D  and  t>  C  the  one 
into  the  other  twife,f  by  the 4.propofition  of  this  boke) 

Let  the  fquare  of  the  number  E  D  be  the  number  K  L:& 
let  N  X  be  the  fquare  of  the  number  D  C:  and  finally  of 

S.iiii.  the 


3 


b  -.'D 


4 


\  6" 


b  *  C 


• 

4 

;  i  ■ 

4 

Ou 

A* 

M.H 

%% 

4 

-f 

4 

i. 

n 


m 


E 


the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  BD  and  D  C  the  one  into  the  other  t\vife,let  be  pro 
duced  either  of  thefe  number's  L  M  and  M  2^.  Wherefore  the  whole  number  K X  i$ 
equall  to  the  number  £  Andforafmuch  as  the  number  BD  multipliyngit  felfe produ¬ 
ced  the  number  K L, therefor  it  meafureth  it  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  it  feife«  More 
ouer  forafmuch  as  the  number  CD  multiplying  the  number  B  D  produced  the  num¬ 
ber  L  A -/,  therefore  alfo  D  B  meafureth  L  M  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  C 
Z>:  but  it  before  meafured  the  number  K  L  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  it  felfe,  Where- 
fore  the  number  D  B  meafureth  the  whole  number  KM  by  the  vnities  which  are  inC 
B .  But  the  number  CB  is  equal!  to  the  number  C  A.  Wherefore  the  number  'DB  mea¬ 
fureth  the  number  K  A4  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  C  A.  Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  nu- 
ber  CT)  multiplivng  the  number  D  B  produced  the  number  A/ 2W therefore  the  num¬ 
ber  D  B  meafureth  the  number  M  7^ by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  CD -but 
it  b  efore  meafured  the  number  KM  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  ^C.Wher 
fore  the  number  B  D  meafureth  the  whole  number  KN  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the 
numbers  D.  Wherefore  the  number  FG  is  equall  to  the  number  if  iV.For  numbers 
which  are  cquemultiplices  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  number,are  equall  the  one  to  the 
other.ButthenumberG’i/ is  equall  to  thenumbcrNX:  foreither  ofthem  is  fuppo- 
fed  to  be  the  fquare  of  the  number  C  D.’Wherefore  the  whole  number  KX  is  equall  to 
the  whole  number  F  H, But  the  number  K  X  is  equall  to  the  number  E.  Wherefore  alfo 
the  number  F  His  equall  to  the  number  £.And  the  number  F His  the  fuperficial  num¬ 
ber  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  and  DB  the  one  into  the  o- 
ther  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  number  DC,  And  thenumber  £  is  the  fquare  of  the 
nutnberC£.Wherfore  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the 
vnequal  partes  AD  and  DB  the  one  into  the  other,  togetherwith  the  fquare  of  the  nu- 
ber  D  C  which  is  fet  betwene  thofe  vnequall  partes, is  equall  to  the  fquareof  the  num¬ 
ber  C  2?,  which  is  the  halfe  of  the  whole  number  AB.  If  therfore  an  euen  number  be  de- 
uidedinto  two  equall  partesAx*  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


1  I 


The  6fTheoreme,  The  6,cPropofition. 


'  -  •  .  3  -  ' 

If  a  right  line  be  deuided  into  typo  equal partes, and ifvnto  it 
be  added  an  other  right  line  direBly,the  reB angle  figure  con* 
tayned  vnder  the  whole  line  with  that  which  is  added,&the 


line  which  is  addedt  together  With  the  fquare  which  is  made 
of  the  halfe ,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  halfe 
line  and  of  that  which  is  added  as  of one  li  ne. 

'■  '  !  •  •  in  •  f-j'  is  ■<  C1.  Hi 


Vppcfe  that  the  rigbte 
line  A’Bbe  deuided  in - 
to  two  equall  partes  in 
point  C :  O'  let  there 
added  Vnto  it  an  other  right  line 
J)rBdirecHy}that  is  tojayynhich 
being  ioyned  Vnto  A  make  both 
one  right  line  A  Then  I fay, 
that  the  rectangle  figure  compre 
bended  )mder  A®  and 


'  •  ..  i..!i 

.'mSfcsih. 


ofEuclides  Elementes.  FoL  6p. 

gether  "frith  the  fquare  whiche  is  made  of  BC  is  equall  to  the  fquare  wU'chefit 
made  ofD  C.DeJcribe(  by  the  46  .of the  i  ,)vpon  CD  a  fquare  C  E  FD,and  (by 
the  firfi  petition  )draW  aline  from  D  to  E:and  (by  the  tuoftbe  first)  byy  point 
B  draw  a  line  parallel  Vnto  either  of thefe  lines  EC&*DFy  cutting  the  diame * 
ter  D  Em  the  point  H^and  let  the  fame  be  BG,&(by  the  felffitme  )by  y  point 
EL  draw  to  either  of  thefe  Itnes  A  T)  andEFa  parallel  line  M:  and  moreouef 

by  the  point  e  A  drawe  a  line  pa a 
rallelto  either  of  thefe  lines  CL 
and  D  M:  and  let  the  fame  be  A 
JfAnd  forafmuch  as  AC  is  e  quail 
Vnto  C B^therfore  (by  the  5  6,  of 
the  firfi)  the  figure  A  Lis  equal 
Vnto  the  figure  C  EL  But(by  the 
43  .of the  firfi  )C  His  equal  Vn* 
the  figure  H  F,  "frherfore  A  L  is 
equall  Vnto  FL  F.  Tut  the  figure 
C  M common  to  them  both^wber 
fore  the  whole  line  A  Mis  equal 
Vnto  the  gnomon  N  X  OjBut  A 
Mis  that  which  is  contaynedvnder  AT)  andD  B:  for  D  M  is  equal  Vnto  TfBi 
‘ frherfore  the  gnomon  TsL  %  OJs  equall  Vnto  the  reBangle  figure  contained  Vn* 
der  A D  and  D  BJPut  the  figure  L  O  common  to  them  both/frhich  is  equall  to 
the  fquare  "frhich  is  made  ofC  B ,  Wherefore  the  reBangle  figure  which  is  con* 
taynedvnder  AD  and  D  B  together  with  the  fquare  which  is  made  ofC  Bis  e* 
quail  to  the  gnomon  IflCO^and  Vnto  L  Gt  But  the  gnomon  NXO  and  L  G 
are  the  whole  fquare  CE  ED  which  is  made  ofC  D4  V fiber  fore  the  reBangle 
figure  contaynedvnder  A  D  and  D  B  together  with  the  fquare  which  is  made 
ofC  B  is  equall  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  ofC  D.Iftherforea  right  line  be  de* 
aided  into  two  equall  partes ,  and  Vnto  it  be  added  an  other  right  line  direBlyi 
the  reBangle  figure  contayned  Vnder  the  whole  line  with  that  which  is  added9 
and  the  line  which  is  added  ^together  with  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  halfe , 
is  equall  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  halfe  line  and  of  that  which  is  added 
as  of  one  line :  which  Was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

By  this  Propofition(be Tides  many  other  vfcs)  is  in  Algebra  dcmonftrated 
that  equation  wherin  the  two  leffe  numbers  be  equall  to  the  number  of  the  grea^ 
tell  denomination* 

An  example  of  this propofition  in  number s4 

Take  any  euen  number  as  1 8  .and  adde  vnto  it  any  other  number  as  3  .which  mafe 
in  all  2  1  .And  multiply  2 1 ,  into  the  number  added,  namely,  into  3  ♦  which  maketh  6 3  . 
Take  alfo  the  halfe  of  the  wholeeuennumber,thatis,of  i8.whichis  p.  And  multiply  p. 
into  it  felf  which  maketh  8 1  .which  adde  vnto  63  .(the  number  produced  of  the  whole 
cuen  number  jand  the  number  added  into  the  number  added)and  you  fhal  make  144., 


AC  3  i> 


ThefecondTlooke 


Then  a  dde  p.thehalfe  of  the  whole  euen  number  vnto  3  .the  number  added  which  ma- 
keth  12  .And  multiply  i2.intoitfeIfe,thatis,take  the  fquare  of  12, which  is  144.WWCI3 
is  equall  to  the  number  compofed  of  the  multiplication  of  the  whole  number  and  the 
number  added  into  the  nu  m  ber  added,and  of  the  fquare  of  the  number  added ,  which 
is  alfo  144.  As  you  fee  in  the  example. 


’•The  whole  euen  number.-^ 
The  number  added. 


The  halfe  of  the  whole. 
The  number  added. 


2 1  the  number  compofed  of  the  whole  number^ 
the  number  added. 

9 

3 


Multiplication  of the 
whole  &  the  number  ad- 
dedintothe  number  ad¬ 
ded. 


12  the  number  compofed  of  the  halfe  andof  thf 
number  added. 

2 1 
3 


63 


*3 

81 


Multiplicand  of  thehalfe 
into  it  felfe. 


Multiplicand  of  the  halfe 
and  the  number  addedin 
to  it  felfe. 


9 

9 


x44 


81 

it 

12 

24 

12 

Lx44 


■'■the  nuber compofed  ofthe  whole- 
and  the  number  added  into  the 
number  added  and  of  the  fquare 
of  the  halfe 

■equall  to 


'"the  fquare  number  made  ofthe-’ 
number  compofed  of  the  halfe  and 
the  number  added. 


The  demonftration  wherof  folio  weth  in  Barlaam* 

The  fix t  Tropofition. 

If  an  euen  number  be  deiiided  into  two  equall  numbers, and -vnto  it  be  added jbme  other nttmheri 
the fuperfcia/l  number  Which  is  made  ofthe  multiplication  ofthe  number  compofed  ofthe  whole  num¬ 
ber  and  the  number  added,  into  the  number  added 5  together  With  the fquare  ofthe  halfe  number,  is 
equall  to  the fquare  of  the  number  compofed  ofthe  halfe  and  the  number  added. 


Suppofethat^2?bean  euennumber.andletitbedeuidedinto  two  equall  num¬ 
bers  AC  and  CB :  and  vnto  it  let  there  be  added  an  other  number  B  D.  Then  /fay  that 
the  fuperficiall  number  produced  ofthe  multiplication  ofthe  number  A'T>  into  the 
number  D/?  is  equall  to  the  fquare  ofthe  number  CD,  For  let  the  fquare  number  of 
the  number  C  D  be  the  number  £,and  let  the  fuperficial  number  produced  of  the  mul¬ 
tiplication  of  the  number  A  D  into  the  number  D  B  be  the  number  F  C.-and  finally  let 
the  fquare  number  of  CB  be  the  number  G  H.  And  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the  nu- 
ber  CD  is  (by  the  4.propofition  Jequall  to  the  fquares  of  the  numbers  D  B  and  BC  to¬ 
gether  with  the  fuperficiall  number  which  is  produced  ofthe  multiplication  ofthe 
numbers  DB  and  BC  the  one  into  the  other  twife.  Let  the  fquare  of  the  number  BD 
be  the  number  KL:  and  let  the  fuperficiall  numbers  produced  ofthe  multiplication 
ofthe  numbers  D  B  and  2?C the  one  into  the  other  twifebe  either  of  thefe  numbers 

LM 


ofEuclides  Elementes.  FoL  jot 

LM  and  M  N;  and  finally  let  the  fquare  of  the  number  2?  Cbe  the  number  NX.  Wher- 
fore  the  whole  number  K-Afhall  be  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  number  C  D.  But  the 
fquare  of  the  number  C  D  is  the  number  E.  Wherfore  the  number  K  X  is  equall  to  the 
number  F.  And  forafinuch  as  the  number  B  D  multiplieng  it  felfe  produced  the  num¬ 
ber  K  L:  therfore  the  number  B  D  meafureth  the  num¬ 
ber  K  L7  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  it  felfe,  but  it  alfo 
meafureth  the  number  L  M  by  the  vnities  which  are  in 
the  number  CB, Wherfore  the  number  D  B  meafureth 
the  whole  number  K  M  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the 
number  C  D.  The  nuber  D  B  alfo  meafureth  the  num¬ 
ber  M  N  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  C B:  & 
the  number  CB is  equall  to  the  number  C  A  by  fuppo- 
fition.  Wherfore  the  number-D  2?  meafureth  the  whole 
number  K  N  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  A 
J>.Butthenumber2)2?  doth  alfo  meafure  the  number 
F  (7  by  the  vnities  which  are  in  the  number  AD  :  for 
by  fuppofition  the  number  F  Cj  is  the  fuperficiall  num¬ 
ber  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  A 
D  and  -OF  the  one  into  the  other*  Wherfore  the  num¬ 
ber  FCis  equall  to  the  number  KN.  But  the  number 
HG  is  equall  to  the  number  N  X :  for  either  of  them  is 
thefquare  number  of the  number  CB,  Wherefore  the 
whole  number i7  His  equall  to  the  number  KX:  and 
the  number  KX  is  proued  to  be  equall  to  the  number 
F.W herfore  the  number  F  f/fhall  alfo  be  equal!  to  the 
number  E,  And  the  number  F  A?  is  the  fuperficiall  num 
her  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers^ 

%)  and  DB  the  one  into  the  other,together  wyth  the 
fquare  of  the  number  CBi  and  the  number  Fis  the  fquare  of  the  number  CD ,  Wher¬ 
fore  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  a/f  D  and 
J>  B  the  one  into  the  other,  together  with  the  fquare  ofthe  number  CB ^  is  equal!  to  the 
fquare  of  the  number  C  D. 2f therfore  an  euen  number  &c* 

The  jJTheoreme ,  The  yfPropofition , 

ffa  right  lyne  be  deuided by  chaimce,  the  fquare  whicbe  is 
.  made  of  the  whole  together  with  the  fquare  which  is  made  of 
one  ofthe partes  Js  equall  to  the  rectangle  figure  which  is  co<* 
tayned  vncler  the  whole  and  the  [aid parte  twifie 3  and  to  the 
fquare  which  is  made  ofthe  other part 

Fppof'e  that  the  right  line  A  B  he  deuided  by  chaunce  in  the  point  C, 
Then  I fay  that  thefquare  Which  is  made  of  A  together  With  the 

fquare  which  is  made  ofB  Cfs  equal  Vnto  the  r  eh  angle' figure  which 
is  contained Vnder  the  lines  ABandBC  twifeyand  Vnio  the  fquare 
‘ Which  is  made  ofj.  C/Dejcribe(  by  the  46  .ofthe firfi)  Vppon  A  B  a  fquare  A 
&)E  B>arid  make  complete  the  figure  .And forafinucb  as  (by  the  45, ofthe  fir [l ) 
ihe  figure  A  G  is  equall  vnto  the  figure  G  EfFut  the  figure  C  F  common  to  the 

T,  '  both] 


v 


3 


c 


b*  *1. 


r 

r 

>  * 

- ♦ 

_ Xjf 

c . 

9  1 

49 

_  r 

1 

O 

« 

H 


i/A 


2 r 


I  E  F  K 


*1  he fecond'B  coke 

both: Ibher fore  the  'tobole  figure  A  Fis  equall  to  the  Tbhole  figure  C  B.  VVher* 
fore  the  figures  AFatid  C  E  are  double  to  the  figure  A  F.But  the figures  jfF 
and  CE  are  the  gnomon  Ffh  M,and  the fquare  CF:  "tober fore  the  gnomon 
L  M,and  the  fquare  C  F  is  double  to  the  figure 
AF.  But  the  double  to  A  Fis  that  Tbhicb  is  con* 
tayned  Vnder  ABandBC  ffrife,  for  BE  is  e* 
quail  Vnto  B  C  W  herfore  the  gnomon  FfL  M 
and  the  f quart  C  F  is  equal!  Vnto  the  rebiangle 
figure  contayned  Vnder  A  B  and  B  C  twifefPut 
the  figure  DG  commonVnto  them  both ,  "tohich 
is  thefquare  made  of yi Ct  Wberfore  thegno* 
mon  l^L  M  and  the  fquares  B  G  and  G  ID  are 
equal  Vnto  the  rebiangle  figure  which  is  contain 
ned  Vnder  AB  &  BCtwife9(sr  Vntothe fquare 
which  is  made  of  A  C.But  the  gnomon  the fquares  BG%<sr  DG  are y 

“tobole  fquare  BAD  Ey(sry  part  or  fquare  C  F9which fquares  are  made  of  the 
lines  AB  &  of  BCyherf ore  y fquares  which  are  made  of  A  B  O' B  Care  equal i 
Vnto  the  re  biangle  figure  which  is  contayned  Vnder  ABandB  Ctwife9andalfa 
Vnto  the  fquare  of  A  C.Iftherfore  a  right  line  be  deuided  by  chaunceithe fquare 
whichis  made  of  the  whole  together  with  thefquare  which  is  made  of  one  of  the 
partes, is  equall to  the  reblangle  figure  which  is  contayned  Vnder  the  whole  and 
the  f ay  d  part  twi[e9and  to  the  fquare  Which  is  made  of the  other  parte :  whiche 
Was  required  to  be  demonstrated . 


Fluflates  addeth  vnto  this  Proposition  this  Corollary* 

The [quarts  of Wo  vn  equall  lines  do  exc  cede  the  reft  angle  figures  contayned  vnder  the fitid  Unit 
by  the fquare  of  the  exceffe  voherby  the greater  lyne  excedeth  thclejfe. 

For  if  the  line  oA  B  be  the  greatcr,and  the  linci?  C  the  lefle.it  is  manifeft  that  the 
fquares  of  AB  andi?  C  are  equall  to  the  redangle  figure  contayned  vnder  the  lyncs  A 
B  and  rB  C twife,  and  moreouer  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  Cwherby  the  line  A  B  cxcc- 
derh  the  line  BC, 

By  this  propofition  moft  \ronderfully  vas  found  out  the  extra&ion  of  roote 
fquares  in  irrationall  numbers,befide  many  other  ftraungethinges. 

An  example  of  this  propofition  in  numbers . 

Take  any  number  as  1 3  .anddeuideitinto  two  partes  asint04.Sc  p.  Take  thefquare! 
of  13.  which  is  i6p,  take  alfo  the  fquare  of  4.  which  is  itf.andadde  thefe  two  fquare* 
together  which  make  185  .Then  multiply  the  whole  number  1 3 .  into  4.  theforefayde 
part  twife,and  you  fhall  produce  5  2.  and  5 2 :  take  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  other  part, that 
i  s,of  p .  wh  ich  is  8  r  .And  adde  it  to  the  produdes  of  r  3  .into  4.twife,that  is, vnto  5  2  .and 
52.  and  thofe  three  numbers  added  together  fhall  make  185.  whicheis  equall  to  the 
number  compofed  of the  fquares  ofthc  whole  and  of  one  of  the  partes,  which  is  alfo 
1 85  .As. you  fee  in  the  example* 


ofEuclides  Elementes.  Fol.yu 


'The  whole 

>3 

it) 

»-partes  of  the  whole* 

Multiplication  of  the 
whole  into  it  felfe. 

n 

*3 

39 

13 

1 6p 

1 6$ 

1 6 

Multiplication  of  one  of 
the  partes  into  it  felfc. 

*< 

** 

• 

4 

4 

id 

n 

4, 

185 

'The  number  compo fed  of 
the  fquares  ofthe  whole, 
and  of  one  of  the  partes 

Multiplicationof  the 
whole  into  the  forefayde 
part  twife. 

52 

53 

4 

5 * 

Si 

nequall  to 

5* 

Multiplication  of  the  o- 
ther  part  into  it  felfe* 

9 

9 

8i 

585 

_ the  number  compofedof 
the  whole  into  the  fore- 
faid  part  twife,and  ofthe 
fquare  ofthe  other  part. 

The  demonftration  ^heroffolloweth  In  Barlaam. 


The feuenth  proportion. 

tfa  number  be  deuided  into  two  numbers:  the fquare  of  the  "Whole  number  together  With  the 
fquare  of  one  of  the  partes,  is  equallto  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the 
Whole  number  into  theforefaid  part  twife, together  With  the [quart  of  the  other  parti 

Suppofe  that  the  number  tAB  be  deuided  into  the  number^  a^/Cand  CBt  Then  1 
fay  that  the  fquare  numbers  of  the  numbers  BA  and  AC  are  equall  to  the  fuperficiall 
number  produced  of  the  multiplicatio  of  the  number  B  A  into  the  number  AC  twife, 
together  with  the  fquare  of  the  number  B  C.For  forafmuch  asfby  the  4.of  this  booke)  3 

the  fquare  of  the  number  AB  is  equall  to  the  fquaresofthe  numbers  B  Cand  CA,znd 
to  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  *3  C  and  C 
A  the  one  into  the  other  twife:  adde  the  fquare  of  the  number  C  common  to  them 

both.  Wherfore  the  fquare  ofthen  umbered  .5  together  with  thefquare  of  the  num¬ 
ber  AC  is  equall  to  two  fquares  of  the  number  A  C  and  to  one  fquare  of  the  number  C 
By  and  alfo  to  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers 
B  C  and  C  A  the  one  into  the  other  twife.  And  forafmuch  as  the  fuperficial  number  pro 
ducedofthe  multiplication  of  the  numbers  B  A  and  C  A  the  one  into  the  other  once,  5 
is  equall  to  thefuperficiall  nuber  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  B  C  into  C  A  once, 
and  to  the  fquare  of  the  number  C  A(by  the  third  of this  booke  Jbtherforc  the  number 
produced  ofthe  multiplication  of B  A  into  *AC  twife  is  equall  to  the  number  produ¬ 
ced  of  the  multiplication  ofB  Cinro  C^twife,andalfo  to  two  fquaresofthe  number  C 
A.Addc  the  fquare  number  ofSCcommon  to  them  both.Wherfore  two  fquares  ofthe 
number  C  and  one  fquare  of  the  number  C2?  together  with  the  fuperficiall  number 

T.iij.  pro-  A 


■«»  tP 


duced  of  the  multiplication  of  B  Cinto  C./?  twife  are  equall  to  the  fuperficiall  number 
produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  number  BA  into  the  number  AC  twife  toee- 
ther  with  the  fquare  of  the  number  C  B -Wherfore  the  fquare  of  the  number  A  B  toge¬ 
ther  with  the  fquare  of  the  nubcr  AC  is  equal  to  the:  fuperficial  nuber  produced  of  the 
multiplication  ofthe  number  5  -4 into  the  number  A  C  twife, together  with  the  fquare 
of  the  number  CB.  If  therfore  a  number  be  deuidedinto  two  numbers  &c.  which  was 
required  to  be  demonftrated. 


b 


f 


6 4  the  fquare  ofthe  whole 


% 


2  5  fthe  fquare  of  the  part 

j1Isut“4 


8 

y 


^4  the  fquare  ofthe  whole  AJS 
25  the  fquare  ofthe  part  A  C 

80  the  fuperficiall  number 
9  the  fquare  ofthe  other  part  B  C 

§7 


l 


4°  4° 

80  the  fiiperficial  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the 
whole  into  the  part  twife 

$ 


.  9.  r  the  fquare  of  the  other  par  t. 


7* he  Theorems.  The  ftSPropoftidn, 


If  a  right  line  he  deuided  by  chance  foe  rectangle  figure  com** 
prehended  Under  the  whole  and  one  ofthe partes foure  times, 
together  With  the fquare  which  is  made  ofthe  other parte,  is 
equall  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  ofthe  whole  and  the  for e^ 
Jaid part  as  of  one  line.  -  ■ 


Vppofe  that  there  he  a  cert  ay  ne  right  line  A  and  Jet 

it  he  deuided  hy  chaunce  in  the  point  C.  Then  1 fay  that 
the  re  hi  angle  figure  comprehended  Milder  A  B  and  BC 
foure  tymes  together  M?ith  the  fquare  Mohichismade  of 
Aids  equall  to  the  fquare  made  of A  B  and  BCas  of  one 
lin/, Extend  the  line  A  B  (hythefecondpeticion).  And 
(j  (hy  the  third  ofthe firft)  Mnto  C  B  put  an  equall  lyne  B 
And  (hy  the  46.of  the  firft)  deferihe  Mppon  AD  a 
fquare  AEF  D.And  deferihe  a  double  figure .  And  forafmuch  as  CB  is  equall 
VntoBDftttt  CB  is  eqmlhnto  GJ^  (by  the^of  the  firft)  and  like  wifeBD 


ofEuclides  Elementes . 


Fol.Ji; 


N, 

,/Y1 

M  /  G 

/A 

K 

\X  0  / 

/  V 

P  ' 

1 _  i 

ts  equallvnto  therefore  G  Ifalfo  is  equally  nto  h(K:and  by  the  fame 
reafonalfo  B  is  equall  Vnto  %0.  And  forafmuch  as  BC  is  equallvnto  B 

and  G  Kgvnto  LfKy  tberfore  (by  the  ^  6. of  the  fir  H)  the  figure  C  is  equall 
Vnto  the  figure  JfiJD}and  the 

figure  G  %ts  equall  Vnto  the  A  c  "B  i> 

figure  (RJSl,  (But  (by y  4i,ofy  ' 
u)the  figure  C  Kjs  equall  Vn 
to  the  figure  BJSL:  for  they 
are  the  fupplementes  of  the 
parallelograme  C  0.  VVher* 
fore  the figure  D  alfo  is  e* 
quail  Vnto  the  figure  ISL  Bj 
VVherefore  the/e  figures  2) 

KJCKJG  BJBJSfyare  equall 
the  one  to  the  other  .Where* 
forethofe  foure  are  quadru * 
pie  to  the  figure  C^.  Agayne 

forafmuch  as  C  B  is  equal  Vn*  ^  M  L  F 

to  BDjout  BID  is  equaUvn* 
toBKjcbatisjmtoCG.And 

C  Bis  equall  vnto  G  K^that  is  Vnto  G  B:  tberfore  C  G  is  equal!  Vnto  G  B.  And 
forafmuch  asCG  is  equalhnto  G  B^and  B  BJs  equall  Vnto  BJlytherefore  the 
figure  A  G  is  equallvnto  the  figure MB  ^and  the  figure  B  Lis  equall  Vnto  the 
figure  Bfd.But  the  figure  MB  is(by  the  4%  ofthefirU)  equalhnto  the  figure 
F  Lfor  they  are  the  fupplementes  of  the  paratlelogramme  M L:  wherfore  the 
figure  alfo  A  G  is  equall  vnto  the  figure  BJ^.  Wherfore  the fe  foure  figures  A 
GyMBfB  L,and  BJd are  equall  the  one  to  the  other:  wherfore  thofe  foure  are 
quadruple  to  the  figure  A  G.And  it  is  proued,that  thefe  foure  figures  CJfififfi) 
G  B,-)fA.'HAre  quadruple  to  the  figure  CKJ/ A  her  fore  the  eight  figures  whid > 
contayne  the  gnomon  S  T  V^are  quadruple  to  the  figure  A  l\.  And  forafmuch 
as  the  figure  A  IQ  is  that  which  is  comay ned  Vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  D,for 
the  line  B  KJs  equallvnto  the  line  B  D :  tberfore  that  whiche  is  contayned  Vn * 
derthe  lines  A  B  and  B  V  foure  tymes  is  quadruple  Vnto  the  figure  A  And 
it  is  proued  that  the  gnomon  S  TV  is  quadruple  to  AAf  Wherfore  that  which 
is  contayned  Vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  BD  foure  tymes  is  equallvnto  the  gnomo 
S  T  VJBut  the  figure  X  Hwhich  is  equall  to  the  fquare  made  of  AC  common 
Vnto  them  both.Wherfore  the  re  dangle figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  lines 
A  B  and  B  D  foure  tymes  together  With  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  line  A 
Cfis  equall  to  the gnomon  ST  Vyand  Vnto  the  figure  X  H.  But  the  gnomon  $ 
'TV:  and  the  figure  X  Hare  the  whole  fquare  ABF  D,  which  is  made  of  A 
T> :  wherfore  that  which  is  contayned  Vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  D  foure  times 
together  with  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  A  C,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  which  is 

Tmu,  made 


made  of  A  7). But  B  D  is  equalhmtoB  C.Wherfore  thereBangle  figure  con* 
tajnedfoure  tymes  Vnder  A  ’Band  B  C  together tyith  the  {quarts  which  is  made 
°f  A  Cjs  equall  Vnto  the  fquare  Trhich  is  made  of  A  ID, that  isyVnto  that  ftbiche 
is  made  of  A  B  andB  C  as  of  one  line .  If  therefore  a  right  lyne  be  deuided  by 
chaunce ,  the  relf angle  figure  comprehended  lender  the  Tbhole  and  one  of  the 
partes  foure  tymes  ^together  faith  the  fquare  which  is  made  on  the  other part,k 
equal!  to  the  fquare  Tabid  is  made  ofthelphole  and  the forefaid  party  as  of  one 
line>D?bicbl!>as  required  to  be  demonstrated-  ;  i 

An  example  of  this  Propofition  in  numbers. 

Take  any  number  3  s  iy.anddeuideit  into  two  partes,as  into  6.and  n.  And  multi¬ 
ply  i7.into5.namelyoneofthepartesfouretymes,andyoufhallproduce  102.  102* 
102. and  io  2.Takealfo  the  fquare  of  1 1. the  other  part,which is  121:  andaddeitynto 
the  foure  numbers  produced  of  the  whole  17. into  the  part  5.foure  tymes,&you  ihall 
make  <>  29. Then  adde  the  whole  number  iy.to  the  forefaid  part  6.  which  make  23 .  Ss, 
take  the  fquare  of  23*  which  is  5  29.  which  is  equall  to  the  number  compofed  of  the 
whole  into  the  fayd  partfoure  tymes,  aud  of  the  fquare  of  the  other  part,  which  num¬ 
ber  compofed  is  alfo  5  zp.  As  you  fee  in  the  example.  f 


-  The  whole. 


6 


102 


j  j  partes  of  the  whole 


Multiplication  of  the 
Whole  into  one  of  the 
partes  foure  times. 


X 

c.;:-L ~  ''  -  ■: 

Multiplication  of  the  o- 
ther par t  into  it  felfe. 


Addition  of  the  whole  in¬ 
to  the  part. 


Multiplication  of  the  nu- 
ber  copofed  of  the  whole 
and  the  forefaid  part  into 
it  felfe. 


17 

6 

102 

17 

6 

102 

17 

6 

102 

1  r 

I  r 

I I 
1 1 

!I2I 


17 

6 

23 

2  i 

23 
\6 9 

$29 


ioz 

102 

102 

102 

121 

5  29 


•  | 

1  :  fv' 

f .  ' 

•  ;  ■  f  ;v 

V  h  •  c 


'  | 


the  number  compofed  of  the 
whole  into  one  of  the  partes 
foure  tymes,  &  of  the  fquare 
of  the  other  part 


v  equal  to 


-  ■>  s-' 


the  fquare  of  the  number  co- 
’  pofed  of  the  whole  &  the  fore 
faidpart.  *  The 


ofEuclides  Elements* . 

The  demonftrationvheroffoilovethin  Barlaam. 
The  eight  proportion. 


Fol.  73. 


D 


If 4  number  be  derided  into  typo  numbers, the fuperficiall  number, produced  of  the  multiplication 
of t  he  whole  into  one  of  the  partes foure  tymes, together  With  the fqtiare  of  the  other  parte, is  equall  to 
the fquare  of  the  number  tempo  fed  of  the  whole  number  and  the  forefay d  part. 

Suppofe  that  the  number  AB  be  deuided  into  two  numbers  AC  and  C  B.  Then  / 
fay  that  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  number  A  B  in 
to  the  number  C  B  foure  tymes  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  number  A  Cfs  cquall 
to  the  fquare  of  the  number  compofed  of  the  numbers  AB  &  CB.  For  vnto  the  num¬ 
ber  2?  Clet  the  number  2?  D  be  equall.  Now  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the 
number  AD  is  equal  to  the  fquares  of  the  numbers  A  B  and  2>  D,Sc  to  the 
fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  AB  Sc  2 
B  D  the  one  into  the  other  twifef  by  the  q-.of  this  booke)  And  the  numb  er 
2?Z>is  equall  to  the  number B  C\  therefore  the :  fquare  of  the  number  AD  2 
is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  numbers  A  B  and  B  C,  and  to  the  fuperficiall 
number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  AB  and  SC  the 
one  into  the  other  twife.But  the  fquares  of  the  numbers  A  B  and  B  C  are  e- 
quall  vnto  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  6 
numbers  A  B  and  B  C  the  one  into  the  other  twife,  and  to  the  fquare  of  A 
C(by  the  former  propofition)  Wherfore  the  fquare  ofthe  number  ADis 
cquall  to  the  fuperficial  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  nu- 
bers  A  S  and  B  C  the  one  into  the  other  foure  tymes, and  to  the  fquare  of  [ 

the  number  A  C.But  the  fquare  of  the  number  A  D  is  the  fquare  ofthe 
number  compofed  ofthe  numbers  .^2?  and  2?  C:  for  the  number#  D  is  e- 
qual  to  the  number  B  C. Wherfore  the  fquare  of  the  number  compofed  of  thenumbefs 
AB  andS  C  is  equall  to  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  ofthe  multiplication  of  the 
numbers  A  B  and  B  Cthe  one  into  the  other  foure  tymes,  &  to  the  fquare  of  the  num¬ 
ber  A  C./f therfore  a  number  be  dcuidedinto  two  numbers, &c- 


8 

2 


1 6 
v___ 


8 

2 

1 6 


8 

2 


1 6 


~y — 


8 

2 

1 6 


6 

6 


64.  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multipli-  _N 

cation  ofthe  numbers  AB  and  B  Cthe  oneinto 
the  other  foure  tymes. 


4  3  6  the  fquare  of  A  C, 


10 

10 

too 


2 1 

100 


> 


thejquare  of  the  number 
compofed  o  iAB  and  B  C. 

the  fuperficial  nuber produced  ofthe  multiplicatiS  made  4*times 
the  fquare  number  of  A  C, 


ConHmlHon. 


DemonHru-* 

non. 


*Ihe  fecondUfwhp 

Thep.Theoreme.  ThepfPropofitm. 

'  '  '  -  1  1  '  '  ■  •  '-'ey  >\  I  j'< 

Sfe?  If  i  right  line  be  dcuided into  two  e  quail  partes,  and  into 
Wo  lone  quail  partes,  the fquares  which  are  made  of  the*vne~ 
quail  partes  of  the  whole, are  double  to  the  fquares, which  are 
made  of  the  halfe  lyne^and  ofthatlyne  which  is  betwene  the 
feUions . 

Vppofe  that  a  certayne  right  line  A  3  he  dtuided  into  two  equaS 
partes  in  the  pointe  C,  and  into  t"Wo  Vnequall partes  m  the  pointe  <D. 
Then  I/ay  t  bat  the Jquares  "which  ar  e  made  of  the  lines  A  F)  and  S) 
3  .are  double  to  the/quarts  whiche  are  made  of  the  lynes  A  C  and  C 
JD.For(by  tfe  1 \,  of  the 
fir  ft  )er  eel  from  y  point 
C  to  the  right  UneABa 
perpendiculer  line  C  E. 

And  let  C  E(by  the  $,of 
the  fir  ft)  be  put  e  quail 
Vnto  either  ofthefe  lines 
ACzsrCB:  and(by  the 
fir  ft  peticio)  draw  lines 
from  A  to  E,  and  from 
E  toB.And (by  the  5  1 . 
of  the  fir  ft)  by  the  point 
l D  dra"W  Vnto  the  line  EC  a  parallel  lyne,and  let  the fame  be  IDF:  and  (by  the 
felfe  fame)  by  the  point  E  dra"W  Vnto  A3  a  line  paralleled  let  the fame  be  FG , 
And  ( by  the  first  petkion)draw  a  line  from  A  to  F,  And  forafmuch  as  AC  is  e* 
quail  Vnto  C  Ejberforefby  the  5  of  the  fir  ft)  the  angle  EACis  equal  Vnto  the 
angle  C  E  A  And  forafmuch  as  the  angle  at  the  point  C  is  a  right  angle:  therfore 
t/c  angles  remay  n’wgE  A  f  and  A  E  C3aree quail  vnto  one  right  angle,  "Where* 
fore  eche  ofthefe  angles  EAC  and  AECis  the  halfe  of a  righ  t  angle.  And  by 
the  fame  reafon  alfoecbe  ofthefe  angles  EfB  Cand  C  E  Bis  the  halfe  of  a  right 
angle. VV her fore  the  "whole  angle  ABB  is  a  right  angle, And  forafmuch  as  the 
angle  G  E  F  is  the  halfe  of  a  right  angle  3but  EG  F  is  a  right  angle.  For  (by  the 
2  9  of  the  fir ft )it  is  equall  Vnto  the  in"Ward  and  oppofite  angle, that  is/Vnto  EC 
3:  "wherfpre  the  angle  remay  ning  E  F  Gis  the  halfe  of  a  right  angle  ,VVhere * 
fore( by  the  6 .1 common  fentence )tht  angle  G  EFis  equal l  Vnto  the  angle  EFG, 
yVherforeal/o  (by  the  6.0ft  he  f it j fifth  efid  e  EG  is  equdllvnto  the  fide  F  G,A# 
gains  forafmuch  as  the  angle  at  the  point  Bis  the  halfe  of a  right  angle  fut  the 
angle  F  D  B  is  a  right  angle  for  it  alfo(by  the  29  .of the firfi )  is  e  quail  V  nto  the 

irtWard 


ofEuclides  Element# s . 


inwarde  and  oppofte  angle  E  C  E.  Wherefore  the  angle  remayning  EFT)  is 
the  halfe  of  a  right  angle .  Wl:erfore  the  angle  at  the  point  E  is  equall  lento  the 
angle  E  EE.  Wherfore  ( hy  the  #>.  ofthefrH)  the  fide  E)  F  is  eqnall  lento  the 
fide  E)  E.  Andforafmuch  as  AC  is  equal l  lento  C  E>  therfore  the fiquare  "which 
is  made  of  A  C  is  equall  lento  the  fiquare " which  is  made  ofC  E.  Wherefore  the 
fquares  "Which  are  made  ofC  A  and  C  E  are  double  to  the fiquare  "which  is  made 
of  A  C.  Eut  (by  the  47*  of the  firft)  the jquare  "Which  is  made  of  E  A  is  equallto 
the fquares ' which  are  made  of  AC  and  C  E  ( For  the  angle  ACEis  a  right  aw 
gle)  "Wherefore  the fiquare  of  A  E  is  double  to  the fiquare  of A  C.  Agayne  forafi 
much  as  E  Gfis  equalllmto  G  F,  the fiquare  therfore  "Which  is  made  ofE  G  is  e* 
qual  to  the fiquare  "Which  is  made  ofiGF.  Wherfore  the  fquares  "Which  are  made 
ofGE  and  G  F  are  double  to  the  fiquare  "Which  is  made  of G  F.  Eut  ( by  the  47* 
oj  the  firU)  the fiquare  "Which  is  made  ofiEF  is  equallto  the  fquares  "Which  are 
made  of  EG  and  G  F.  Wherfore  the  fiquare  "Which  is  made  ofE  F  is  double  to 
the fiquare  "which  is  made  ofiGF.  Eut  G  F  is  e  quail  lonto  C  ID.  Wherefore  the 
fiquare  "Which  is  made  of 
EF  is  double  to  the 
fiquare " which  is  made  of 
C  E) .  And  the  fiquare 
"Whiche  is  made  of  A  E 
is  double  to  the  fiquare 
"Which  is  made  of  A  C. 

Wherefore  the  fquares 
' which  are  made  of  A  E 
and  E  F  are  double  toy 
fquares  which  are  made 
of  AC  and  CE).  Eut  (by 
the  47*  of the  firH)the fiquare  which  is  made  of  AFis  equal  to  the  fquares  which 
are  made  of  A  E  and  EF(  Forj  angle  A  E  F  is  a  right  angle ) .  Wherfore  the 
fiquare  "Which  is  made  of AF  is  double  to  the  fquares  "Which  are  made  of AC  iyC 
Ed.Eut  ( by  the  47*  o  f  the  firfl)y  fquares  "Which  are  made  ofiAE)  and  E)  F  are  e* 
quail  toy  Jquare  "Which  is  made  of A  F.Fory  angle  oty  point  E>  is  a  right  angle . 
WJ:>erfiore  the fquares " which  are  made  ofiAE)  and  E)  F  are  double  toy fquares 
"Which  are  made  of  AC  and  C  E).  Eut  E)  F  is  equall  Ipnto  E)  E.  Wherfore  the 
fquares  "which  are  made  of  A  E)  and  E)Ej  are  double  to  the  fquares  "Which  are 
made  of  AC  and  C  E).  If  therfore  a  right  line  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes 
and  into  two  lane  quail  partes  jbe fquares  "Which  are  made  of the  lane  quail partes 
of the  "whole yare  double  to  the  fquares  "which  are  made  of the  halfe  lyne3  and  of 
that  lyne  "Which  is  betwene  the  fie  (lions:  * which  "Was  required  to  he  proued. 


E 


f  An  example  of  this propofition  in  numbers. 

Take  any  enen  number  as  1 2.  And  deuide  it  hrft  equally  as  into  <?. and  6t  &then  m» 
equally  as  into  8  ,&  4.  And  take  the  difference  of  the  halfe  to  one  of  the  vnequal  partes 

V.ij»  which 


The fecondHooke 

which  is  2  .And  take  the  fquare  numbers  of  the  vnequalJ  partes  8,  and  4,which  are 
and  itf.’and.adde  themtogether,which  make  80, Then  take  the  fquares  ofthehalfe  6, 
and  of  the  differece  2:  which  are  3  d^anciq:  which  added  together  make  40.Vn.to  which 
numberthe  number  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  vnequall  partes,whiche  is  So,  i# 
double. As  you  fee  in  the  example* 


The  whole. 


Multiplication  of eche 
vnequalpart  into  himfelf. 


>< 


Multiplication  of  the  half 
and  of  the  difference  eche 
into  himfelfe. 


12 


8 

8 


4 

'4 


6 

6 


ii 

2 

2 


^  J*  the  equal! pat tes 


8 


4  J 
2 


the  vnequall  partes 


64 


16 


64 

16 


80 


3  6 
4 


40 


the  difference  ofthc  halfe  to 
one  of  the  partes 


r  the  number  compofedof  the  C 
fquares  of  the  vnequal  partes  ' 


>  double  to 


the  number  compofed  of  the 
fquares  of  the  halfe,and  of  the 


difference. 

The  demonftration  wherof followeth  in  Barlaam*. 


J 


The  ninth  Tropo/ition. 

If  a  number  be  deuided  into  tVoo  e  quail  numbers, and againe  be  deuided  into  two  inequall  partes:  the 
fquare  numbers  of  the  vnequall  numbers, are  double  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  multiplicand 
on  of the  halfe  number  into  it  felfe,  together  With  the  fquare  Whiche  is  made  of  the  number  ft  bed 
tWene  them. 

For  let  the  number  zA  B  being  an  cuen  number  be  deuided  into  two  cquall  numbers 
A  C  &  C  B:  Sc  into  two  vnequall  nubers  AD  and  D  A.Then  /  fay  that  the  fq  uare  num¬ 
bers  o (AD  and  D  B,txt  double  to  the  fquares  which  are  made  of  the  multiplication 
of  the  numbers  AC  and  CD  into  themfelues.  For  forafmuch  as  the  number  si  B  is  an 
euen  number, and  is  deuided  alfo  into  two  equal  numbers  A  C and  Ci^and  afterward 
into  two  vnequal  nubers  A  D  and  DB-.t  herefore  the  fuperficial  nuber  produced  of  the 
multiplicand  of  the  nubers  AD  &DB>  thone  into  the  other, together  with  the  fquare 
of  the  number  D  C,is  equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  number  ACfby  the  fife  proportion  ) 
Wherfore  the  fuperficiall  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  numbers  AD 
and  D  B  the  one  into  the  other  twife,  together  with  two  fquaresof  the  number  CD}is 
double  to  the  fquare  of  the  number  zA  C,  Forafmuch  as  alfo  the  number  A  B  is  deui¬ 
ded  into  two  equal  numbers  zA  Cand  C3,therfore  the  fquare  number  of  AB  is  qua¬ 
druple  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  number  <sA  C  into 
it  felfef  by  the  q.propofition)  .MOfeouer  forafmuch  as  the  fuperficiall  number produ¬ 
ced  of  the  multiplication  of  thenumbers  A  the  one  into  the  other  twife  to¬ 

gether,  with  two  fquares  of  the  number  D  C  is  double  to  the  fquare  number  of  CA.&c 

forafmuch 


of  Euclides  Element?  s . 


Fol.j 5< 


forafmuch  as  there  are  two  numbers*  of  whiche  the  one  is  quadruple  to 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  number,and  the  other  is  double  to  the  fame  hum 
ber:  therefore  that  number  whiche  is  quadruple  fhall  be  double  to  that 
number  whiche  is  double-  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  number  A  B  is 
double  to  the  number  produced  ofthe  multiplicand  of  the  numbers  ~ 
jD  and  D  B  the  oneintotheothertwife  together  with  the  two  fquares  of 
the  number!)  C.Wherfore  the  number  which  is  produced  of  the  mul¬ 
tiplication  ofthe  numbers  A  D  and  D  B  the  one  into  the  other  twife*  is 
lelfe  the  halfe  of  the  fquare  ofthe  number  A  B  by  the  two  fquares  ofthe  ^ 
numbers  D  C.  And  forafmuch  as  the  nuber  produced  of  the  multiplica¬ 
tion  ofthe  nuber  s  AD  8c  D  B  the  one  into  the  other  tw,ife, together  with 
the  nuber  copofed  of  the  fquares  ofthe  numbers  A  D  an&T)  B  is(by  the 
4.propofiaori)equall  to  the  fquare  ofthe  number.^  A  ;  therforethe  nu¬ 
ber  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  numbers  A  D  8c  D  "Bis  greater  then 
the  halfe  ofthe  fquare  nuber  ofc^  B,  by  the  two  fquares  of  the  number 
I)  C.  And  the  fquare  ofthe  numbered/  2?  is  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of  6 
the  number  A  C.Wherfore  the  number  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the 
numbers  A  D  and®  B  is  greater  then  the  double  of  the  fquare  of  the 
number  ACby  two  fquares  of  the  number  D  C.Wherfore  the  faid  num¬ 
ber  is  double  to  the  fquares  ofthe  numbers  A C and  C‘Z>.  7f therefore  a 
number  be  deuided  &c,which  was  requiredto  be  demonftrated. 


,'D 


8 

8 


2 

2 


<5q.  the  fquare  of the  vnequall  part  AD  4  the  fquare  of  the  vncquall  part  £  JD 


5 

5 


2  5  the  fquare  of  the  halfe  A  C* 


9  the  fquare  of  C D3nameiy,of  the  number  fet  betwene. 


9 


3  4  the  fquares  of  the  halfc*and  of  the  number  fet  bctwenc. 


*4 

4 


68 

34 


I2* 


~  68  the  fquares  of  the  vncquall  partes. 

.  •  ■ t-  -  -  .  *.  ■  -  ^  1  _  _  ■  _  *  * 1 «  .* '  *  •  -  -4 

The  10. Theorems.  The  xo.Trofofition . 

If  a  right  line  be  deuided  into  two  equal partes vnto  it  be 
added  an  other  right  line  direBlyithe  fquare  which  is  made  of 
the  whole  &  that  which  is  added  as  of  one  line ,  together  with 


The fecond'Booke 

the fquare  whiche  is  made  of  the  lyne  whiche  is  added \  thefe 
mo fcjuares  ( 1 fay')  are  double  to  thefe fquarcsynamelyjo  the 
Jquare  which  is  made  of  the  halfe  line to  the  fquare  which 
is  made  of  the  other  halfe  lyne  and  that  whiche  is  added  >  as 
of  one  lyne . 


ConJtrntlim. 


Dtmtnflra- 
tion . 


V ppofe  that  a  cert  ay  ne  right  line  ABbe  deuided  into  tleo  equal l  partes 
\in  the  point  C.And  Vnto  it  let  there  he  added  an  other  right  line  dir  eft* 
^^lyjiamel0d  D.  The  I  fayjhat  the  fquar.es which  are  made  of  the  lines 
*A  D  and  D  B  are  double  to  the  fquares  Which  are  made  of  the  lines  _A  Cand  C 
D.  (Rayfeyp  (by  the  n,  of  the  firH )  from  the  point  C^nto  the  right  line  ACT) 
a  perpendiculer  lyneyand  let  the  fame  be  C  E.  And  let  C  E  (by  the  5,  of  the  fir  ft) 
be  made  equallvnto  either  of  thefe  lines  J  Cand  CB.  And  (by  the  firft  petiti * 
on)  draw  right  lines  from  E  to  A^andfrom  E  to  B.  And(by  they,  of the  fir  ft) 
by  the  point  E fir  aw  a  line  parallel  Vnto  C  Dymd  let  the fame  be  E  EAnd(byy 
felfjame  )by  the  point  T)  draft;  a  line  parallel  Vnto  C  E  and  let  the fame  be  IDE. 
Andforafmuch  as  Vpon  thefe  parallel  lines  CEzs'DE  ligbtetb  a  certain  right 
line  E  Fyherf m(  by  the  zyjfthe  firft)  the  angles  CEFandEFD  are  equal 
Vnto  tft>o  right  angles jETher fore  th e  angles  FE  B^and EFD  are  lefle  then 
tit  0  right  angle  sJBut  lines  produced  from  angles  leffe  then  two  right  angles(  by 
the  fifth  peticion)at  the  length  meete  together. VTberfore  the  lines  EB  andF 
D  beyng  produced  on  that  fide  that  the  line  B  Distill  at  the  length  meete  to * 
gether: Produce  them  and  let  them  meete  together  in  the  point  G .  And  (by  the 
firft  peticion)draW  a  line  from  A  to  G,  Andforafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  is  equal l 
Vnto  the  line  C  Ey  the  angle 

alfoAECis  (by  the of  the  E  F 

firfl)equall  ’Vnto  the  angle  E 
A  Ct  And  the  angle  at  y  point 
Cis  a  right  angle.  W her fore 
eche  of  thefe  angles  E  A  C<& 
and  A  EC  is  the  halfe  of  a 
right  angle.  And  by  the  fame 
reafon  eche  of  thefe  angles  C 
E  B,  and  ETC  is  the  halfe 
of  a  right  an fie.  Wherefore 

the  angle  A  E  Bis  a  right  angle.  And fotafmuch  as  the  angle  ETC  is  the  halfe 
of  a  right  angle  fherfore  (by  the  1$.  of the  firH)tbe  angle  DBG  is  the  half  of  a 
right  angle.  But y  angle  BDGis  a  right  angle(for  it  is  equal  Vnto  the  angle  D 
CEfor  they  are  alternate  ahgles)Wher fore  the  angle  remaining  DG  B  is  the 
halfe  of  a  right  angle. VV her  fore  (by  the  6  common  fentence  of  thefirfl)the  an * 
gleDGB  is  equall  to  the  angle  DBG #  VF her  fore  (by  the  6  .of the firft)  the 

fide 


m  is  equall  Imto  the  fide  GD.  Agayne  forafmuch as  the  angle  E  G  F  it  thi 
balfeofci  right  angle :  and  the  angle  at  thepointe  F is  a  right  angle:  for  (by  the 
3Fof the  first)  it  is  equall  lento  the  oppofte  angle  EC  ID.  Wherefore  the  angle 
remay  ning  F  EG  is  the  halfe  of a  right  angle.  Whet  fore  the  angle  E  G  F  is  e* 
quail  to  the  angle  F  E  G.  Wherfore  ( by  the  6.  of the  frit  the  fide  FF  Eis  equall 
lento  the  fide  F  G.  And  forafmuch  as  EC  is  equall  Imto  C  A,  the  fquare  dfe 
i! Ariel:  is  made  ofE  C  is  equall  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  C  A*  Wherefore 
the fquares  which  are  made  of  CEand  C  A  are  double  to  the  fquare  "Which  is 
made  of  AC.  Eut  the fquare  "Which  is  made  ofE  A  is  (by  the  47*  of  the  fir  A)  e* 
quail  Imto  the fquares  which  are  made  of  EC  and  C  A.  Wherefore  the  fquare 
Which  is  made  of  E  A  is  double  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  A  C.  Again  e  for* 
afmuch  as  G  F  is  equall  Imto  E  F/he  fquare  alfo  which  is  made  ofGF  is  equall 
to  the  fquare  winch  is  made  ofFE.  VVherfore  the fquares  which  are  made  of  G 
F  andE  F  are  double  to  the fquare  which  is  made  ofE  F.  Eut  (by  the  47  •of  the 
fir  A)  the fquare  which  is  made  of EG  is  equall  to  the  fquares  which  are  made 
of GF andE  F.  Wherefore 
the  fquare  which  is  made  of 
EG  is  double  to  the  fquare 
Which  is  made  ofE  F.EutE 
Fis  equall  Imto  C  D,  wher- 
forey  fquare  which  is  made 
ofE  G  is  double  to  the fquare 
Which  is  made  of  C  D.  And 
it  is  proued  the  fquare  which 
is  made  of  E  A  is  double  to 
the  fquare  which  is  made  of 
A  C.  Wherfore  thefquar  es  Which  are  made  of  A  E  andE  G  are  double  to  the 
fquares  which  are  made  of  A  C  and  C  D.  Eut(by  the  47-  of ths fir  A)  the fquare 
which  is  made  of  AG  is  equall  to  the  fquares  which  are  made  of  A  E  and  E  G, 
Wherefore  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  AG  is  double  to  the fquares  which  are 
made  of  AC  and  C  ID.  Eut  Imto  the  fquare  which  e  is  made  of  AG  are  equall 
the  fquares  which  are  made  of A  D  and  D  G. Wherfore  the  fquares  which  are 
made  of  A  D  and  D  G  are  double  to  the  fquares  which  are  made  of  A  C  andD 
C  •  Eut  D  G  is  equall  Imto  D  E.Wherfore  the fquares  which  are  made  of  A  D 
And  D  E  are  double  to  the fquares  which  are  made  of  AC  and  D  C.  Iftherfore 
aright  line  be  deuidedinto  two  equall partes y  and  Imto  it  be  added  an  other dyne 
directly ,  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  Whole  and  that  which  is  added ,  as  of 
one  line  together  With  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  line  which  is  added ghefe 
two  fquares  (I fay)  are  double  to  thefe fquares  y  namely }  to  the fquare  which  is 
made  of  the  halfe lyne,  and  to  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  other  halfe  lyne 
and  that  which  is  added gs  of one  lyne:  which  Was  required  to  be  proued. 

v  •  .  ...  •  -  •- .  .  •'  . 

f  An  other  demonAration  after  Eelitarius. 

V.iili. 


Suppofe 


The  fecondBooke 

Suppofe  that  the  lyne  AB  be  deuided  into  two  equal!  partes  in  the  poytiteC. 
And  vnto  it  let  there  be  added  an  other  right  lyne  dire&ly,  namely,  B  D.  Then  I  fay 
that  the  fquare  of  AD  together  with  the  fquare  of  B  D  is  double  to  the  fquares  of  A 

Vpon  the  whole  line  AD  defcribe  a  fquare  AD  E  F.And  ypon  the  halfe  Ivne  A  Cde-? 
fcnbe  the  fquare  A  C  G  H.And  produce  the  Tides  G  H  and  C  H  till  they  cut' the  lides  E 
F  &  D  F,wherby  ilialbc  defcribed  the  figure  H  L  K  F, which  ihalbethe  fquare  of  the  line 
C  D  the  Corollary  of  the  4.  of  this  boke,&  by  the  34.Propofition  of  the  i.)itis 

manifcfhf  we  draw  the  diameter  C  D.  For  the  lyne  K  F  is  equall  to  the  line  C  D.  And 
making  alfo  the  lines  H  M  and  H  N  equall  to  either  of  thefe  lynes  A  C  and  C  B,  drawe 
the  lynes  M  G  and  NP  cutting  the  one  the  other  right  angled  wife  in  the  point' Q.  Ei¬ 
ther  of which  lynes  let  cutthefides  of  the  fquare  A  D; 

E Fin  the  pointes  OandP.Nowitnedeth  nottoproue 
that  the  figure  H  Qis  the  iquare  of  the  lyne  A  C,fcyng 
that  it  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  B  :  as  the  figure  QJ  is 
the  fquare  ofthe  line  BD  ;  neither  alfo  needethit  to 
proue  that  the  paralleiograme  H  P  is  eq  uall  to  either  of 
the fupplementes E  H  and H D  :  nor  that  the  fupplc- 
mentcs  N  O  and  QJ.  are  equall.  For  all  this  is  manifeft 
cue  by  the  forme  of  the  figure, for  that  all  theangles  a- 
bou  t  the  diameter  arc  half  right  angles,  &  the  fidcs  are 
equall.  Wherfore  if  we  diligently  marke  of  what  partes 
the  fquare  HF  which  is  the  fquare  of  CD,  iscompo- 
fed,we  may  thus  reafo.  Forafmuch  as  the  whole  fquare 
E  D  is  compofed  of  the  two  fquares  A  H  and  H  F  and  of 
the  two  fupplementes  E  H  and  H  P,we  muftproue  that 
thefe  fupplementes  with  the  fquare  QJJwhich  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  D)  are  equall 
to  the  two  fquares  A H  and  H  F.For  then  (hall  we  proue  that  thefe  two  fquares  AH  6£ 
HF  taken  twile  are  equall  to  the  whole  fquare  DE  together  with  the  fquare  of  QF9 
which  thing  we  tookefirftin  hand  to  proue. And  thus  do  I  proue  it. 

The  Supplement  E  H  is  equall  to  the  paralleiograme  H  P.  And  the  fquare  A  H  to¬ 
gether  with  the  lefier  fupplemet,  N  0,is  equall  to  the  other  fupplemet  H  D  (by  the  firft 
common  fentence  fo  oftentymes  repeted  as  is  neede )  wherfore  the  two  fupplementes 
E  H  and H  D  are  equall  to  the  fquare  A  H  and  to  the  Gnomon  K  H  L  P  QjO.  If  therfore 
vnto  either  of  them  be  added  the  fquare  QJ :  the  two  fupplementes  E  H  and  H  D  to¬ 
gether  with  the  fquare  of  QJ  dial  be  equal  to  the  fquare  A  H,  &  to  the  Gnomon  K  H  L 
P  QO  and  to  the  fquare  QJJBut  thefe  three  figures  do  make  the  two  fquares  A  H  and 
H  F.VVherforc  the  two  fupplementes  E  H  and  H  D  together  with  the  fquare  QJF  arc  e- 
quall  to  the  two  fquares  AH  and  H  F, which  was  the  fecond  thing  to  be  proued. Wher¬ 
fore  the  two  fquares  A  H  and  H  F  beyng  taken  twife  are  equall  to  the  whole  fquare  D 
E  together  with  the  fquare  of  QJ3.  Wherfore  the  fquare  D  E  together  with  the  fquare 
QJ  is  double  to  the  fquares  A  H  and  H  F:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


f  jin  example  of  this  Tropofition  in  numbers. 

Take  any  euen  number  as  1 8:  and  take  the  halfe  of  it  which  is  9.  and  vnto  18.  the 
whole, adde  any  other  number  as  3  .which  maketh  2 1 .  Take  the  fquare  number  of  1 1 . 
(the  whole  number  and  the  number  added)  which  maketh  441.  Take  alfo  the  fquare 
of  3  C  the  number  added)  which  is  p.  which  two  fquares  added  together  make  450. 
Then  adde  the  halfe  number  p.  to  the  number  added  3.  which  maketh  12.  And  take 
the  fquare  ofp.the  halfe  number  and  of  1 2,  the  halfe  number  and  the  number  added 
which  fquares  are  8 1.  and  144.  and  which  two  iquares  alfo  added  together  make  235; 
■vnto  which  fumme  the  forefayd  number  450,  is  double.  As  you  fee  in  the  example. 


The 


The  whole. 

The  number  added. 


ententes • 

r  18 


Fol.yj. 


Multiplication  of  the  whole  and 
the  number  addedinco  himfelf. 


Multiplication  of  the  number 
addeddnto  himfelfe. 


Multiplication  of  the  halfe  in¬ 
to  himfelfe. 


Multiplication  of  the  halfe,  & 
the  number  added  into  it  felfe. 


>■«< 


l 


21 

21 

21 

21 


42 


44I 

44I 

3  9 

.  - 


9 

9 


81 

12 
1 2 

24 

12 

144 


1 


the  halfe- 


81 

iH 

225 


~  The  number  compofed  of 
the  fquare  of  the  whole  & 
the  number  added  and  of 
the  fquare  of  the  number 
added, 

-doublet© 


the  number  compofed  of 
the  fquare  of  the  halfe  and 
of  the  fquare  of  the  halfe 
and  the  number  added. 


The  demonftration  wheroffolloweth  in  Barlaam* 
r.  -  The  tenth  (Proportion, 

If  ten  tnmnomber  be  deuided  into  two  squall  nombers ,  and  vnto  it  be  added  any  other  nomber:  the 
fquare  nomber  of  t  he  Whole  nomber  compofed  of  the  nober  and  of  that  which  is  added ,  and  the 
fquare  nomber  of  the  nober  added.-thefe  tWo  fquare  nobers(  I  fay  )added  together ,  are  double  t@ 
thefe fquare  nombers, namely, to  the  fquare  of  the  halfe  nomber t  and  to  the  fquare  of  the  nomber 
compofed  of  the  halfe  nomber  and  of  the  nomber  added. 

Suppofe.  that  the  nomber  c A  B  being  an  euen  nomber  be  deuided  into  two  cquall 
nombers  AC  andCZ? :  and  vnto  it  let  be  added  an  other  nomber  BD  .  Then  I  fay,  that 
the  fquare  nombers  of  the  nombers  AD  an  dDB  are  double  to  the  fquare  nombers  of 
*XC  and  CD.  For  forafmuch  as  the  nomber  AD  is  deuided  into  the  nombers  AS  and 
BT):  therefore  the  fquare  nombers  of  the  nombers  AD  and  DB  are  equall  to  the  fu~ 
perficiail  nomber  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  nombers  AD  andD2?  the  on 
into  the  other  twife,together  with  the  fquare  ofthe  nomber  .^.5 f  by  the  7  propofitio) 
But  the  fquare  of  the  nomber^  is  equal  tofowerfquaresof  either  ofthe  nombers 
ACotCB  (for  ^4Cis  equall  to  the  nomber  CB ):  wherforealfo  the  fquares  ofthe  nom¬ 
bers  AD  an  dDB  are  equall  to  the  fuperficiall  nomber  produced  ofthe  multiplication 
of  the  nombers  AD  and^JDi?  the  one  into  the  other  twife,  and  to  fower  fquares  ofthe 
nomber  BCox  CA,  And  forafmuch  as  the  fuperficiall  nomber  produced  ofthe  multi¬ 
plication  of  the  nombers  AD  and  DB  the  one  into  the  other, together  with  the  fquare 
ofthe  nomber  Ci?, isequal  to  {quareofthe  nomber  CD(by  the  6  propofitio) :  therfore 
the  nomber  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  nombers  AD  and  DB  the  one  into 
the  other  twife  together  with  two  fquares  of  the  nomber  CB,is  equall  to  two  fquares 
ofthe  nomber  CD .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  nombers  AD  and  DB  are  equall  to 

X-£»  two 


rJL 


The fecondTHookf 

two  fquares  ofthe  nomber  C  ® ,  and  to  two  fquares  of  the  nomber  AC .  Where>- 
fore  they  are  double  to  the  fquares  ofthe  numbers  AC  and  C®.  And  the  fquare 
of  the  nomber  <s A  D  is  the  fquare  of  the  whole  and  of  the  nomber  added  ;  And 
the  fquare  of  ®  B  is  the  fquare  of  themombe  r  added :  the  fquare  alfo  of  the  nomber  CD 
is  the  fquare  of  the  nomber  compofed  of  the  halfe  and  of  the  nomber  added  :  If  there¬ 
fore  an  euen  nomber  be  deuided.&c.  Which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


8 

8 


2 

2 


the  fquare  of  A  D 


4  the  fquare  of®  B 


the  fquare  of  C  ®,namely.,of  the  number  compofed  of  the  halfe  and 
of  the  number  added. 

3  ay  Vd-f"1 


J 

9 


the  fquare  ofthe  halfe  A  C. 


2$ 

9 

34 


k 


68 


J 


■  rs8| 
J  341 


2. 


A. 


yk^Tbe  I,  Trobleme%  TheufPropoftion . 

To  deuide  a  right  line  geuen  in  fuch  fort,  that  the  reBangU 
fgure  comprehended  ynder  the  whole >and  one  ofthe  partes , 
/hall  he  e  quail  vnto  the  fquare  made  ofthe  other part . 

fppoje  that  the  right  line  geuen  he  A  <B.  "Flow  it  is  required  to  deuide 
||  the  line  A  <B  in  fuch forty  that  the  re  Bangle  figure  contajned  Tmder 
the  vhole  and  one  of the  partes  yfball  be  equal l  Ivnto  the  fquare  “Which 
is  made  of the  other  part.lDefcribe  (by  the  46.  of the  fir ji)  'Vpon  A  35 
Conttrutlion.  a  fquare  ABCftD.  And  (  by  the  10.  of  the 
firjl  )  deuide  the  line  A  C  into  two  equall 
partes  in  the  point  E,and  draw  a  line  from 
B  to  E.  And  (by  the  fecond petition)extend 
C  A  lento  the  point  F  .And  (by  the  3.  of the 
firfi)put  the  line  E  F equall Tmtoj  line  B  E. 

And  (by  the  4 6.  of  the firft)vpon  the  line  A 
F  defenbe  a fquare  FG  AH.  And  (by  the 
2.  petition)  extend  GH  Imto  the  point  Ff 
T hen  I  fay  that  the  line  yfB  is  deuided  in 
the point  H  in  fuch  fort,  that  the  reRangle 
figure  -which  is  compreheded  Tender  A  B  and 
B  FI  is  equall  to  the  fquare  -which  is  made  of 
Demon  ft  ratio  AH.  For  forafmuch  as  the  right  line  A  C 
is  deuided  into  two  equall partes  in  the poynt 
E,and  'Vnto  it  is  added  an  other  right  line 

jK 


G  _p 

% 

H  A 

E 

V 

K  C 

of Euclides  Element es .  Fol.jS . 

^F.  Therefore  (by  the  6. of  the fecond)  the  re&angle  figure  contayned  Wider 
C  F  and  F  A  together  loith  the fijuare  1 vhich  is  made  of  A  E  is  equall  toy  fquare 
lohichis  made  ofR  F .  But  E  F  is  equall  Wito  E  B .  VVherefore  the  re  Bangle 
figure  contayned lender  C  Fynd  F  A  together  loith  the  fquare  lohich  is  made  of 
E  A  is  equall  to  the  fquare  lohich  is  made  of  EE.  'But  (  by  47.  of  the  firfi  ) 

Wito  the  fquare  "Which  is  made  of  EB  are  equall  the  fquares  lohich  are  made  of 
B  AandAE .  For  the  angle  at  the  poynt  A  is  a  right  angle  .  VVherefore  that 
lohich  is  contayned  "wider  C  F and  F  A}  together  loith  the  fquare  lohich  is  made 
of  A  E,  is  equall  to  thefquares  lohich  are  made  of  BA  and  yfE .  T ake  away 
the fquare  lohich  is  made  of  A  E  lohich  is  common ,  to  them  both :  VVherfore 
the  reElangle  figure  remayning  contayned  Wider  CF  and  F  A  is  equall  Wito 
the  fquare  lohich  is  made  ofAB .  And  that  lohich  is  contained  Wider  the  lines 
C  F  and  F  A  is  the  figure  F  If .  For  the  line  F  A  is  equall  Unto  the  line  F  G. 

And  the fquare  lohich  is  made  of  A B  is  the  figure  A  ID .,  VVherefore  thefi * 
gure  F  if  is  e quail  Wit  0  thefigure  AD  .  Takeaway  the  figure  A  if  lohich 
is  common  to  them  both.  VVherefore  the  reftdue>  namely }  thefigure  FH  is 
equall  Unto  the  rejidue  ynamely}Unto  thefigure  Elf)  .  But  the  figure  HAD  is 
that, lohich  is  contayned  Wider  the  lines  AB  and  BH,for  AB  is  equation* 
to  BD .  And  thefigure  F  His  the  fquare  lohich  is  made  of  AH.  VVherfore 
the  re&angle  figure  comprehended  "Under  the  lines  AB  and  BH  is  equall  to 
the  fquare  lohich  is  made  of the  line  H  A .  VVherefore  the  right  line  geuen  AB 
is  deuidedin  the  point  H, in fuel? fort  that  the  re&angle  figure  contayned  Under 
AB  and  B  H  is  equall  to  the  fquare  lohich  is  made  of  AH;  lohich  loas  required 
to  be  done.  ' 

Thys  propofition  hath  many  fingular  vfes.  Vpon  it  dependeth  the  demonftration  Many  and 
of  that  worthy  Probleme  the  10.  Propofition  of  the  4.booke  :  which  teacheth  to  de-  fingultr  vfes 
feribe  an  Ifofceles  triangle, in  which  eyther  of  the  angles  at  the  bafe  (hall  be  double  to  of  this  props- 

the  angle  at  the  toppe .  Many  and  diuers  vfes  ofa  line  fodeuided  Hull  yon  finde  in  the  fiiion. 

ij.booke  of  £uchde. 

Thys  is  to  be  noted  that  thys  Propofition  can  not  as  the  former  Propofitions  rI . 
of  thys  fe'cond  booke  be  reduced  vnto  numbers  .  For  the  line  EB  hathvnto  the  ■ 

fine  AE  no  proportion  that  can  be  named,  and  therefore  it  can  not  be  exprefled  VenducedU 
by  numbers.  For  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  qf  EB  is  equall  to  the  two  fquaresof  to  numbers  * 
AB  and  AE  (by  the  47.ofthe  firfi)  and  AE  is  the  halfe  of  A  B,  therefore  the 
line  BE  is irrationall .  Foreuenas  two  equall  fquare  numbers ioyned  together 
can  not  make  a  fquare  number :  fo  alfo  two  fquare  numbers,  of  which  the  one  is 
the  fquare  of  the  halfe  roote  of  the  other,  can  not  make  a  fquare  number .  As  by 
an  example.  Take  the  fquare  of  8.  which  is  64.  which  doubled,  that  is,  128. mi 
keth  not  a  fquare  number  •  So  take  the  halfe  of  8 .  which  is  4*  And  the  fquares  of 
8 .  and  4.  which  are  64.  and  1 6.  added  together  Hkewyfe  make  not  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber  .  For  they  make  8  o.  who  hath  no  roote  fquare .  Which  thyng  muft  ofnecelii* 
tic  be  if  thys  Probleme  fliould  haue  place  in  numbers. 

But  in  Irrationall  numbers  it  is  true3  and  may  by  thys  example  be  declared. 

X.ii.  Lee 


r 


Let  8,be  fo  deuided,that  that  which  is  produced  of  the  whole  into  one  of  his  partes 
Ihall  be  equall  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  other  part.  Multiply  8. into  him 
felfe  and  there  (hall  be  produced  64.  that  is, the  fquare  CD.Deuidc  8.  into  two 

equall  partes, that is,into  4,  and  4.  as  the  line  E  oxEC .  And  multiply  4. into  hym 

felfe,and  there  is  produced  1  <5,  which  adde  vnto  64,  and  therefhall  be  produced  80: 
whoferooteis  Vg^  80:  which  is  the  line  £  2?  or  the  line  E  F  by  the  47,  of  the  firft*  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  EFisdif  80,  &  the  lyne  E  A\s  4*  therfore  the  lynctAt Fis 
80— 4,And  fo  much  (hall  the  line  AH  be.  And  the  line  B  H  (hall  be  8 — */§"*  80— 4,that 
is  j 1 2 — Vfr  80.  Now  the  12  —  8 o  multiplied  into  8  dial  be  as  much  as  8  o — 4, 

multiplied  into  it  felfe. For  of  either  of  them  is  produced  p  6 — y/  5120. 


he  uffheorme .  The  izfPropofition . 

In  ohtufeangle  triangles,  the fquare  which  is  made  of  the fide 
fubtending  the  obtufe  angle, is  greater  then  the fquare s  which 
are  made  ofthefides  which  comprehend  the  obtufe  angle ,  by 
the  reB angle  figure,  which  is  comprehended  twife  vnder  one 
ofthofe  ftdes  which  are  about  the  obtufe  angle  ,ypon  which 
being  producedfalleth  a  perpendicular  line  3  and  that  which 
is  outwardly  taken  betwene  the  perpendicular  line  and  the 
obtufe  angle. 


Demonstra¬ 

tion. 


$ 


V^ppofe  that  ABC  he  an  ohtufeangle  triangle  bauing 
the  angle  B  AC  obtufe ,and from  the  point  B(by  the  12* 
of  the firft)dr aw  a  perpendicular  line  lonto  CA  produced 
and  let  the  fame  be  BID.  Then  I  fay  that  the  fquare 
1 vhich  is  made  of the fide  B  C3  is  greater  then  the fquares 
"Which  are  made  of the fides  B  A  and  A  C,hy  the  re  hi  am 

_ _ fff  gle figure  comprehended  lender  the  lines  CA  and  AD 

twife .  For  forafmuch  as  the  right  line  CD  is 
by  chaunce  deuided  in  the poynt  A }  therefore 
(by  the  4.  of the fccond  )  the  fquare  "Which  is 
made  of  CD  is  equall  to  the  fquares  "Which  are 
made  of  C  A  and  A  D,and  lonto  the  reflangk 
figure  contayned  Wilder  CA  and  AD  twife. 

But  the  fquare  "Which  is  made  of  DB  com * 
mon  Ivnto  them  both  .  Wherefore  the  fquares 
-which  are  made  of  CD  and  D  B  are  equall 
to  the  fquares ' which  are  made  of  the  lines  C  A, 

A  Dj  and  D  Byand  nto  the  red  angle  figure 

contayned  lender  the  lines  CA  and  AD  twife .But  (by  the  the firflfihe 

fquare  yohich  is  made  of  CB  is  equall  to  the  fquares  lehtch  are  made  of the  lines 


• '  if  y. 

■ 


■M 


ofEuclides  Elementes . 


Foi  77* 


CD  and  /D/8.  For  the  angle  at  the  point  D  is  a  right  angle .  AndWnto  the 
fquares  lohich  are  made  of  AID  and  D  H  (by  the  felfe  fame )  is  equall  the 
fquare  t/hich  is  made  of  A  /8 .  VVherfore  thefquare  H vhich  is  made  of  CHys  e- 
quail  to  the  fquares  which  are  made  of  CA  and  A  <B  and  "Onto  the  reElanglef 
gure  contayned  loader  the  lines  C  A  and  A  ID  twife.  Wherfore  j  fquare  1 vhich 
is  made  of  C/S fits greater  then  the fquares  which  are  made  of  CA  and  AD  by 
the  rectangle figure  contayned  Tender  the  lines  CA  and  AD  twife.  In  obtufe- 
angle  triangles  therefore yhe  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  fide fiubtending  the  ob * 
tufe  angle ,is greater  then  the  fquares  which  are  made  of  the  fides  YOhich  com * 
prehend  the  obtufe  angle  Jay  the  reBangle  figure  VOhich  is  comprehended  twife 
louder  one  of thofe fides  which  are  about  the  obtufe  angle gopon  which  being  pro* 
duced falleih  a perpendiculer  lyne^and  that  which  is  outwardly  taken  betwene 
the  perpendiculer  lyne  and  the  obtufe  angle :  which  was  required  to  be  demons 
Jirated. 

Of  what  force  thys  Propofition,  and  the  Propofition  following,  touching  the 
meafuring  of  the  obtufeangle  triangle  and  the  acuteangle  triangle,  with  the  ayde 
of  the  47.  Propofition  of  the  foil  booke  touching  the  rightangle  triangle,  he  fhall 
well  perceaue,which  fiiall  at  any  time  neede  the  arte  of  triangles  in  which  by  thre 
thinges  knowen  is  euer  iearched  out  three  other  thinges  vnknowen,by  helpeof 
the  table  of  arkes  and  cordes. 

The  n.Tbeoreme.  fhc  13  fPropofition. 


5^  h  acuteangle  triangles 3the fquare  which  is  made  of  the 
fide  that fubtendeth  the  acute  angle js  lejfe  then  the  fquares 
which  are  made  of  the  fides  which  comprehend  the  acute  an¬ 
gle  >b  the  reBangle  figure  which  is  coprehended  twife  vnder 
one  of thofe  fides  which  are  about  the  acuteangle ,  vpo  which 
fillet h  a  perpendiculer  lyne ,  and  that  which  is  inwardly  ta~ 
ken  betwene  the perpendiculer  lyne  and  the  acute  angle . 


■  Vpp°fe  that  ADC  be  an  acuteangle  triangle  ha* 
the  angle  aty point  D  acute  ys( by  the  iz.of 
L_ns!  t  hefirU  from  the  point  A  dr aw  "Onto  the  lyne  D 
C  a perpendiculer  lyne  JD.  Thenlfaythat  thefquare 
lohich  is  made  of  the  lyne  JC  is  lefie  then  the  fquares 
^hich  are  made  of  the  lyne  CDandD  Ajby  the  reBangle 
figure  conteyned  bonder  the  lines  CD  and  HD  twife.  For 
forafmuch  as  the  right  lyne  <B  C  is  by  chaunce  deuided  in 
the  point  Dyher fore  (by  the  7.  of the fiecond)  the fiq  uares 

X.iij.  which 


A 


DemnJlratiS 


The  fecond  Boothe 

lohich  are  made  of the  lines  C  B  and  B  D  are  e quail  to  the  reBangle  figure  com 
tamed  lander  the  lines  C  B  a?id  D  B  twife  and  Tanto  the  fquare  lohiche  ismade 
of  line  C  D  .Tut  the  fquare  lohich  ismade  of  the  line  !D  A  common  lanto  them 
both .  VVherfore  the  fquares  lohich  are  made  of  the  lines  CB  ,  BD,and(D 
jf3are  equall  lanto  the  re  El  angle  figure  contayned  lander 
the  lines  C  B  and  B  ID  twife ,  and  lanto  the  fquares  lohich 
are  made  of  AD  and  D  C.  But  to  the fquares  lohiche  are 
made  of  the  lines  B  D  and  D  A  is  equal y  fquare  lohich  is 
made  of  the  line  JIB :  for  tl/ angle  aty  point  D  is  a  right 
angle .  Andlanto  the  jquares  lohiche  are  made  of  the  lines 
A  D  and  D  C  is  equall  the  fquare  lohiche  is  made  of  the 
line  A  C(  by  the  a-.ofy  firfi):loberfore  the  fquares  lohich 
are  made  of  the  lines  C  B  and  B  A  are  equal  to  the fquare 
lohich  is  made  of  the  line  A  C,and  to  that  lohich  is  contain 
7ied louder  the  lines  C Band BD  twife  .  Wherfiorethe  b 
fquare  lohich  is  made  of  the  line  A  C  beyng  taken  alone  js  lejfe  then  the fquares 
lohich  are  made  of  the  lines  C  B  and  BA  by  the  rectangle  figure  ,  lohich  is  con * 
tainedlonder  the  lines  C  B  and B  D  twife .  In  rectangle  triangles  therfore  the 
fquare  lohich  is  made  of  the  fide  that  fubtendeth  the  acute  angle, is  lejfe  then  the 
Jquares  lohich  are  made  of  the  fides  lohich  comprehend  the  acute  angle  ,  by  the 
rectangle  figure  lohich  is  comprehended  twife  louder  one  of thofie fides  lohich  are 
about  the  acute  angle,  lopon  lohich falleth  a  perpendicular  line  ,  and  that  lohich 
is  inwardly  taken  betwene  the  perpendicular  line  and  the  acute  angklehich  loas 
required  to  be proued. 


1]  jt  Corollary  added  by  Orontius. 


A  Corollary. 


This  Propo/i- 
tion  true  in  all 
kindes  of 
triangles * 


Hereby  is  eafily  gathered,that  fuch  a  perpendicular  line  in  redangie  triangles 
falleth  ofneceffitie  vpon  the  fide  of  the  triangle,  that  is,  neyther  within  the  trian¬ 
gle, nor  without.  But  in  obtufeangle  triangles  it  falleth  without, and  in  acuteangle 
triangles  within .  For  the  perpendicular  line  in  obtufeangle  triangles,  and  acute- 
angle  triangles  can  not  exa&ly  agree  with  the  fide  of  the  triangle :  for  then  an  ob- 
tufe  &  an  acuteangle  ihould  be  equal  to  a  right  angle,contrary  to  the  eleuenth  and 
twelfth  definitions  of  the  firft  booke .  Likewife  in  obtufeangle  triangles  it  can  not 
fall  within, nor  in  acuteangle  triangles  without:  for  then  the  outward  angle  of  a 
triangle  fhould  be  lefte  then  the  inward  and  oppofite  angle,whichis  contrary  to 
the  i  ^.of  the  firft. 

And  this  is  to  be  noted, that  although  properly  an  acuteangle  triangle,  by  the 
definition  therof  geue  in  the  firft  booke,be  that  triangle, whofe  angles  be  all  acute: 
yet  forafinuch  as  there  is  no  triangle,but  that  it  hath  an  acute  angle,this  propofith 
on  is  to  be  vnderftanded,&  is  true  generally  in  all  kindes  of  triangles  whatfoeuers 
and  may  be  declared  by  them, as  you  may  eafily  proue. 

The 


of Euclides  Elements s.  FoL  80, 

The  lEProbleme.  Thev^.Tropofition. 

Vnto  a  reBiline figure  geuen3to  make  a jquare  squall. 


^The  ende  of the  fecond  Booke 

ofEuclides  Elementes. 


Cofijiruftm. 


Dmo»tJlraii$ 


The  Argument 
of  this  kooks* 


The  fir  ft  defi¬ 
nition* 


fflby  circlet 
take  their 
equality  of 
their  diame- 
ten  or  femi¬ 
diameters • 


i[.The  third  books  of  Eu- 

elides  Elementes. 

His  third  booke  ofEuclide  entreateth 

of  the  moft  perfed:  figure,  which  is  a  circle .  Where¬ 
fore  it  is  much  more  to  be  eftemed  then  the  two 
bookes  goyng  before ,  in  which  he  did  fet  forth  the 
moft  fimple  proprieties  of  rightlined  figures  .  For 
fciences  take  their  dignities  of  the  worthynes  of  the 
matter  that  they  entreat  of.But  of  al  figures  the  circle 
is  of  moft  abfoluteperfedion,whole  proprieties  and 
pafsions  are  here  fet  forth,and  moft  certainely  demo- 
ftrated.Here  alfo  is  entreated  ofrightlines  fubten- 
ded  to  arke's  in  circles  :  alfo  of  angles  fet  both  at  the 
circumference  and  at  the  centre  of  a  circle,andofthevarietie  and  differences  of 
them.Wherfore  the  readyng  of  this  booke ,  is  very  profitable  to  the  attayning  to 
the  knowledge  of  chordes  and  arkes.lt  teacheth  moreouer  which  are  circles  con- 
tinget,and  which  are  cutting  the  one  the  other  :  and  alfo  that  the  angle  of  contin- 
gence  is  the  leaft  of  all  acute  rightlined  angles:and  that  the  diameter  in  a  circle  is 
the  longeft  line  that  can  be  drawen  in  a  circle .  Farther  in  it  may  we  learne  how, 
three  pointes  beyng  geuen  how  foeuer(fo  that  they  be  not  fet  in  a  right  line), may 
be  drawen  a  circle  palling  by  them  all  three,  Agayne, how  in  a  lolide  body ,  as  in  a 
Sphere,Cube,orfuchlyke,maybe  found  the  two  oppofite  pointes .  Whiche  is  a 
thyngvery  necefiaryand  commodious  :  chiefly  for  thofe  that  fliall  make  inftru- 
mentes  feruyng  to  Aftronomy,and  other  artes. 

! Definitions . 


Equal!  circles  are  fuch^hofe  diameters  are  equally  or  who/e 
lynes  drawen  from  the  centres  are  equal! . 


The  circles  A  and  B  are  equal, if  theyr  diameters,namely,E  F  and  C  D  be  equaShor  if 
their  femidiameters  ,  whiche  are  lynes  drawen  from  the  center  to  the  circumference^ 
namely  A  F  and  B  D  be  equall. 


i  The  reafon  why  circles 
take  theyr  equalitie ,  of  the  e- 
qualitie  of  their  diameters  or 
femidiameters  is  ,  for  that  a 
circle  is  delcribed  by  one  re- 
uolution  or  turnyng  about  of 
the  lemidiameter,  hauing  one 
of  his  endes  fixed .  As  if  you 
Imagine  the  lyne  A  E  to  haue 

his  one  point  namely  A  faftened,and  the  other  end  namely  E  to 

it 


o/Sudides  Elementes.  Fol.2u 

it  come  to  the  place  where  itbega  to  moue ,  it  fhal  fully  defcribe  the  whole  circle. 
Wherefore  ifthefemidiameters  bee  equall5the  circles  of neceffity e  muft  alfo  be 
equal!:  and  alfo  the  diameters. 


By  thys  alfo  is  kno wen  the  definition  of  vnequall  circles.  Definition  of 

imeqHtUw* 

Circlestyhofe  diameters  orfmidiameters  are  vneqnatt,  are  alfo  vneqnai  .  *And  that  circle  Wft 
fybicb  hath  the  greater  diameter  or  femidiametcr,  is  the  greater  circle »  and  that  emit  Which  hath 
the  lejfe  diameter  or  femidiamet  ert  it  the  leffe  circle „ 


As  the  circle  t  M  is  greater 
then  the  circle  I K ,  for  that  the 
diameter  L  M  is  greater  then  the 
diameter  I K:  or  for  that  the  femi- 
diameterG  Lis  greater  then  the 
femidiameterHI. 


right  line  is  fay  d to  touch  a  circle jtohich  touching  the  cir > 
ele  and  being produced  cutteth  it  not .  mm* 


As  the  right  lyneEFdrawen  from  the  point  E  9andpa%ng  by  a  point  of  the  circle* 
namely ,by  the  point  G  to  the  point .F  on¬ 
ly  toucheth  the  circle  G  H,and  cutteth  it 
not, nor  entreth  within  it.For  a  right  line 
entryng  within  a  circle, cutteth  anddeui- 
deth  the  circle .  As  the  right  lyne  K  L  de¬ 
ni  deth  and  cutteth  the  circle  K  L  M ,  and 
entreth  within  it :  and  therfore  toucheth 
it  in  two  places  .  But  a  right  lync  tou- 
chyng a  circle, which  is  commonly  called 
a  cotingent  lyne,toucheth  the  circle  one* 
ly  in  one  point. 


df  contigent 
tine* 


% 


Circles  are  fayd to  touch  the  one  the  other ythicb  touching  the  V’M&foh 
one  the  other  jut  not  the  one  the  other*  ***** 


As  the  two  circles  AB  and  BC  touch  the 
one  the  other  ♦  For  theyr  circumferences 
touch  together  in  the  poynt  B  *  But  neither  of 
them  cutteth  or  deuideth,  the  other .  Neither 
doth  any  part  of  the  one  enter  within  theo« 
ther.And  fuch  a  touch  of  circles  is  euer  in  one 
poynt  onely:  yhich  poynt  oncly  is  common 
to  them  both  .As  the  poynt  B  is  fit  the  confc* 
tehee  of  the  circle  A  B,and  aUb  is  io,  the  circu- 
ifereace  of  the  circle  BC. 


The  touch  of 
emits  is  tuev 
in  one  point 
mdj.  , 

Aa-f.  Circles 


Circles  mg 
South  toge¬ 
ther  two  md- 
mrofurdjes. 


Fourth  defi- 
nuion. 


Fife  defini¬ 
tion. 


touch  together  two  matier  of  wayes ,  either  outwai^ly  &£qij,^ 
wholy  without  the  other :  or  els  the  one  being  cojitayne4  withiuthe  otfc. 

As  the  circles  D  E  and  D  F :  of  which  the  one  D  E  contay- 
neth  the  other ,  namely  D  F :  and  touch  the  one  the  other  in 
the  poynt  Z>;and  that  oncly  poynt  is  common  to  them  both : 
neitherdoththeone  enter  into  the  other  »Ifanypart  ofthe 
pne  enter  into  any, part  of  the  other,then  the  one  cutteth  and 
feideth  the  other  ,  and  toucheth  th?  one  the  other  not  in 
one  poynt  oneiy  as  in  the  other  before ,  blit  in  two  pbintes, 
and  haue  alfo  a  fupcrficies  common  to  them  both.  As  the  cir¬ 
cles  G  H  ifand  HL  K  cut  the  one  the  other  in  two  poyntes 
H and  X;and  the  one  entreth  into  the  other :  Al¬ 
fo  the  fuperficies  AfiC  is  common  to  them  both; 

For  it  is  a  part  of  the  circle  G  H  K ,  and  alfo  it  is  a 
part  pf  the  circle  HL  K. 


%ight  lines  in  a  circle  are  fay  d  to 
be  equally  diBant  from  the  cen~ 
freshen  perpendicular  lines  drawen  from  the  centre  ynto 
thoje  lines  are  equall,  <*And that  lint  is  fayd  to  be  more  di~ 
Hantfvpon  wbomfalleth  the  greater  perpendicular  line. 


As  in  the  circle  tABCDw hofe  centre  is  E,  the  two  lynes 
JI  B  and  CD haue  equall  difiance  from  the  centre  E  .*  bycaufe 
that  the  Iyne  EF  drawen  from  the  centre  E  perpendicularly 
vpon  the  lyne  A  2?,and  the  lyne  E  G  drawen  likewife  perpendi- 
larly  from  the  centre  E  vpon  the  lyne  CD  are  equall  the  one  to 
theother  .  Butin  the  citdzH  KLM  whofc  centreis  2\^the 
lyne  H  if  hath  greater  diftance  from  the  centre  2^  then  hath 
the  lyne  L  M :  for  that  the  lyne  O  2^drawen  from  the  centre 
^perpendicularly  vppon  the  lyne  HKis  greater  then  the  lyne 
T^JF  which  is  drawen  fro  the  centre  perpendicularly  vpon 
the  lyne  L 

So  likewife  in  the  other  figure  the  lynes  AB  and  D  Cin  the 
circled  BCD  are  equidiftant  from  the  centre  C,bycaufe  the 
iyncsOCandiy  jP  perpendicularly  drawen  from  the  centre  G 
vppon  the  fayd  lynes  A  B  and  D  Care  equall  .  And  the  lyne 
A  B  hath  greater  diftance  from  the  centre  G  then  hath  the 
the  lyne  EF  ,  bycaufethclync  O  G  perpendicularly  drawen 
from  the  centre  G  to  the  lyne  cAB  is  greater  then  the  lyne  H 
G  whiche  is  perpendicularly  drawen  from  the  centre  G  to  the 
lyneEF, 


A feBion  or figment  of  a  circle 9  is  a  figure  coprehendedmder 
a  right  line  and  a  portion  ofthe  circumference  of  a  circle. 


As  the 


As  the  figure  ABCis  a  fedtion  of  a  -circle 
bycaufe  itis  comprehended  vnder  the  right 
lyne  AC  and  the  circumference  of  a  circle  A. 

B  C .  Likewife  the  figure  D  E  Ais  a  fedtion  of 
a  circle  ,  for  that  it  is  comprehended  vnder 
the  right  Ivne  D  F ,  and  the  circuference  D  E 
F.  And  the  figure  A  BC  for  that  it  cotaineth 
within  it  the  centre  of  the  circle  is  called  the 

greater  fection  of  a  circle :  and  the  figu  re  CD  E  Fis  the  lefle  fection  of  a 
itis  w holy  without  the  centre  of  the  circle  as  it  was  noted  in  the  1 6 .  Definition  ortne 
firft  boofce* . ..  f  - 


*tAn  angle  ofafeBion  or  fegment ?  is  that  angle  which  is  con  < 
tajneciyncier  a  right  line  and  the  circuference  of  the  circle . 

As  the  angle  A  B  C  in  the  fedtion  A  B  C  is  an  angle  of  a  fee- 
tiort ,  bycaufe  it  is  c6ntained  of  the  circumference  B  A  C  and 
the  right  lyne  B  C  .  Likewife  the  angle  C  B  D  is  an  angle  of  the  ^ 
fedtion  B  D  C  bycaufe  it  is  contayned  vnder  the  circumference 
B  D  C,andthe  right  JyneB  C .  And thefe  angles  are  commonly  I 
called  mixte  angles,  bycaufe  they  are  contayned  vnder  a  right  ' 
lyne  and  a  crooked  .  And  thefe  portions  of  circumferences  are 
commonly  called  arkes,  and  the  right  lynes  arc  called  chordes, 
or  right  lynes  fubtended.  And  the  greater  fedtion  hath  euer  the 
greater  angle,and  theleffe  fedtion  the  Idle  angle, 

Jn  angle  is  fayd  to  be  in  afeBionjtohein  the  circumference  is 
takgn  any  poynt^andfrom  thatpqynt  are  drawen  right  lines 
to  the  endes  of  the  right  line  which  is  the  bafe  of  the  fegment ? 
the  angle  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  right  lines  drawen 
from  the pojnt,  is  ( Ifayfaydto  be  an  angle  in  a JeBion . 

As  the  angle  A  BCfs  an  anglein  the  fedtion  A  B  C ,  bycaufe 
from  the  poy  nt  B  beyng  a  poynt  in  the  circumference  A  B  C  are 
drawen  two  right  lynes  B  C  and  B  A  to  the  endes  of  the  lyne  A  G 
which  is  the  bafe  of  the  fedtion  A  B  C  .  Likewife  the  angle  ADC 
is  an  angle  in  the  fedtion  A  D  C, bycaufe  from  the  poyrit  D  beyng 
in  the  circuference  A  D  C  are  drawen  two  right  lynes,namelv,D 
C  &  D  A  to  the  endes  of  the  righ  t  line  A  C  which  is  alfo  the  bafe 
to  the  fayd  fedtion  A  D  C-So  you  fee,it  is  not  all  one  to  fay,  an  am 
gle  of  a  fedtion,and  an  angle  in  a  fedtion.An  angle  of  a  fedtion  co- 
fifteth  of  the  touch  of  a  right  lyne  and  a  crooked.  And  an  angle 
in  a  fedtionis  placed  on  the  circumference ,  and  is  contayned  of  two  right  lynes .  Alfo 
the  greater  fedtion  hath  in it  the  leifc  angle ,  and  the  leife  fedtion  hath  in  it  the  greater 
angle.-  'v'  ■  o-.' .  " 

'‘But  when  the  right  lines  which  comprehend  the  angle  do  re - 
ceaue  any  circumference  of  a  circle jben  that  angle  is  fayd  to 
.  he  correfgondent^and  to pertaine  to  that  circumference* 

Aa.i/,  As  the 


Sixt  defm~ 
tion. 


Mfot  Angles, 

Arkes. 

C hordes , 

Seuenth 
finitim «•. 


Difference  of 
an  angle  of  £ 
Seffion.and 
of  an  an  Ae 
in  a  Semon» 


Eight  deft 
nition » 


plinth  dtfi- 
mtion . 


Tenth  dcfini - 
tion. 

T wo  defini¬ 
tions, 

Brft, 


Semi* 


As  the  right  lynes B  A  ~ 

€,and  reeeaue  the  circumference  A  D  C  iherforc  the  angle  A  B 
C  is  fayd  to  fubtend  and  to  pettaine  to  the  circuference  ADC. 
And  if  the  right  lynes  whiche.  caufe  the  angle,  concurrein  the 
centre  of  a  circle :  then  the  angle  is  fayd  to  be  in  the  centre  of  a 
circle « As  the  angle  E  F  D  is  fayd  to  be  in  the  centre  of  a  circle, 
for  that  it  is  comprehended  of  two  right  lynes  F  E  and  F  Ds 
rhiehe  concurre  and  touch  in  the  centre  F.  And  this  angle  likewife 
fubtendeth  the  circumference  EG  D  :  whiche  circumference  alfo, 
is  the  meafure  of  the  greatnes  of  the  angle  E  F  D* 


'  of  a  circle  is  (an  angle  being  fetal  the  e 

centreof  a  circle )  a  figure  contayned  ynder  the  right  lines 
which  make  that  angle 9and  the part  of  the  circumference  re* 
ceaucd  ofthem. 


As  the  figure  A  B  C  is  a  fedor  of  a  circle,  for  that  it  hath  an  angle 
at  the  centre,namely  the  angle  B  A  C,&  is  cotained  of  the  two  right  j 
lynes  A  B  and  A  C  (  whiche  contayne  that  angle  and  thedreumfe. 
rence  receaued  by  them. 


Likefegmentes  orfellions  of  a  circle  are  thofe9  which  ham 
equall  angles %or  in  whom  are  equall angles • 


Here  are  fettwo  definitions  of  like  fedions  of 
a  circle. The  one  pertaineth  to  the  angles  whiche 
are  fet  in  the  centre  of  the  circle  and  reeeaue  the 
circumfercce  of  the  fayd  fedions:  the  other  per¬ 
taineth  to  the  angle  in  the  fedion,  whiche  as  be¬ 
fore  was  fayd  is  euer  in  the  circumference  •  As  if 
the  angle  B  AC,  beyng  in  the  centre  A  and  re- 
ceauedof  the  circumference  B  LC  be  equall  to 
theangleFEG  beyng  alfointhe  centre  E  and 
receaued  of  the  cir  cu  inference  F  KG,  then  are  the  two  fedions  B  CL  and  FGKIyfc® 
by  the  firft  definition. By  the  fame  definition  alfo  are  the  other  two  fedions  like3naae* 
ly  B  C  D,and  F  G  H/or  that  the  angle  BAG  is  equall  to  the  angle  F  E  G. 


Alfo  by  thefecond  definition  if  B 
A  C  beyng  an  angle  placed  in  the  Cir¬ 
cumference  of  the  fedion  B  C  A  be  e- 
angle  E  D  F  beyng  an  angle  in  the  fe¬ 
dion  E  F  D  placed  in  the  circumfe¬ 
rence,  there  are  the  two  feCtionsBC 
A ,  and  E  F  D'lyke  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther .  Likewife  alfo  if  the  angle  BGC 
beyng  in  the  fection  B  C  G  be  equall 
to  the  angle  E  H  F  beyng  in  the  fedio 
.  E  H  F  the  two  fedions  BCG  and  E  F 
H  are  lyke.  And  fo  is  it  of  angles  beyng  equall  in  any.poynt  of  the  circumference. 

,  \  v  -  -  Bucllde* 


Euclide  defmcth  not  equall  Se&ions  :for  they  may  infinite  wayes  be  defcribed. 
For  there  may  vpponvnequall  right  lynes  he  fet  equall  Se&ions  (butyet  in  vne- 
quall  circles)  For  from  any  circle  beyng  the  greater,may  be  cut  of  a  portion  equall 
to  a  portion  of  an  other  circle  beyng  the  lelfe .  But  when  the  Sections  are  equall, 
and  are  fet  vpon  equall  right  lynes ,  theyr  circumferences  alfo  flialbe  equall  *  And 
right  lynes  beyng  deuidedinto  two  equall  partes ,  peroendicular  Ivnes  drawer* 
from  the  poyntes  of  the  diuifion  to  the  cir- 
cumfercces  ihalbe  equall.  A  s  if  the  two  fc£ti- 
oiis  ABC and  CD  E  F,  beyng  fet  vppon  equall 
ryghtlyn.es  ACdcDF,  be  equall :  then  if  eeh  of 
the  two  lynes  ACgcDF  be  deuidedinto  twoe- 
quall  partes  in  the  poyntes  G  and  //*,&  from  the 
uyd  poyntes  be  drawento  the  circumferences 
two  perpendicular  lynes  BG  and  EH,  the  fayd 
perpendicular  lynes  fhalbe  equall ♦ 


ZfofThe  ifProbteme .  The  i.  Tropofition . 


To finde  out  the  centre  of  a  circle geuen. 


Vppofe  that  there  lea  circle  geuen  ABC .  It  is  requi¬ 
red  to  finde  out  the  centre  of the  circle  ABC.  (Draw  in  it 
aright  line  at  all  aduenturesy  and  let  the fame  he  A  B. 
And  (by  the  i  o*  of  the  firf)  deuide  the  line  A  B  into  two 
equall partes  in  the poynt  1 ).  And(by  the  i  i.of  the  fame ) 
|  fro  the poynt  D  raife  yp  lento  AS  a  perpendicular  line 

_  _ |  D  by  the  fecond petition  )extend D  C lento y  point 

E.  And( by  the  io*of  the firft )  deuide 
the  line  C  E  into  two  equall  partes  ' 
the  poynt  F .  T  hen  1 fay  that  the  point 
E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC.  For 
if it  be  not  fet fome  other  po 
Gjbe  the  centre.  And  (by  th 
tion)draw  thefe  right  lines 
and  GB.  And  forafmuch 
equall  lento  D  By  and  ID  G  is 
lento  the  both,  therefore  thefe  two  lines 
A  D  and  DG  are  equall  to  thefe  two 
lines  G  D  and  D  B?the  one  to  the  other  find  (  hy  the  .  definition  of the  firf) 

the  bafe  G  jC  is  equall  to  the  bafe  G  B .  For  they  are  both  drawen  from  the  ceri* 
tre  G  to  the  circumference :  therefore  (  hy  the  8.  of the  frft )  the  angle  ADO 
is  equall  to  the  angle  BDG .  But  ~%>hen  a  right  line Jlandmg  lepon  a  right  line 
maketh  the  angles  on  eche  fide  equall  the  one  to  the  other  y  eyther  of  thofe  angles 
( by  the  io*  definition  of the firjl)  is  a  right  angle.  WJeerefore  the  angleBDG 

yfa.iij.  is  4 


Why  SaetlM 

defineih  not 
equalised 

cm* 


CouflruZlkn* 


tion  leading 
to  an  impofL 
fibilitk* 


€meUiy* 


lOrnon/lra* 
uo  leading  to 
an  intpoffibi- 
Stie. 


The  thirdflooke 

is  a  right  angle  :  butj  angle  FID  ©  is  alfo  a  right  angle  by  confiruBion.  Vtfher* 
fore  (by  the  4 .  petition)the  angle  FT)  'Bis  e  quail  to  the  angle  ©  T)  Gythe  grea¬ 
ter  to  the  lejfe ,  K>hich  is  impofhble .  Wherefore  the poynt  G  is  not  the  centre  of 
the  circle  ABC,  In  like  K>ife  may  ~fre  prone  that  no  other  poynt  befides  F  is  the 
centre  of  the  circle  AFC.  Wherefore  the  poynt  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
AT  C:  lohkh  leas  required  to  be  done . 

Cor r el  ary* 

Hereby  it  is  manifefljhat  if  in  a  circle  a  right  line  do  deuide 
a  right  line  into  two  e quail partes, and  make  right  angles  oneche 
fide:  in  that  right  line  which  deuideth  the  other  line  into  two  e* 
quail  partes  is  the  centre  of  the  circle* 

*r&The  1, T heoreme .  The  zfPropofition. 


If  in  the  circuference  of a  circle  be  taff  two poyntes  at  all  ad- 
uentures :  a  right  line  drawen from  the  one poynt  to  the  other 
Jhall  fall  within  the  circle. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  a  circle  A  ©  C.  And  in  the  circumference  tier* 
of  let  there  be  take  at  all  adnentures  thefe  two  poyntes  A  &  ©.  Then 
I fay  that  aright line  dr awen from  AtoT  Jhall fall  loithin  the  circle 
'A  ©  C.For  if  it  do  not  Jet  it  fall  without  the  circle, as  the  line  AFT 
dotbptohich  if it  be  pofiible  imagine  to  be  a  right  line .  And(  by  the  Tropojition 
going  before)take  the  centre  of  the  circle, and  let  the  fame  be  D.Andfby  the firfi 
petitwn)draw  lines from  ID  to  A, and from  ID  to  ©„  And  extend  D  F  to  E*  And 
for  afmuch  as  (by  the  15*  definition  of y  firfi ) 

T)  A  is  equall  lonto  DT.  T  here  fore  the  an* 
gle  D  A  Eis  equall  to  the  angle  ID  ©  E.And 
for  afmuch  as  o?ie  of  the  fides  of  the  triangle 
(DAE,  namely  the  fide  A  ET  is  produced, 
therefore  (  by  the  16  ♦ of  the  firfi  )  the  angle 
(D  E  T, is  greater  then  the  angle  D  A  EJBut 
the  angle  DA  E  is  equall  ynto  the  angle 
DTE.  Wherfore  the  angle  DET  is  great 
ter  then  the  angle  DTE.  Tut  (by  the  iS. of 
the  firfi)  Tmto  the  greater  angle  is  fubt ended 
the  greater fide .  Wherefore  the fide  DTis 
-greater  then  the  fide  D  K  Tut(by  the  15  ♦  definition  of the  firfi )the  line  D  Tjs 

equall 


0. 


FoLty, 

equaU  lento  the  line  0F.  VVhcrfore  the  line  • D  F  is  greater  then  the  lint  0  Ey 
namely y  the  lejfe greater  then  the greater Ytohtch  is  irnpofiibk.Whtrforea  right 
line  drawenfrom  AtoB  falleth  not  without  the  circle.  In  like  fort  alfo  may 
prone  that  it  falleth  not  in  the  circumference :  Wherefore  it  falleth  within  the  , 
circle .  If  there  fore  in  the  circumference  of a  circle  he  taken  two  poyntes  at  dll  ad* 
uentures:  a  right  line  drawenfrom  the  onepoynt  to  the  other frail fall  1 whin  the 
circle:  U? hid:  t>as  required  to  he proued . 

y&The  zfiTheoreme.  The  ifPropofmon. 

If  in  a  circle  a  right  line pafiing  by  the  centre  do  deuide  ano¬ 
ther  right  line  not  pa  fling  by  the  cetre  into  two  equall  partes: 
it Jh all  deuide  it  by  right  angles .  And  if  it  deuide  the  line  by 
right  angles fit fh all  alfo  deuide  the fame  line  into  two  e quail 
partes . 

Vpjmfe  that  there  he  a  circle  A  B  Cy  and  let  there  he  in  it  drawen  ybe&flHrt 
a  right  line  pafiing  by  thexentye,  and  let  the fame  he  C0>  deuiding  of  this  Aopo 
ah  other  tight  line  A  B  not  pafiing  by y  centre  into  two  e  quail  partes 
in  the poynt  F.  T hen  I  fay  that  the  angles  at  the poynt  of  the  deuijion 
are  right  angles.  T ahe  ( hyy  firfl  of  the  third) 
the  centre  of  the  circle  A B  C\  and  let  the fame 
he  E .  And(  by  the  firft  petition )  drawe  lines 
from  E  to  Ayr from  E  to  B>  And  for  afmuch 
as  the  line  A  F is  equall lento  the  line  F'Byand 
the  line  F  E  is  common  to  them  bothy  therfore 
thefe  two  lines  EF  and  FA  are  equall  lento 
thefe  two  lines  E  F&  F  B.  And  the  hafe  E  A 
is  equall  lento  the  hafe  E  B  (by  the  15.  defnk 
tion  of  thefirfi) .  Wherefore( by  the  8.  of  the 
firft) the  angle  AFE  is  equall  to  the  angle 
BFE.  But  Sfrhen  a  right  line  Handing  lepon  a  right  line  doth  make  the  angles 
■on  etc he fide  equall  the  one  to  the  other yeyther  of  thofe  angles  is  (by  the  10. define 
tion  of  the  firft)a  right  angle. VVherf ore  either  of  thefe  angles  A  FEyfy  B  F  E 
is  a  right  angle.  VVherefore  the  line  C 0 pafiing  by  the  centre y  and  deuiding  the 
line  A  B  not  pafiing  by  the  centre  into  two  equall partes ymaketh  at  the  point  of 
the  deuijion  right  angles. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  line  C0  do  deuide  the  line  A B  in  fuch  fort  that  it  The  feccnd 
■maketh  right  angles.  Then  I  fay  that  it  deuideth  it  into  two  equall  partes  y  that 
'tsyythe  line  AFis  equal!  J>nto  the  line fiB.  For  the  fame  order  of conftruction 
remay ?iing  for  afmuch  as  the  line  E  A  is  equaU'tmto  the  line  EB(hy  the  15.  de*  til™” 

AaMij.  finition 


Conjirutiiwo 


'DtmonUra- 

tion. 


finkion  of the fir  ft),  T  herefore  tlx  angle  EAF  is  e quail  ^nto  the,  angle  E  ®  F 
( by  the  5 .  of the  fir  ft).  And  the  right  angle  A  EE  is  ( by  the  4  *  petition)  equaBk 
to  the  right  angle  EE  E.  Wherefore  there  are  two  triangles  E  AF,Z?  EEF 
hatting  two  angles  equal l  to  two  angles, £?  one  fide  equall  to  one  fide,  namely  the 
fide  E  F  "Which  is  common  to  them  botb,a?id fubtendeth  one  of  the  equall  angles , 
"Wherefore  (by  the  26.  of the firfi)the fides  remayning  of  the  one, are  equdll  y?t* 
to  the  fides  remayning  of  the  other .  Wherefore  the  line  jtF  is  equall  Wn to  the 
line  F  E .  If  therefore  in  a  circle  a  right  line  pafiing  by  the  centre  do  deu'ide  an 
other  right  line  not  pafiing  hy  the  centre  intoXwo  equall  partes  ,  it jhall  deuide  it 
by  right  angles .  And  if  it  deuide  the  line  by  right  angles  it Jhall  alfo  deuide  the 
fame  line  into  two  equall  partes :  "whick"Was  required  to,  be  demonfirated. 

Theoreme.  Ifihe  ^fPropqfition. 

If  in  a  circle  two  right  lines  not  pafiing  hy  the  centre >  deuide 
the  one  the  other  :  t hey  jh all  not  deuide  eche  one  the  other 
into  two  equall  partes* 


-Demn&ra- 
tion  leading 
to  an  mpof- 
Jtbilitie* 


Fppofe  that  there  be  a  circle  AECD,  and  let  there  be  in  it  drawen  tw§ 
fright  lines  not  pafiing  by  the  centre  and  deuidingthe  one  the  other ?  and 
--  let  the  fame  le  A  C  and  E  ID,  "Which  let  deuide  the  one  the  other  in  ths 
poynt  E.  T hen  I  fay  that  they  deuide  not  eche 
the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  partes ,  For  if 
ithepofiible  let  them  deuide  eche  the  one  the 
other  into  two  equall  partes, fo  that  let  AE  be 
equall  lento  E  €,<&•  E  E  Wnto  E  ID.  And  take 
the  centre  of  the  circle  AECD  ,  "Which  let 
be  F .  And  (by  the  firfi  petition  )  draw  a  line 
from  F  to  E  .Flow for  afinuch  as  a  certaine 
right  line  EE  pafiing  by  the  centre  deuideth 
an  other  line  A  C  not  pafiing  hy  the  centre  into 
two  equall  partes, it  maketh  "where  the  deuifi* 
on  is  right  angles  (by  the  Z*  of  the  third  ) .  VVherfore  the  angle  EE  A  is  a  right 
angle.  Againe for  afinucb  as  the  right  line  F E, pafiing  by  the  centre  j  deuideth 
the  right  line  E  D  not  pafiingby  the  centre  into  two  equall  partes  ,therefore(by 
the fame  fit  maketh  "where y  deuifion  is  right  angles.  Wherfore  the  angle  EE  E 
is  aright  angle.  And  it  is proued  that  the  angle  FE  A  is  a  right  angle.  VVher- 
fore( by  the  4  ♦  petition)  the  angle  F  E  A  is  equall  lento  the  angle  F E  E, namely 
the  lejfe  angle  lento  the  greater :  "Which  is  impofiible .  Wherefore  the  right  lines 
A  C  andED  deuide  not  eche  one  the  other  into  two  equall  partes.  Iftherforem 
a  circle  two  right  lines  not  pafiing  by  the  centre,  deuide  the  one  the  other  ,  they 

fhaft 


ofSttclides  Elementes. 


Fol.%5. 


JhaUnot  deuide  eche  one  the  other  into  two  equall partes :  'which  ~tyas  required  2ft 
he demon f  rated. 

In  this  Propofition  are  two  cafes.For  the  lines  cutting  the  one  the  other,do  ey-  yw0  Caj~es  -tn 
ther,neyther  of  them  paffe  by  the  centre, or  the  one  of  them  doth  paffe  by  the  cen-  tins  Propo- 
trc,&  the  other  not.The  firft  is  declared  by  the  author.The  fecond  is  thus  proued,  fttm. 


Suppofe  that  in  the  circle  tA  BCD  the  line 
B  CD  paffing  by  the  centre  doc  cut  the  line  tA  C 
not  palling  by  thecentre.Thenl  fay  that  the  lines 
C  and  B  D  do  not  dcuidc  the  one  the  other  in¬ 
to  two  equall  partes « For  by  the  former  Propor¬ 
tion  the  line  B  D  paffing  by  the  centre  and  deui- 
ding  the  line  aA  C  into  two  equall  partes,  it  lhall 
alfo  deuide  it  perpendicularly.And  for  afmuch  as 
the  line  A  C  deuideth  the  line  B  D  into  two  equall 
partes  &  right  angled  wife:therfore  by  the  Correb 
lary  of  the  firft  of  thys  booke,the  line  *A  C  palfeth 
by  the  centre  of  the  circle  :  which  is  cotrarytothe 
fuppofitiom  Wherfore  the  lines  eA  C  and  B  D  do 
not  deuide  the  one  the  other  into  two  equal! 
partes  :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


ConflmBton 
for  thepmid 
safe, 

•  DemnUrfr 
Sion. 


5-fc>T he  4.0  Theorem:  The  5.  Tropofitioru 


If  two  circles  cut  the  one  the  other Jthey  heme  not  one  and  the 
fame  centre . 


\Vppofe  that  thefe  two  circles 
fBCj  and  CFG  do  cut  the 
1  one  the  other  in  the  poyntes  C 
and  <B .  Then  I  fay  that  they  haue  not 
one  is*  the fame  centre. For  if  it  be  pofii* 
hie  let  E  be  centre  to  them  both.Andfby 
the firf  petition )  draw  a  line  from  E  to 
C .  And  draw  an  other  right  line  EFT 
at  aldaduentures.And for  afmuch  as 
poyfit  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  AFC y 
therefore  (  by  the  1 5*  definition  of  the 
firsfthe  line  E  C  is  equall  lento  the  line 

E  F.  yfgaynefor  afmuch  as  the poynt  E  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  C  T>  G,  then# 
forefby  the fame  definition)the  line  EC  is  equall  Imto  the  line  EG.  And  it  is 
proued  that  the  line  E  C  is  equall  lento  the  line  E  F :  therefore  the  line  E  F  alfo 
is  equall  l?nto  the  line  E  Gqnamely  the  lejfe  Imto  the  greater :  lohich  is  impofil + 
ble.  VVberfore  the  poynt  E  is  not  the  centre  of  both  the  circles  A  IB  Cgs*  CFG . 
In  like fort  alfo  may  prone  that  no  other  poynt  is  the  centre  of  both  the  fayd 

circles. 


CehjlrH&ktu 


Demon  ft  ra~ 
tio  leading  to 
mmpojftbi - 
litis  a 

.  Jm* 


9. 


Dmwftra- 
Sion  leading 
to  an  impQ]- 

in 


in  thys  Pro- 
fofithn. 


c  inks.  If  therefore  two  circles  cut  the  one  the  other  5  they  haue  not  one  mid  the 
fame  centre :  ^bicb  "Was  required  to  be proued, 

S^Tbe  j.Theoreme,  The  6,  *Propofitionm 

If  mo  circles  touch  the  one  the  other ,  they  haue  not  one  and 
the  fame  centre, 

'  fppofi  that  thefe  two  circles  A  E  Cyj?  OD  E  do  touch  the  one  the  other 
\in  the  poynt  C.  Then  I fay  that  they  haue  not  one  and  the  fame  centre . 
For  if  it  be  pofiible  let  the  point  F  be  centre  Wnto  them  both.  And  (by  the 
firfi  petition)drdw  aline from  F to  Ciand  ( 

drawe  the  line  FEE  at  all  aduentures . 
j. fhdfor  afmuch  as  the  poynt  F  is  the  ten* 
tre  of  the  circle  A  E  C  pther for e(by  the  I 
definition  of  the firH)the  line  F C is  equal! 

Ipnto  the  line  FE.  (Agayne  for  afmuch  as 
the  poynt  F  is  the  centre  of y  circle  C  IDE f 
therefore  (by  the fame  definition)  the  line 
FC  is  equally  nto  the  line  FE .  And  it  is 
proved jhat  the  line  F  C  is  e quail  Imto  the 
line  F  E, "Wherefore  the  line  FE  alfo  is  e * 
quail  lento  the  line  F E}  namely  the  lejfa 
yntoy  greater:~which  is  impofiible.  When 

fore  the  poynt  F  is  not  the  centre  of  both  the  circles  AEC  and  Cfb  E .  In  like 
fort  alfo  may  ive  prone  that  no  other  poynt  is  the  centre  of  both  the fay d  circles. 
If  therefore  two  circles  touch  the  one  the  other:  they  haue  not  one  and  the  fame 
centre:  "Which  "Was  required  to  be  demonft rated. 


In  thys  Propofition  are  two  cafes  :  for  the  circles 
touchyng  the  one  the  other,  may  touch  eyther  within  or 
without » If  they  touch  the  one  the  other  within,  then  is  it 
by  the  former  demonftrationmanifeft,  that  they haue  not 
both  one  and  the  felfe  fame  centre.  It  is  alfo  manifeftif  A 
they  touch  the  one  the  other  without :  for  that  euery  cen~ 
tre  is  in  th  e  middeft  of  hys  circle.  ; 


.  ,  .  1  j  .  .•  •  r  .... 

i-^T'he6.  Theoremc*  The  yfPropofition. 


If  in  the  diameter  of  a  ci 


many  poynt. 


is  not 
the 


ofSucIides  Blementes* *  FoLSd* 

the  centre  of  the  circle,  andfromthat  foynt  he  drawen  ynto 
the  circumference  certaine  right  lines :  the  greate&of thefe 
lines (hall  he  that  line  wherein-  is  the  centre ,  and  tm  wff 
fhad  he  the refidue  of  the fame  line  •And  of  alltbe other  form, 
that  whkh  is  nigher  to  the  line  which pajjeth by  theeqntrejis 
greater  then  that  which  is  more  distant.  Andfromthat  point 
can  fall  within  the  circle  o^eehfdefthekMi  lineoneljtwo 


Vppoflybat  time  be  a  circle  JfB-  C®-:.  mdJe&tfeidiameter  thereof 
ke  JJD .  'And  take  in  it  awyjpoynt  hejides$et \  centre,  of  the.  circle,  ymd 
let  the  fame  he  K  And  let  thexentre  of  the,  circfifi by  tj?e>  i.  *  off  third ) 
he  the poynt  &  jfndfirom  the poynt  E  let ;  theyg  he.  draw w  lento the 
circumference  yfF  C  L D  thefe  right 
the  line  Fyfis  thegreatefl :  and  the 
FID  is  the  left .  And  of  the  other  lines, 
the  line  F  F  is  greater  then  the  line  F 
and  the  line  F  C  is  greater  then  the  line 
F  G .  (Drawe  (by  the firfl  petitionfhefe. 
right  lines  F  Efi E}  and  G  E.  jTnd  fo 
afmuch  as(  by  the  2o»  of the  firfl  fin 
ry  triangle  two  fides  are  greater  then 
the  third  therefore)  lines  E  $  and  E  F 
are  greater  then  the  refidue  ,  namely 
then, the  line  F  F.  Fut  the  line  AE  is  e* 


qihlllmto  the  line  FE(bythe  i$*defi* 

nitionof 'the firftfiWherefore the  lines  BE  and  E  Fare -equal!  lento  the  line 

*AF.  Wherefore  the  line  ^AF  is  greater  then  then  the  line  FF,  Agayne  for 
afmuch  as  the  line  F  E  is  equal!  pntoC  E  (by  the  15.  definition  of  thefirft)and 
the  line  FE  is  common  Imto  them  both ^therefore  thefe  two  lines  FEand  EF 
are  equalhmto  thefe  two  C  E  and  EF.  Fut  the  angle  FEF  is  greater  then  the 
angle  CEF.  Wherefore  ( by  the  2  4..ofthe firfl)  the  bafe  F  F  is  greater  then 
the  bafe  CF :  and  by  the  fame  reafon  the  line  CF  is  greater  then  the  line  FG. 
Agayne for  afmuch  as  the  lines  G  F and  F  E  are  greater  then  the  line  EG  (by 
the  zo.of the firfl ) .  Fut(  hy  the  15. definition  of  the firftfihe  line  E  G  is  equal! 
Ipnto  the  line  E  D :  Wherefore  the  lines  G  F  and  F  E  are  greater  then  the  line 
E  Djtake  away  E  Fytybicb  is  comon  to  the  bothptoherforey  refidue  G  F  isgrea * 
ter  then  the  refidue  FD ;  Wherefore  the  line  F  A  is  the greatest }and  the  line 
FD  is  the  lefl3and  the  line  FF  is  greater  then  the  line  FC,  and  the  lineFC 


ConflmBim* 


The  firfl  p*rt 
of  this  Props* 
fitlOHo 

Demonflrt* 

thfSo 


Second  part. 


Third  part .  h  greater  then  the  line  F  G .  Flow  alfo  I fay  that  from  the  poynt  F  there  can  he 

drawen  onely  two  equall  right  lines  into  the  circle  jfBCD  onechefide  of  the 
leaf  line  gamely  F  ID .  For  (by  the  2% .  of the firfl)  lopon  the  right  line geuen. 
B  F  and  to  the  poynt  in  it, namely  E,  make  "onto  the  angle  G  E  F  an  equall  an * 
gle  FE  H:  and(by  the firft  petition)draw  a  line  from  F  to  H.  Flow forafmuch 
as  (by  the  15.  definition  of the  firft )  the  line  E  G  is  equall  Tmto  the  line  E  H, 
and:  the  line  EF  is  common  Wnto  them  both,  therefore  thefe  two  lines  GE  and 
EF  areequalhmto  the fe  two  lines  HE  and  E  F,  and  (by  conftruclion)  the 
angle  G  E  F  is  equall  into  the  angle  HEF .  Wherefore(by  the  4. of y  firft} 
This  demon-  thebafe  FG  is  equall  lonto  the  baj'e  F  H.  I fay  moreouer  that  from  the  poynt 
firmed  by  an  jp  Qm  ye  qrawen  mt0  a'rc/e  no  other  right  line  equall  lento  the  line  F  G  „  For 
dmg  to  an  im-  if  it  pofiible  let  the  line  F  KJbe  equall  lonto  the  UneFG .  And for  afmuch  as  F  If 
geftbiiie.  }s  equall  lonto  F  G .  (But  the  line  F  H  is  equall Imto  the  line  F  G,  therefore  the 
line  F  If  is  equall  lonto  the  line  F H.  Wherfore  the  line  which  is  nigherto  the 
line  which pajfeth  by  the  centre  is  equall  to  that  which  is  farther  of  which  He 
haw  before proued  to  he  impofiible . 
iAn  other  de-  Or  els  it  may  thus  be  demonftrated. 

ofT&tter  bDraw  (  by  the firft  petition )  a  line from 

part  of  the  E  to  If:  and for  afmuch  as(byy  15*  de* 

leadings  find™  °fj firft)y  He  GE  is  equall  lonto 

to  an  mpofii-  J  line  &  K.> dn^ doe  fine  F  Eis  common 
frilitit.  to  them  botb}and  the  bafe  G  F  is  equaU 
lonto  the  bafe  Elf,  therefore  (by  the  S. 
of the firft)  the  angle  GEE  is  equaU  to 
the  angle  IfEF.  But  the  angle  GEF 
is  equall  to  the  angle  HEF .  Where* 
fore  (by  the  firft  common  fentence)  the 
angle  HEF  is  equall  to  the  angle  IfE  F  the  lejfe  lonto  the  greater :  which  h 
impofiible .  Wherefore  from  the  poynt  F  there  can  he  drawen  into  the  circle  m 
other  right  line  equall  lonto  the  line  G  F.  Wherefore  hut  one  onely .  If  therefore 
in  the  diameter  of a  circle  be  taken  any  poynt, which  is  not  the  centre  of the  cir * 
demand from  that  poynt  he  drawen  Imto  the  circumference  certaine  right  lines : 
the greateft  of  thofe  right  lines  Jhall  be  that  wherein  is  the  centre :  and  the  leaft 
jhallbetherefidue .  jindof  all  the  other  lines , that  which  is  nigherto  the  line 
which  pajfeth  by  the  centre  is  greater  then  that  which  is  more  dift ant.  And  from 
that  poynt  can  fall  within  the  circle  on  ech fide  of the  leaft  line  onely  two  equaU 
right  lines :  which  Was  required  to  be  proued. \ 


*4.  CoroHary* 


fj  H  Corollary, 

Hereby  ir  is  manifeft,  that  two  right  lines  being  drawen  fro  any  one  poynt  of 
the  diameteryJhe  one  of  one  fide,and  the  other  of  the  other  fide,if with  the  diame¬ 
ter  they  make  equall  anglcs,thc  fayd  two  right  lines  are  equal!.  As  in  thys  place 
are  the  two  lines  F  G  and  FH. 

fTh 


ofSuclides  Elementes .  FoL  3  Jo 

y&T'he  7 .  FTheoremc.  7  he  S.Tropoftion . 

Ifwithouta  circle  be  takpn  any poynt, and  from  thatpOynt  be 
drawn  into  the  circle  vnto  the  circumference  certayne  right 
lines  ,of which  let  one  be  drawn  by  the  centre  and  let  the  re fl 
be  drawn  at  M  adventures :  thegreatejl  ofthofe  lines  which 
fall  in  the  concauitie  or  hollownes  of  the  circumference  of  the 
circled s  that  which  paffeth  by  the  centre :  and  of  all  the  other 
lines  that  line  which  is  nigher  to  the  line  which  pajfeth  by  the 
centre  is  greater  then  that  which  is  more  diflantfBut  ofthofe 
right  lines  which  end  in  the  conuexe  part  of  the  circumfe¬ 
rence ,th  at  is  the  leaf  which  is  drawen  from  thepoynt  to  the 
diameter:  and  of  the  other  lines  that  which  is  nigher  to  the 
leafisalwaies  leffe  then  thatwhich  is  more  dif ant.  And  from 
th at poynt  can  be  drawen  vnto  the  circumference  on  ech fide 
of  the  leaf  onely  two  equall  right  lines . 


9 


FfMd  Fppofe y  t&e  circle geuen  be  A’B Cx 
without?  circle  AS  C,  take  the 
■  ^d^point  ID :  and froy fame  point  draw 
certain  right  lines  intoy  circle  ynto  the  cir* 
cumference ,  zs  let  the  be  D  A ,D  E,D F, 

<Zsr  D  C:zsr  lety  line  D  A  paffe  byy  centre. 

T  hen  I  fay,  ofy  right  lines  H vhich  fall  in  the 
concauitie  ofy  circumference  A  E  FCy  is, 
loithiny  circle y greatef  isy  Svhich  paffeth 
by  y  centre, that  is,  D  [A.  And  of  thofe  lines 
vhich  fall  ypony  conuex part  ofy  circumfe* 
rencefj)  lef  is  y  iohich  is  drawen  froy  point 
D  lontoy  end  ofy  diameter  yl  G.  And  of  the 
right  lines fallmglbin  the  circumferece ,  the 
line  D  E  is  greater  theny  line  D  E,Zy  the 
line  D  F  is  greater  theny  line  D  C.  jind  of 
the  right  lines  t>bicb  end  iny  conuex  part  of 
the  circumference  J  is,  -without}  circle  ,that 
ybich  is  nigher  yntoD  Gy  lef, is  alwayes  leffe  theny  1* hich  is  more  dipt, that 
is, the  line  D  J\  is  leffe  then  the  line  D  E,and  the  line  D  E  is  leffe  then  the  line 
D  H.  T  ake  (  by  thefirfi  of the  third)thc centre  of the  circle  J.B  C,  and  let  the 

Bb.j.  farm 


The  first  part 
of  this  Propo - 
fimu. 


Sfcsnd  part. 


Third  part. 


fame  be  M  :  and ( by  the  firji petition)  drawe  thefe  right  lines'  ME,MT?.JMC, 
MB,  ML  ?and  M If.  find for  afmuch  as  (by  the  15  .definition  of  the  ftrft) 
the  line  MM  is  equall Icyito  the  line  E  M, put  the  line  MD  common  to  them 
both .  Wherefore  the  line  AID  is  eqnall  Imto  the  lines  EM  and  MD .  ‘But 
the  lines  E  M  and  M  D  are  ( by  the  2  o.  of  the ftrft) greater  then  the  line  E  D: 
Wherefore  the  line  MDaljo  is  greater  then  the  line  E  D .  Agaynefor  afmuch 
as  (by  the  definition  of  the  ftrft)  the  line  ME  is  eqnall  lento  the  line  ME, 
put  the  line  MD  common  to  them  both '.Wherefore  the  lines  EM  andMD 
are  eqnall  to  the  lines  FMandM  D,and  the  angle  E  MD  is  greater  then  the 
angle/PM  D :  Wherefore  (by  the  19*  of the  firji)  the  bafie  E  D  is  greater  then 
the  bafie  FD  .In  like jort  alfio  may  Ice  prone  that  the  line  ED  is  greater  then 
the  line  C  D .  Wherefore  the  line  D  A  is  thegreateft,and  the  line  D  E  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  line  D  Fj  and  the  line  D  F  isg, 

jfnd  for  afmuch  as  (  hy  the  20.  of  the 
firji)  the  lines  MJf  and  lfjD  are  greater 
then  the  line  M  D .  ‘But  (by  the  i^.defini* 
tion  of the  firji)  the  line  M  G  is  equal!  J>n* 
to  the  line  M  If  .Wherefore  the  ref  due 
KJD  is greater  theny  refidue  G  D.VVher* 
fore  the  line  G  D  is  lefife  then  the  line  KJD. 

.Andjor  afmuch  as  from  the  endes  of one  of 
the fides  of  the  triangle  MED ,  namely, 

M  D  are  drawen  two  right  lines  M  If  and 
KJD  meeting  within  the  triangle ,ther fore 
(hy  the  21.  of  the  firji)  the  lines  M  If  and 
KJD  are  lefife  then  the  lines  ML  if  ED, 
of  mhich  the  line  M If  is  equal!  Imto  the 
line  M  E  .  Wherefore  the  refidue  D  If 
is  lefife  then  therejidue  D  E  .  In  like  jort 
alfio  may  me proue  that  the  line  D  E  is  lefife 
then  the  line  D  El .  Wherefore  the  line 
D  G  is  the  left,  and  the  line  D  If  is  lefife  then  the  line  D  L,  and  the  line  D  E 
is  lefife  then  the  line  DH. 

Now  alfio  I Jay  that  from  the  pqyntlp  can  be  drawen  Tnto  the  circumference 
6n  eche  fide  of  DG  the  leaft  onely  two  equal!  right  lines .  Vpon  the  right  line 
MD,  andlmto  the  poynt  in  it  M make  (by  the  2%:  of the  fir  ft)  lento  the  an* 
gle  KJMD  an  equal!  angle  DMfi .  And  (by  the  ftrft petition)  drawe  a  line 
from  D  toB.  Jbnd  for  afmuch  as  (  by  the  l^definition  ofthefirU  )  the  lint 
M  B  is  equall  lento  the  line  M- If  put  the  line  MD  common  to  the  both,mher* 
foye  thefe  two  lines  M  If  and  M D  are  equall  to  thej'e  two  lines  B  M andMD 
the  one  to  the  other,  and  the  angle  LfM  D  is  (  hy  the  2\,  of  the ftrft)  equal!  to 
the  angle  B  MD:  IWherefore  (  by  the  4.*ofthefirU  )the  baft  D  If  is  equall 


FolM. 


.  to  the  hafe  D  3 . 

ISLow  I  fay  that  from  the poynt  D  on 
that  fide  that  the  line  ID  3  is,  can  not  he 
drawen  Imto  the  circumference  any  other 
line  hefides  D  3  equall  lento  the  right  line 
DAfePor  fit  he  pofitble  let  there  he  drawen 
an  other  line  hefides  D  tB, and  let  the  fame 
be  D  N.  y(nd for  afinuch  as  the  line  D  If 
is  equall Imto  the  line D  N.  But  lento  the 
line  D  Jf  is  equall  the  line  D3.Therfore 
( hy  the  fir  ft  common  fentence)the  line  D  3 
is  equall  lento  the  line  DK.  Wherefore 
that  ‘ft Inch  is  Higher  lento  ID  G  the  least, is 
equall  toy  "Which  is  moredifiant:  Which 
-We  haue  before proued  to  he  impofiihle. 

Or  it  may  thus  he  demonstrated »  Draw 
(hy  the  firfl  petition  )  a  line  from  M  to  'N.- 
And  for  afinuch  as  (hy  the  15*  definition  of 
thefirfi)the  line  IfiM  is  equall  lento  the 
line  MN,and  the  line  M D  is  common  to  them  both .  And  the  hafe  JfD  is  c* 
quail  to  the  hafe  D  IS!  (hyfuppofition  )  therefore(hy  the  ft  *  ofthefirfi )  the  an* 
gle  KfKFD  is  equal!  to  the  angle  DMpZ  ,3ut  the  angle  KfiAD  is  equall  to 
the  angle  3MD.  JVberfore  the  angle  3  M  D  is  equallto  the  angle  N  M W, 
the  lejje  lento  the  greater:  -which  is  impofiihle :  Wherefore  from  the  poynt  D  can 
not  he  drawen  lento  the  circumference  A3  C  on  echefide  of  DO  the  left,  more 
then  two  equall  right  lines .  If  there  fore  without  a  circle  be  taken  any  poynt  and 
from  that  poynt  he  drawen  into  the  circle  lento  the  circumference  certaine  right 
lines, of -which' let  one  be  drawen  by  the  centre , and  let  the  resihe  drawen  at  all 
aduenturc-s : the greatefi  of  thofe  right  lines -which fall  my  concauitie  or  hollow * 
nes  of  the  circumference  of  the  circle  is  thatyhichpafiethby  the  centre .  Jhdof 
all  the  Other  lines , that  line  -which  is  nigber  to  the  line  -which  pafieth  hy  the  cen ! 
ire, is  greater  then  that  -which  is  more  dittant.3ut  of thofe  light  lines  ' which  end 
in  the  conuexe part  of  the  circumference ,  that  !me  is  the  Mt  -which  is  drawen 
from  the  poynt  to  the  dimetient :  and  of  the  other  lines  that  -which  is  nighef'tb 
the  leaf  is dlwayes  leffe  then  thatyhicl:  is:  moredifiant .  ^And from  that  poynt 
Can  be  drawen  Imto  the  circumference  on  echfidtof  thelefi  only  two  equall  right 
lines :  -which  -Was  required  to  hefrbuedl  y  :  r 

A"., ’  \  o*.  KOiVa'.u  ;  A/  'A  \ck.v;  . \  Ax~’1  '  v; 


Thys  Proportion  is  called  commonly  in  oldbookes  amongeft  the  barbarous, 
C/udaPaupms,,  that is,  tfre  Peacocks  taile, 

\j  1  .y  i,.  -  .  i,  \  J  -  >  'i  v  i  i  *  A  v  ■  *\  ■‘•a  \  •  iJf  ■  ;  -■  /  '  ’  '  * 


IS  vv. 


wjtmm. 

i  ■  "  -  TA  yyyr  -  <y  ,  t  ■ -y , 

Hereby  it  is  mani£efl>that  the  right  lineSjWhich  being  drawen  from  the  poynt 


Bb.ij. 


geuen 


This  is  demo* 

prated  hy  an 
argument  (en¬ 
ding  to  an  &b-' 
’  fnrdity. 


An  other  de- 
monUratton 
of  the  latter 
part  Reading 
alfo  to  an  im- 
pofsibiiity» 


This  Propon¬ 
ents  cemmely 
called  CatuU 
i*ttm>nssa 


Confiructioti. 

TXerwnftrtr 

t(on. 


K' 


gcuen  without  the  circle,  and  fall  within  the  circlc,are  equally  aidant  from  the 
lead, or  from  the  greateft  (which  is  drawen  by  die  cehtre)  are  equal!  the  one  to 
the  other :  but  contrarywyfe  if  they  be  vncqualiy  diftant,whcthcr  they  lightvpon 
rhe  concauc  or  conuexe  circumference  of  the  circlc,they  are  vnequalh  s 

y&The  ZfTheorme.  clhe  yfPropofitm.  f 

If  within  a  circle  he  talpen  a  poynt ,  and  from  that  poynt  he 
drawen  lemto  the  circumference  rrioe  then  two  e quail  right 
linesithepoynttal^en  is  the  centre  of  the  circle. 

I  Eppofe  t hat  the  circle  be  A  IB  C,  and  loithin  It  let  there  be  taken  the 
poynt  ID.  And  from  ID  let  there  be  draieen  lento  the  circumference 
ABC  moe  then  two  equal!  rift  lines ,  that  is,  D  A,D  B,  andD  C 
T  hen  I  fay  that  the  poynt  D  is  the  centre  of the  circle  ABC \  Dram 
( by  the  firfl  petition  )  thefe  right  lines 
JB  and  BC :  and (  by  the  io»  of  the 
frfl  fdeuide  the  into  two  equall partes 
m  the  poyntes  E  and  F:  namely,  the 
line  4  B  in  the  poynt  E,  and  the  line 
B.C  in  the  poynt  F ,  And  drqpy  lines  y 
E  D  apd  F  Dy  and  (by  the  fccond pe* 
tition)extendthe  lines  E  D  and  FD 
(}U  eche  Jide  to  the  poyntes  Jf,  G,and 
fif .  A  nd for  afmnch  as  the  line  AE 
as.  equal!  lento,  the  line  E  B,and  the  line 
E  D  is  common  to  them  both, ,  there * 
fore  thefe  two  fdes  A  E  and  %D are  equal!  tynto  thefe  two  J 
B  D :  and.(  byfuppoftion )  the  bafe  D  jf  is  equal!  to  the  bafe  D  B .  Wherfon 
(by  the  8  .  of  thefirft)  the  angle  A  ED  is  equal!  to  the  angle  B  ED  Wherfore 
eyther  of  thefe  anglepji  E  D  aiid,  B  E  D  is  4  fight  angle.  Wherefore  theftiig 
G  Jfjleuidethy  line  A  B  into  two  equall  partes  andmaketh  right  angles.  And 
for  .afmuch  as,  if  in  'a  circle aright  lipe  denude  an  other  right  line  into  two  equaJl 
parte?  in  fuel  fort  Eqtitniafjyqfrftafes^f y  line  that  dcuideth  isth 
cenjpe  ft  he  circlfby  the  Coirolfy  of  ihefirfi  oft  he  third) ,  T  her  fore  ( by  the 
fame  Corr  diary)  _m  the  lino  G 

fame  reafon)maysxe prone  that  in  y  line  HE  is  the. Centre  of  the  circle  A  BC, 
and  the  right  lines  G  Jf,  and  FI  E  bane  no  other  poynt  common  to  them  (oth 
hejides  the poynt  D:  Whereforedhe  poyfit  D  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  A  BC. 
Jf  therefore  within  a  circle  be  taken  a  poynt , and  from  that  point  bedfdweii 
th  e  circumference  more  then  two  equal)  right  hjties,  the  poynt  taken  is  the  centre 
of  the  circle:  Svhicblvas reauiredto.be proued. 

'  ■  -  '  ••  tv  •-••••  4  ■-  *  - ,  *‘J  ‘  '  /’  *•  *  "  **J®- 

'  fjn 

‘httni  -x-atrk  1  7/ 


■ 

c 


A  a. 

.  3V.\  0. 

.  vh 


E:'.  S 


I 


ides 


.rt.oa 


to  an  impofii 
bilitk*  * 


FoL  8p. 

ft  An  other  demonstration. 

;  ■  S  ■  G\  ifcjk  fdG  1  .  k  0  k  k  -••• ,  ,v:  r--:dkpff\ 

y‘  'E'ei.thexehe  taken ■^itUn-^^k(^:A.^€^he  fojnt  D.Anifrom.  the poynt  jn  otforje, 
fDlet-thwe^Mdraw'eniyi^rf^&rcmfinxtckfndre  then  two  equally tgbt  Cmesy  mnlimion 
namely }  DA,DB}  and  2)  t.Then  I  fay  thattbe  poynt  ID.  is  the  centre  of  the: 
circle .  For  if  not ,  then  if  it  be pofible 
let  the  point  E  be  the  centre  rand  draw 
a  line  from  Dio  Eyand  extend  D  E  to 
the  poyntes  F  and  G .  Wherefore  the 
line  F  G  is  the  diameter  of  the  circle 
A  EC.  And  for  afmuch  as  in  F  G  the 
diameter  of  the  circle  AFC  is  taken 
a  poynt ?  namely  Dy  1 vhicb  is  not  the 
centre  of  that  circle ,  therefore  ( hy  the 
7 .  of  the  third)  the  lintDG  is ygrea 


ohsVA  TWAO 

teffy  and  the  line  D  C'is  greater  then  (y,  . 

tea  then  the  line  D  A.  ‘But  the  lines  D  CfD  Bfb  A^are  alfo  e quail  ( byfuppofi* 
tion) :  which  is  impofihle .  Wherefore  the  poynt  E  is  not  the  centre  of  the  circle 
ABC.  And  in  likefortmhyWe  prone  that  mother  poynt  befides  D.  Wherefore 

the  poyrtt  D  is  the  centre  of the  circle  ABC:  “Which  Was  required  to  be  troued, 

-x:  ftjfcca jttivvl  5m»s  tHima  J  1  \  \pfipc 

wU'WA 


.  WThe9M 

YUOrtu  .  . .  dn  <&m 


'WV* 


e  io. 

n  ,  ■  •" 

V:>  ::rav. 


option . 


s»'  ■  i 

V‘  V;.,  E'E 


■  k 
■s\  RTOV' 


Id  .  j  k 


A  cm  le  cutteth  not  a  circle  in  moepointes  then  two* 

*Vj  )  tv  i'.V  '-.c  •>  V  . 

^  r  .  i  «.  f\ ,  ’  •  >  t  i .  .  •  1  .’i  ’  iff'1  y  rt,  ■  -  \ 

Or  if  it  le poflible  let  the  circle  A  BC  cut  the  circle  D  B  F.  in  mopohites 
“""qLtben  two  float  is  pi  BfGJ-dyW  R,  And  drawe  lines fro B to  & ?and from  tion  lead in 
M  B  to  rI.Ana(byy  io  .of the firffeuide  either  of  the  lines  BG&B  El 
into  two  equaU partes pi) pointes  '  .......  j 

Jfand  L.  And  by  then*  of  the 
fir  ft) from  the  poynt  Ifraifelop 
yntoy  line  B II  a  perpendicular 
line  KjC>  and  hkewife  from  the 
poynt  E  raife  lop  yntoy  line  B  G 
aperpendi&dqr  line  hlf  and . 
extend  the  line  L  jf  to  the  poynt 
A  y  and  EFIM  to  the  poyntes 
IX  and  E .. And  for  qfitmch  qs:in 
the  circle' k/f  BC  3  the  right  line ' 

A  C  deuideth  the  right  line  B  IE 
rfei 


/srsv.-  (hj 

r 

s 

A'V'  ,-V 

'L 

W  ... 

v\,  • 

\ 

\  ^  /x 

•  •  •  l,  .  1  o 

c 

jrEjfixC 

/  1 
/ 

.  :  ...,\ 


d'd  maketh  'rght  angles  jherfore( by  the  3 .  of  the  third ) 

Bb.itj.  in  the 


An  other de- 
ftion/l  ration 
of  the  fume 
Heading  alfo 
to  an  mpofti- 
kililie. 


m  the  line  AC  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC.  Agaynefor  afmuch  as  in  the 
jeife  fame  circle  A  BC  the  right  line  NXy  that  is  Me  line  ME  deuideth  the 
right  line  B  G  into  two  equall paries  andmaketh  right  angles ytherefore( Wjfthe 
third of  the  third)  in  the  line  NX  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  ABC.  And  it  k 
proued  that  it  is  alfo  in  the  line  , 

X C  ,  'And  thefe  two  right  lines 
A  C  and  N  X  meete  together  in 
no  other poynt  befides  0.  Where* 
fore  the  pqynt  0  is  the  centre  of 
the  circle  ABC .  And  in  like  fort 
may  1 tie  prone  that  the poynt  0  is 
the  centre  of  the  circle  S)EF: 

Wherefore  the  two  circles  ABC 
and  (D  EF  deuiding  the  one  the 
other  haue  one  and  the  fame  cen * 
tre :  yphiclf  hy  the  5  •  of  the  third) 
is  impofible .  A  circle  therfore  cutteth  not  a  circle  in  moepoyntes  then  two^hich 
t>as required  to be  proued. 

'  '  '  '  1  ■  '  '  m 


if  An  other  detnonftration  to  proue  the  fame. 


S  uppofe  that  the  circle  ABC  do  cut  the  circle  (DGF  in  mopoyntes  then 
that  is  jn  Bf}f\and  H,  And  ( hy  the firfl  of  the  third)  take  the  centre  of the 
circle  ABC  and  let  the fame  be  the  poynt  if.  And  draw  thefe  right  lines  IffB? 
JfGy  and  ]\F .  Now  for  afmuch  as 
within  the  circle  !DE  F  is  taken  a  cer* 
taine  poynt  and from  that  poynt  are 

d'rawen  ynto  the  circumference  moe  then 
two  equall  right  lines  y  namely ,  KJBy 
i\G  yand  JfF :  therefore  (by  the  9  ♦  of 
the  third)  If  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
ADEF .  And,  the  poynt  If  is  the  centre 
of  the  cirble  ABC.  wherefore  two  cir* 
des  cutting  the  one  the  other  haue  one 
and  the  fame  centre :  "tyhich( by  the  £>  ♦  of 
the  third)  is  impofiible.X circle  therfore 
cutteth  not  a  circle  in  moe  pointer  then  two :  ‘tohich  itas  required  to  hi  demom 
ft  rated. 


5 &T he  IQ.  Theoreme .  The  if  fProftofition* 

If  two  circles  touch  the  one  the  other  inwardly  ,  their  centres 

being 


r-x 


ofEuclides  Elementes.  Fo/.po* 

inggeuen ;  a  right  line  ioyning  together  their  centres  and 
1  will fall  upon  the  touch  of  the  circles. 


Vppofe  thM  jf&C,  and  ASJ-E  do  touch  the  one  the 

other  in  the  poynt  A.  And  (by  the firjl  of the  third)  take  the  centre  of 
^  the  circle  A  £>  C^andlet  the fame  he  F:  and  likpivifey  centre  oft  he  circle 
4fD  Ejand  let  tf  e fame  be  Or-.  Then  l fay  that  aright  line  dnxwen  from  F  to  G 
and.behgprodnccifAill fall  yponthe  poynt  j[.  For  if  not 3  then  fit  he  pofiible 
let  it  fall  as  the  line  F  Q  ID  Fd doth  .  And  dmwthefe  right  lines  A  F}i?  A  G. 
ror  afmnch as  the  lines  A  G  and 


QF  are  (by.the  2:o,  of  thefrsfgrea* 
ter  then  the  line  F  A?  that  is,  then  the 
line  F  H fake  aipay  the  line  GF yehich 
is  common  to  them  both.  Wherefore  the 
ref  due  A  G  is  greater  then  the  ref  due 
G  EL .  Tut  the  dine  T)  G  is  equall  t>nto 
the  line  G A  (by  the  W*  definition  of 
the  fir f),  Wherefore  the  line  G  dp is 
greater  theny  line  G  H:  the  leffe  then 
thegreaterilohich  is  impofiible.  Wher * 
fore  a  right  line  drawen  from  the  poynt 

ftp  fie  poynt  G  and produced fal\eth  not  befides  the  poynt  J,  loUch  is y  point 
wal  rxsl„vhfor'e  itftllethypon  the  touch  ,  If  therefore  two  emits. imch 


quire d  to  beproued. 

'  \\  •  .•*:  r  •  ;  •  q  ’  •  <v  ;  Vv;r;  v.“i  v  g-. :  \  '-j  - ;} 

An  other  demonftration  to  prone  the  (lime. 


Tut  now  let  it fall  as  GF  C  fallethfnd  extendy  line  G  F  Cto  the  poynt  H: 
and  dmwe  thefi  right  lines  J  G  and  A  F.  Arid for  afinuch  as  the  lines  JG  and 
O  F  are  (  by  the  20»  of  the fir fl) greater  then  the  line  A  F.  Tut  the  line  A  F  is 
equall y>nto the  line  CF,  that  is,  ynto  the  line  FH.  Take  away  the  line  FG 
common  to  them  both .  Wherforethe  refidue  A  G  is  greater  then y  refidue  GH 
that  is  fire  line  GJD  is  greater  then  the  line  G  H:the  leffe  greater  then y grea *. 
ter :  lohich  is  impdfiiblel '  1  ft 


Which  thing  may  alfo  be  proued  by  the  7.Propofitibn  of  this  booIce.For  for  afmuch 
as  the  line  H  C  is  the  diameter  of  tnc  circle  A  B  C ,8c  in  it  is  taken  a  poynt  which  is  not 
the  centre, nimely,the  poynt  G,  therefore  the  line  G  A  is  greater  then  the  line  G  H  by 
the  fayd  y.Propofmon .  But  the  line  G  D  is  equall  to  the  line  G  A  (by  the  definition  of 
a  circle)  .Wherefore  the  line  G  D  is  greater  then  the  line  G  H,namely}the  part  greater 

then  the  whole'-:  which  is  irtipoffible.  —  -  ■  -  -  0 


Conjlruftion, 


Demonftra- 
tion  leading 

jiUlitti. 


An  other  de* 
man  ft  ration 
of the  fame 
leading  alfo 
to  an  mpeffla 

Wti'fi 


J  he  fame  4* 
gaine  demon* 
jhated  by  an 
Argument  lea « 
ding  to  an  ab* 
fur d it  it  is. 


XU 


o 


•  .  -.0 


rr  *  r  ''  7  ■  /  -  t  ■  '/  '  V&J  > -v':  | 

If  wo  circles  touch  the  one  the  other  ouwardly^a  righflme 

,  '  .  .  ri'G.W  .K  Av(pO;  A\  kW 

'  \»  V«  C  .  .  '  ‘  .  ^  '  .'y  I  yTi"’  uV 

ig||  VppofewlMjT^fe  tw&Sh'M  A*B  C  and  ft:lDE  do  touch  flkone  the  o* 


And  (by  the  third  of  the  third')  take  the 


Umonjlnh 

tie  leading  to 
or/  tmpojfibi- 
titic . 


the  right  line  F  C  ID  G  doth.  And 
draw  thefe  right  lines  A Fcr  AG. 

„ And  for  cijmuchas  the  poynt  F  is 
the  centre  of  y  circle  JFB  Cyber* 
free  the  line  FA  is  equall  Tmto 
the  line  FC .  Again  e  for  afmuch 
as  the  poynt  G  is  the  centre  of  the/ 
circle  A  iD  E. ,  therefore  the  line 
G  A  is  equall  to  the  line  G  ID.  And 

And  it  is proued  that  the  line  F  A  is  equall  to  the  Me  VC  .  Wherefore  the  Tines 
FAmdAG  dr/equall  lento  'the -lines' F Cand'G"T>f  Wherefore  the  Ipbole  line 


poynt  G  jhall  paffe  by  the  poynt  of  the  touch  yiamefy  }hy  the  poynt  A .  If  there «*' 
fore  two  circles  touch  the  one  the  other  outwardly ,  a  right  line  drawen  by  their 
centres  Jhall  paffe  by  the  touch :  "ft?  Inch  leas  required  to  be  demon f  rated, 

•  w  ^  t  *  .  •  -  ,L  .  _  , 

ff An  other  demorf  ration  after  Telitarius. 


An  other  de - 
monfiration 
after  Feliu- 
pj  its  leading 
at  Jo  to  an  ah- 
jurditie , 


V-\ 


\  \  iy 


Ka 


r-y 


Suppofe  that  the  two  circles  ^4  B  C  and  T>EF  do  touch  the  one  the  other  out* 
watdly  in  the  poynt  fsfi  And  let  G  be  the  centre  of  the  circle  tABC :  From  wbic-h 
p.oynr  produce  by  the  touch  of  the  circles  the  line  G’^tothc  poynt  F  of  the  circum¬ 
ference  DEE .  Which  for  afmuch  as  ir.paftetjinot  by  the  centre  of  the  circle  2>  Efr 
(as  the  aduerfary  affirmeth  )  draw  , 
from  the  fame  centre  G  an  other  , 
right  line  G  A',  which  - if  itbepoffi*  ) 
ble  let  paffe  by  the  centre  of  the  cir¬ 
cle  D  E  F ,  namely,  by  the  poynt  Hi 
Cutting  the  circumference  tABC  F 
in  the  poynt  B ,  &  the  circuference 
DEE  in  the  poynt  D  y&let  theop- 
pofite  poynt  therof  be  in  the  'point 
X.  And  for  afmuch  as  fro  the  poynt 
Cj  taken  without  the  circle  D  E  F  is 
drawen  the  line  G  K  paffing  by  the  centre  M  and  fro  the  fame  poynt  is’drawen  alfo  an 

©thee. 


/ 

i  ' 

AaT 

0, 


mentes , 


FoL9  T, 


other  line  not  patting  by  the  centre,namely, the  line  G  F .  Therefore  (by  the  § .  of  thvs 
bookc)  the  outward  part  G'T>  of  the  lipe  G  K  (hall  bejeffethen  the  outward  part  G  A 
oftheline  G  F.But  the  line  G  Ais  equal!  to  the  line  G  B .Wherfore  the  line  G  D  islefie 
then  the  line  O' ^namely  ,the  whole  lefll*  then  the  part ;  which  is  abfurde. 

y&The  12.  T bcoreme.  The  13.  Tropofition* 

A  circle  can  not  touch  another  circle  in  mce  foyntes  then 
one  whether  they  touch  within  or  without. 

Or  if  it  be pofsible  Jet  the  circle  ABC  D  touchy  circle  EB  FD 
firfi  inwardly  in  moc poyntes  then  one  ghat  is  fin  D  an  dB. Trike 
I  (by  the  firft  of  the  third )the  centre  of  the  circle  A(B  C  Dyand  let 
1  the  fame  bey  point  G;.and  hkewjfej  centre  of  the  circle  E'BFtD, 
and  let  the  fame  hey  poynt  H.  Wherefore( by  the  11.  of  the  fame ) 
a  right  lh\e  drawen  from  {he  poynt  G  to  the* poynt  IT and, produced pttillf  ill  yp- 
on  the  poyntes  B  and  D  :■  let  it  jo fall  as  the  line  BG  HD  doth.  And for  ufmuch 
as  the  poynt  G  is  the  centre  of the  circle  ABC  Dgherejore  (by  the  15*  definiti* 
on  of  the  f  rfi)  the  line  B  G  is  e quail  to 
the  line  ID  G ,  Wherfore  the  line  B  G  is 
greater  then  then  the  line  H  D:  Where 
fore  the  line  B  FI  is  much  greater  then, 
the  line  FID  ,  Agrime  for  a f  nuch  as 
the  poynt  FI  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
EBFD ^therefore  (by  the  fame  defini* 
trim)  the  line  BH  is  equal!  to  the  line 
HD :  audit  is  proued  that  it  is  much 
greater  then  it:  yphichis  imjxfiible..  H 
circle  thewfwO  can  not  touch  a  cirelriin 


Of circlet 
Dehicb  touch 
the  one  the 
other  mp$ri~ 

& 


r  a  circle  Pouchyth  a  circle  iri-nioe 
poyntes  then  one. For  if  it  he  pofrible  jet 
thy  circle  A  C  touchy  circle  A  BCD 

outwardly  in  moc  poyntes  theme ,thafz- 
is  jn  A  andC :  And  (by  the firft petition)Arriw  aline  from  the  poynt  \AtqtFT 
poynt C.  Now  for  afmuch  as  in}  circumference  cfeith&(ftkf  ci fries  HBC  ' 

and  A  C  Ff^are  taken  two  poyntes- at  all  adiknturesgAmefryJ^dTjhe^rr 
(by  the fecofijfrtFe third)  a  righstfinetoynihg  together  tfoW p(yhtesjhal(fii- 
^ithin  both  the  circles .  Bui  itfalleth 1 mtlm  the  circle  AB  t.Dj?  Without  the 
circle  AC  KJ  nvhichis  abfurde  ./  Wherefore  a  circle  fhall not  touch  a  circle,  out* 
wardly  in  nioepointes  then  one Arid it  is prouedy  neither  alfbinwardlyyyFereF 
yore  a  circle  orimw&tp&Ghph other  circle  in  moc: poyntes  then  oney  Whether  they 


t)f  arch) 
H>hich  touch 
the  one  the 
other  out- 
fpkrdly. 


touch 


tvucbmthm  or  without:  lohkh  Tx>as  required  to  be  demonflrated. 


\An  other  de¬ 
monstration 
after  Pehta- 
rtas  zr  Fluf - 
fates, of  circles 
Jebicb  toocb 
the  one  the 
ether  out- 
‘&4rdiy» 


Of  circles 
which  tooch 
the onr  the 
other  in¬ 
wardly. 


f  ^Another  demonstration  after 4Pelitarius  and  Fluff ates. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  circles  AB  G  and  AD  G,  which  if  it  be  poffible,iettouc& 
the  one  the  other  outwardly  in  moepoyntes  then  one,  namely,  in  A  and  G.  Let  the 
centre  of  the  circle  AB  G  be  the  poynt  I,  and  let  the  centreof  the  circle  ADG  be  the 
poynt  K.  And  draw  a  right  line  from  the  poynt  I  to  the  poynt  K,  which  (  by  the  12. 
of  thys  booke  )  fhall  pafle  both  by  the 
poynt  A  and  by  the  poynt  G:  which  is 
not  poffible  :  for  then  two  right  lines  . 

Ihould  include  a  fuperfiejes, contrary  to. 
the  laft  common  fentence.  Itmayalfobc 
thus  demonftrated.Draw  a  line  from  the 
centre- 1  to  the  centre  K,  which  fhalipalfe 
by  one  of  the  touches,  as  for  example  by 
the poynt  A.  And  draw  thefe  rigbtlines 
G  K  and  G  I,  and/p  (bail  be  made  a  tri-  . 

'•  <nglc,  Vhofetwo  fides  G  K  and  G I  Hull  not  be 
contrary  to  the  2o.dfth,efirft. 

*  Bi;  brow  if  it  be  poffible, let  the  forefayd  circle  ADG  touch  the  circle  A  B  C  inward- 
lyin’ woe.  poyntesrthen  bne,namelv,in  the  pointes  A  and  G :  and  let  the  centre  ©f  the 
circle  ABG  be  the  poynt  I  ,  as  before  :  and  let 
the  centre  of  the  circle  ADG  be  the  poynt  K,  as 
alfo  before.  And  extend  a  line  from  the  poynt  I 
to  the  poynt  K,  which  lhall  fall  vpon  the  touch 
(by  the  1 1  .of  thys  booke) .  Draw  alfo  thefe  line* 

KG, and  IG  .  Andforafmucha^  theline  KG  is 
cqualltothelineKA(by  the  1 5. definition  of the 
firfl)  adde  the  line  KI  common  to  them  both. 

Wherefore  the  whole  line  AI  isequalltothetwo 
lines  KGandKI:  but  vnto  the  line  A I  is  eq  ual! 
theline  I G  (by  the  definition  pf  a  circle)*Wber~,v 
fore  in  the  triangle  IKG  the  fide  IG  is  not  lefic  ' 
then  the  two  fides  IK  and  KG;  which  is  con¬ 
trary  to  the  20.  of  the  firft. 


The  i j.  Theoreme.  *The  14..  Tropofition. 


vimA  \0 

-Wtw'Alet 

The  fir  ft  part 
of  this  Theo¬ 
rems. 


Conflruftion. 


In  a  circle, fe  quail  right  lines ^eequ^diflatitfiim 
tre.  And  lines  equally  diTtantfrom  tie  centre, 
one  to  the  other.  w.iddv  v' - 

■ .  .  /  \  cb  k  ' 

v  >  J  a 

rffoj'e  that  there  he  a.  circle 
{  C there, he  in  it 
Tvy  drawM :  thefe  equall  right,  fines 
4  ®  ®  ^  hen  lj^that-th^,4t’e[ 

equally  dijiant,  from,  the  centre,  X <tke(hy 


ckf 4$  CdDyOfifUt  thefd^h?yfoyntf[  ~  ^  . 
pint  tk.line^4S<^eaX' ;  ,  T  ,t 


i  e, 


c.  -  "V 


X'l  • 
j  ./ 


|  s\  *.r  W  «-•* 

•  ;  .W  'wi  -Vv 


perfmdicxkr 


ofEuclides  Elemcntcs. 


Fol.p 


Am  ft 


perpendicular  tines  EF  and  EG.  And  ( by  thefuft  petition)  draw  thefe  right 
tines  A  E  and  C  E .  Flow  for  afmuch  asa  ccrtaine  right  tine  E  F  drawen  by  the 
centre  cuttetha  certaine  other  right  tine  A  B  not  drawen  by  the  centre ,  in  fuck 
fort  that  it  make  th  right  angles  ^therefore  (by  the  third  of the  third )  it  deunleth 
it  into  two  equall paries .  Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  equall  to  the  line  FB.Wher * 
fore  the  line  A  B  is  double  to  the  line  AF:  and  by  the fame  reajon  alfo  the  tine 
C T>  is  double  to  the  tine  C  G .  But  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  C D.  Wher * 
fore,  the  line  A  F  is  alfo  equall  to  the  tine  C  G .  And  for  of  nuchas  ( by.  the  1 5  *de* 
fnitwn  of  the firf)  the  line  A  E  is  equall  to  the  line  EC,  therefore  thefquare 
of the  line  E  C  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E .  But  fyhto  the fquare  of the 
tine  A  E,are  equall  (by  the  47-  of thefirft)the fquares  of the  lines  A  F  W  F  E: 
for  the  angle  at  the  poynt  F  is  a  right  angle .  And  (by y  felje  famefto  the  fquare 
of  the  line  E  C  are  equall  the  fquares  of  the  lines  E  G  and  G  C:for  the  angle  at 
the  poynt  G  is  a  right  angle  .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AF  andFE 
are  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  CG  and  G  E:  of  lehicb  the  fquare  of  the 
line  AE  is  equall  to  thefquare  of  the  line 
C  Gtfor  the  line  A  Fisrquall  to  the  line 
C  G  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  third  common 
fentence)  thefquare  remay ning ,  namely f 
the fquare  of  the  tine  F  E,  is  equall  to  the 
fquare  remayning ,  namely,  to  thefquare 
of  the  line  EG  :  Wherefore  the  tine  E  F 
is  equall  to  the  line  E  G .  But  right  lines 
are  fay  d  to  be  equally  difant  fromy  cen* 
trepyhen  perpendicular  lines  drawen  fro 
the  centre  to  thofe  lines,  are  equall  (by  the  4*  definition  of the  third).  Wherfore 
'the  lines  A  B  and  C  D  are  equally  difant  from  the  centre. 

But  nowfuppofe  that  the  right  lines  AB  and  CT)  be  equally  difant  from 
the  centre, that  is, let  the  perpendicular  line  EF  be  equall  to  the  perpendicular 
like  EG.  T  hen  1  fay  that  the  line  A.  B -is  equal!  to  the  line  C  T> .  For  the  fame 
order  of conftruRion  remayningppe  may  in  tike  fort  prone  that  the  line  A  B  is 
double  to  the  line  A  F,  dm that  the  line ChD  is double  to  the  line  C  G.  And  for 
afmuch  as  the  line  AE  is  equall  to  the  line  CE,for  they  are  drawen  fromy  cen= 
tre  to  the  circumference ,tber fore  the fquare  of  the  line.  A  E  is  equall  tof fquare 
of  the  tine  CE.  But  (by  the  47.  of tEffir§lfto  thefquare  of  the  line  AE  are 
equall  the fquares  of the  lines  E  F  and  E  A.  And  (by  the felfe fame)  toy  fquare 
of  the  line  C  E  are  equall  the  fquares  of the.  lines  E  G  and  GC .  Wherfore  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  EF  and  FA  are  equall  tothefquares  of the  lines  EGaml 
G  C.  Ofylpch  thefquare  of  the  tine  EG  irequall  to  thefquare  of  the  line  E  i\ 
for  the  tine  E  F  is  equall  to  the  line  E  G,  Wherefore  (by  the  third  common  feu* 
tence)  the fquare  r ern  ayn  ing, namely, the  fquare  of  the  line.  A  E , is  equall  to  the 
fquare  of the  line  C  G .  Wherefore  the  equall '.into  the  tine  C  G.  But 

'  '  the 


T  :  ‘0  ■  r\> 


JjcmonUra- 

tion. 


Demonstra¬ 
tion . 


Dhefecovd 
part  which  i 
she  Conner je 
of  the  rip » 


■An  other  de- 

monjiration 
c ftbefirft 
part  after 
tampans 


■GsnfirutUofi- 


the  line  AB  is  double  to  the  line  A  F}  and  the  line  C  3)  is  double  to  the  lint 
C  G .  Wherefore  the  line  HB  is  equall  to  the  line  C  3)  .  Wherefore  in  a  circle 
equall  right  l hies  are  equally  diftantfrom  the  centre .  And  lines  equally  dijlant 
from  the  centre ^are  equall  the  one  toy  other  :  h vhkh  ~%>as  required  to  be proued 

iff  An  other  demonstration  for  the frf  part  after  Cam  fane. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  circle  nA  B  D  C, whole  centre  let  be  the  poynt  £ .  And  draw 
in  it  two  equall  lines  A  B  and  CD.  Then  I  fay  that  they  arc  equally  diftant  from  the 
Centre. Draw  from  the  centre  vnto  the  lines  AB 
and  CD,  thefe  perpendicular  lines  E  F  and  E G. 

And(by  the  2 .  part  of  the!  3 .  of  this  booke  Jthc 
line  A  B  (hall  be  equally  deuided  in  the  poynt  F, 
andtheline  CD  lhall  be  equally  deuided  in  the 
poynt  G.  And  draw  thefe  right  lines  EA,EBt 
EC,  and  ED.  And  for  afmuch  as  in  the  triangle 
mAEB  the  two  fides  tA  B  and  AE  arc  equall 
to  the  two  fides  C  D  and  C  E  of  the  triangle 
C  ED,  &  the  bafe  EB  is  equall  to  the  bafe£Z>, 
therefore  (by  the  8.  of  the  firft)  the  angle  at  the 
point  A  (hall  be  equall  to  the  angle  at  the  point 
C .  And  for  afmuch  as  in  the  triangle  A  E  F  the 
two  fides  AE  and  A  F  are  equall  to  the  two 
fides  CE  andC<j  of  the  triangle  CEG,  and  the 
angl  e.E  A  F  is'equall  to  the  angle  CE  G}  therefore  (by  the  4.  ofthe  firft)thc  bafe  is 

equall  to  the  bafe  E  G :  which  for  afmuch  as  they  arc  perpendicular  lines,  therefore  the 
lines  ABSc  CD  are  equally  diftant  fro  thccentre,by  the  4.  definition  of  this  booke, 

h&The  Theoreme.  The  15.  Trofoftion, 

In  a  circle a  the  greatejl  line  is  the  diameter ,  and  of  all  other 
lines  tha  t  line  which  is  nigber  to  the  centre  is  alwajes greater 
\  then  that  line  which  is  more  diftant* 


Vppofe  that  there  be  a  circle 
ABC  3),  and  let  the  diameter 
thereof  be  the  line  yf3>3and  let 
the  centre  thereof  be  the  poynt  E.  And 
ymto  the  diameter  A3)  let  the  Tine  3  C 
be  nigher  then  the  line  F  G .  Then  If  ay 
that  the  line  A3)  is  the greatejl ;  and 
the  line  B  C  is  greater  then  y  line  FG. 
3)  raw  (by  the  1 2 .  of the  frit) from  the 
centre  E  to  the  lines  B  C  and  FG  per* 
pendicular  lines  EH.  and  Elf  .  And 
for  afmuch  as  the  lineB  C  is nigher  lan* 
to  the  centre  then  the  line  F Gptherfore 


of Bmlides  Elemerites . 


Fol.py 


(by  the  4 .  definition  of  the  third )  the  line  E  If  is  greater  then  the  line  E  H. 
find  (by  the  third  of  the  firft ) put  lento  the  line  E  H  ah  equall  line  E  L.  And 
(by  the  u,  of  the firft) from  the  point  L  rdtfelep  lento  the  line  Ebfia  per  pen* 
dicularline  LM:  and  extend  the  line  L  M  to  the  poynt  7A .  And(bg  the  first 
petition )  drata  thefe  right  lines,  E  M,  E  N,  E  F,  and  E  G .  And  for  afinuch  as 
the  line  E  FI  is  equall  to  the  line  EE ,  therefore  ( by  the  14 *of  the  third,  and 
by  the  4  *  definition  of  the  fame )  the  line  ©  C is  equall  to  the  line  M jSl.  Againe 
for  afinuch  as  the  line  A  E  is  equall  to 
the  line  E M,  and  the  line  .EE)  to  the 
line  EM,  therefore  the  line  A  A)  ise* 
quail  to  the  lines  M  E  and  E  El .  lint 
the  lines  M E  andE  !A  are( by  thezc, 
of the  fir  fi) greater  then  the  line  MIA. 

Wherefore  the  line  yf  A)  is  greater  then 
the  line  MTA .  Mad  for  afinuch  as  thefe 
two  lines  M E  and  E lA  are  equal l  to 
thefe  two  lines  F E  and  EG  (by  the 
15,  definition  of  the  firft  ) for  they  are 
dmwenfrom  the  centre  to  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  ,and  the  angle  ME1A  is  greater 
then  the  angle  F EG ,  therefore( by  the 
24.  of  the  firft)  the  bafe  MIA  is  greater  then  thebafe  EG.  Eut  itisproued 
that  the  line  MIA  is  equall  to  the  line  ©  C  :  Wherefore  the  line  ©  Calfo  isgrea* 
ter  then  the  line  F G .  Wherefore  the  diameter  ME)  is  the  greateft  ,and  the  line 
EC  is  greater  then  the  line  EG .  Wherefore  in  a  circle, the greateft  line  is  the 
diameter  ymd  of  dll  the  other  lines, that  line  "which  is  nigher  toy  centre  is  alwaies 
greater  then  that  line  which  is  more  diftant :  which  Was  required  to  be proued. 

tfMn  other  demonfir ation  after  Campane . 

In  the  circle  eABC  I^whofe  centre  let  be  the  poynt  £,  draw  thefe  lin es^BjAC, 
isf'D,FG3'j.nd  HK,  ofwhich  let  the  line  D  be  the  diameter  ofthecircie.Then  I  lay 
thattheline  AD  is  .the  greateft  ofall  the  lines. 

And  the  other  lines  eche  of  the  one  is  fo  much 
greater  then  ech  of  the  other  ,how  much  nigher 
it  is  vnto  the  centre .  loyne  together  the  endes 
of  all  thefe  lines  with  the  centre ,  by  drawing 
thefd  right  lines  E  B,E  C,E  g,E  K,E  £/,and  E F. 

And  ( by  the  20.  of  the  firft )  the  two  fides  E  F 
and  £  G  of  the  triangle  EE  G,  (hall  be  greater 
then  the  third  fide  F  G  .  Andforafmuch  asthe 
fayd  fides  EF  8c  EG  are  equall  to  the  line  AD 
(by  the  definition  ofa  circle)  therefore  the  line 
tAD  is  greater  then  the  line  ££?.  And  by  the 
fame  reafon  it.  is  greater  then  euery  one  of  the 
reft  of  the  lines, if  they  be  put  to  be  bafes  of  tri¬ 
angles  ;  for  that  euery  two  fides  drawen  fro  the 


Oc.j. 


centre 


Demonjlnt* 

lion. 


An  other  de-* 
monftr  ation 
after  Cam - 

1 fane* 


/ 


centre  .are  equal!  to  the  line  t/C  D .  Which  is 
the  firft part ofr* the  Propofition.  Agayne,for af- 
irmch  as  the  two  (ides  EF  and  EG  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  E  F  Gy  are  eqaall  to  the  two  fides  E  H 
and  EK  of  the  triangle  EH  K,  and  the  angle 
F  EG  is  greater  then  the  angle  H E X,therforc 
(by  the  24*ofthe  firft)  thebafe  FG  is  greater 
then  the  bafe  H  K.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may 
it  be  proued,  that  the  line  A  C  is  greater  then 
the  line  A  B .  And  fo  is  manifeft  the  whole  Pro- 
$>ofitidn. 

"  r't-  V  *  * ‘  •  w  . 

<: .  >  •'  s 

...  ...  T.  ,  ...  ,  .  . 

Si /The  15. Theorems.  T'he  \6.Tropofition . 

If from  the  end  ofthe  diameter  of  a  circle  be  dr  often  aright 
line  making  right  angles :  it (hall fall  ftithout  the  circle:  and 
betftene  that  right  line  and  the  circumference  can  not  be 
dr  Often  an  other  right  line :  and  the  angle  ofthe femicvcle  is 
grea  ter  then  any  acute  angle  made  of  right  lines ,but  the  0^ 
ther  angle  is  lejje  then  any  acute  angle  made  of  right  lines. 


The  foft  part 
of thts  Theo- 
reme* 

T>emonftra- 
tv'-n  leading 


Appofe  that  there  he  a  circle  AB  C:  whofie  centre  let  he  the  point  D9 
and  let  the  diameter  therofhe  AB.T hen  I  fayy  a  right  line  drawen 
\  from  the poynt  A,  making  with  the  diameter  A I B  right  angles  fh all 
z  fall  without  the  circle .  For  if it  do  not /hen  if  it  he  pofiihle  9  let  it fall 

Within  the.  circle  as  the  line  A  C  doth,  ; 

and  draw  a  line  from  the  point  D  to  the 
point  C.  „ And  for  afmuch  as  (by  the  ifT* 
definition  of  the firfl)  the  line  DA  is 
to  an  ahfurdi-  equal!  to  the  line  D  C  ?for  they  are 
drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circum * 
ference 3  therefore  the  angle  DAC  is 
equall  to  the  angle  A C  ID.  (But  the  an* 
gle  ID  AC  is  (by  fuppofition)a  right 
angle :  Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  ACID 
is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  the  angles 
D  AC  and  AC  D /re  equall  to  two 
right  angles :  which  (hy  the  17.  of  the 
firft)  is  impofiihle  .  Wherefore  a  right 

line  drawen  from  the  poynt  A  >  making  With  the  diameter  A  B  right  angles 
frail  not  fall  within y  circle.  In  like fort  alfo  may  We  prone /hat  itfalleth  not  ih 


ofSumctes  Elenientes. 


FoL<)-\. 


the  circumference .  Wherefore  itfalleth  ydthout,as  the  line  A  E  doth . 

I fay  alfo,that  hetwene  the  right  line  A  E,  and  the  circumference  AC  By 
can  not  he  drawen  anothcrrlght  line-.  For  f  it  be pofiiblejet  the  line  AF fo  he 
drawen .  And  (by.  the  1-2.  of the  fir ft) from  the  poynt  ID  draw  tinto  the  line  FA 
a  perpendicular  line  D  G .  And  for  afinuch  as  AG  D  is  a  right  angle  ,  but 
DAG  is  leffe  then  a  right angle , therefore  (by  the  19*0/' the firftfihe fide  A  D 
is  greater  then  the  fide  D  G .  'But  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  D  FI,  for 
they  are  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference .  Wherefore  the  line  D  H 
is  greater  then  the  line  D  G:  namely, the  leffe  greater  then  the  greater  :  ivhich, 
is  impofiible .  wherefore  hetwene  the  right  line  AF.  and  the  circumference 
ACB,  can  not  be  drawen  an  other  right  line. 

1  fay  moreouer ,  that  the  angle  of 
the femicircle  contayyied  "tindery  right 
line  A  B  and  the  circuference  C  HA, 
is  greater  then  any  acute  angle  made  of 
right  lines .  And  the  angle  remay ning 
cotayned  "tindery  circumference  CHA 
and  the  right  line  A  E,is  leffe  then  any 
acute  angle  made  of  right  lines .  For  if 
there  be  any  angle  made  of  right  lines 
greater  then  that  angle  Hnchiscon* 
tayned  "tinder  the -right  line  BA  and 
the  circumference  C  HA,  or  leffe  then 
that  K>])ich  is  contayned  "under  the  cir * 
cumference  CHA  and  the  right  line 
A  ft, then  bettime  the  circumference  CHA  and  the  right  line  A  E, there /hall 
fall  a  right  line ,  "tihich  maketh  the  angle  contayned  Under  the  right  lines, grea* 
ter  then  that  angle  "tihich  is  contayned  "tinder  the  right  line  BA  and  the  cir * 
cumference  C II  A,  and  leffe  then  the  angle  "tihich  is  contayned  Under  the  cir * 
cumference,  C  H  A  and  the  right  line  A  E.  But  there  canfallno  fuch  line,  as 
it  hath  before  bene  proued.  Wherfore  no  acute  angle  contained  tinder  right  lines , 
is  greater  then  the  angle  contayned  tinder  the  right  line  B  A  and  the  circumfe * 
rence  C H  A,  nor  alfolejfe  then  the  angle  contayned  tinder  the  circumference. 
C  H  A  and  the  line  A E. 


Correlarj . 

Hereby  it  is  manifefi  that  a  perpendicular  line  drawen fro  the 
end  of  the  diameter  of 4  circle .  toucheth  the  circle:  and  that  a  right 
line  toucheth  4 circle in  0  ne poynt  onely .  For  it  was  proued (*  hy  the 
If  of  thethirdfihat  a  right  line  drawen  from  two  pointes  taken  in 

Cc.ij.  the 


Second  path 


7  hird parti 


CoftJirH&htt. 


Vmonftra- 

mn. 


An  addition 
ofPtlttmns. 


the  circumference  of  a  circle,  (hall fall  within  the  circle.  Which 
was  required  to  be  demonjlrated, 

5 ^The  2.  Trobleme.  The  17.  Tropoftion0 

From  a poyntgeuenjo  draw  a  right  line  which  Jhall touch  a 
circlegeuen • 

j  Tppofe  that  the  poyntgeuen  he  jf,and  let  the  circlegeuen  he  SOD. 
It  is  required  from  the poynt  .A  to  draw  a  right  line  "Which Jhall  touch 
the  circle  BC  D  .  Take  (by  the  firjl  of  the  third)  the  centre  of  the 
circle }and  let  the  fame  be  F.  And(by  thefrfl petitionjdraw  the  right 
line  AIDE.  And  making  the  centre  F,  and  the  space  ylF,  defcrihe  ( hyy  third 
petition )  a  circle  .AF G.  And from  the  poynt  D  raife  1 ?p( by  the  1 1  *of  the firjl ) 
nto  the  line  E  A  a  perpendicular  line  D  F.  And  (by  the  firjl  petition )  draw# 
thefe  lines  EftF  and  A  ft  .  Then  I 
Jay,  that  from  the  point  A  is  drawen 
to  the  circle  BCD  a  touch  line  A  ft. 

For  for  of  much  as  the  point  E  is  the 
centre  of the  circle  BCD ,  and  alfo  of 
the  circle  A  F  Gyherfore  the  line  F  A 
is  equall  to  the  line  E  F,  and  the  line 
F  D  toy  line  F  ft,  for  they  are  drawen 
from  the  centre  to  the  circumference. 

Wherefore  to  thefe  two  lines  AF  and 
E  ft,  are  equall  thefe  two  lines  E  Fir 
F  D,  and  the  angle  at  the poynt  F  is 
common  to  them  both :  Wherefore  (  by 
the  4 .  of the  firjl)  the  baje  DF  is  equall  to  the  bafe  A  ft,andy  triangle  DEF 


But  the  angle  ED  F  is  a  right  angle :  Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  Eft  A  is  a  right 
angle ,  and  the  line  F  ft  is  drawen  from  the  centre .  But  a  perpendicular  line 
drawen  from  the  end  of the  diameter  of a  circle, toucheth  the  circle  (byy  CoreUa» 
ry  of  the  \6.of the  third  ) .  Wherefore  the  line  A  ft  toucheth  the  circle  BCD. 
Wherfore from  the  point  %euen, namely,  A,  is  drawen  Tfntoy  circle  gene  ft  C  D9 
a  touch  line  yl  ft :  "Which  "Was  required  to  be  done. 

jfy  addition  offtelitarius , 

Vnto  a  right  lyne  which  cutteth  a  circle,  to  drawe  a  parallel  line  which  lhaK 
touch  the  circle, 

*  Suppofe 


es*  Folpfe 

Suppofethat  .the  right  lyije.  AB  do  cut  the  circle  AB  Cinthepoyfites  AandB*  It  is 
require^ todrawe  vntpthelineAB  a  parallel  lyne  &  F  H 

which  ihall  touche  the  circle.'  Let  the  centre  of  the 
circle  be  the  point  D.  And  deuide  the  lyne  A  B  into 
two  equall  partes  in  the  point  E.  And  by  the  point 
E  and  by  the  centre  D,  draw  the  diameter  CDEF, 

And  from  the  point  f'(whlch  is  the  ende  ofthe  dia¬ 
meter)  ray  fe  vpf  by  the  1 1 .of  the  fir  if)  vnto  the  dia¬ 
meter  Cl  F  a  perpendicular  line  G  F  H.  Then  I  fay 
rthatthe  lyne  G  F  H  (which  by  the  correilary  of  c he 

1  <?«.of  this  booke  toucheth  the  circle)  is  a  parallel 
vnto  the  line  A  B.For  forafinuch  as  the  right  line  C 
Ffallyng  vpon  either  of  thefe  lines  AB  &  GHma- 
keth  all  the  angles  at  the  pbint  E'  right  angles  (by 
the  i  ,of  this  bokejand  the  two  angles  at  the  point 
F  are  luppofed  to  be  right  angles :  therforef  by  the 

2  p,of  the  firft)  the  lines  A  B  and  G  H  are  parallels :  which  was  required  to  be  done.And 
this  Probleme  is  very  cominodious  for  the  inscribing  or  circumfcribing  of  figures  ifl 
or  about  circles. 


cl he  1 6,  Theorem^ 


This  Pn- 

btems  cimw-fc. 
Amu  fa?  %m 
in  farthing  c.-A 
ctrtumjen- 
Hngofpgur-n 
m  or  about 
sirties* 


onion* 


.v  .  ,,  •  f 

ffa  right  lyne  touch  a  circle, and  from  the  centre  to  the  touch 
be  dr  amen  aright  line/ that  right  line fo  dr  amen Jhalbe  a per* 
pendicular  lyne  to  the  touchelyne* 

jfippofe  that  the  right  line  ID  F  do  touch  the  circle  ABC  in  the  point  ‘Dmonfln- 
And  take  the  centre  o  f  the  circle  ABC,  and  let  the  fame  be  F.And  mn  . 
fffgfh  the  jiff  petition )  from  the  poynt  F  to  the poynt  C  dr  awe  a  right 
^  dme  FC .  T  hen  I fay, that  C  Fisa  perpendicular  line  to  D  EcFor  if 


J  s 

not  ,draw(hy  the  i  z.of the  ftp) from  the 
poynt  F  to  the  line  D  E  a  perpendicular 
line  EG.  .. And  for  a fmuch  as  the  angle 
FGC  is  a  right  angle,  therefore  the  angle 
GCF  is  an  acute  angle:  Wherefore  the 
angle  FG  C  is  greater  theny  angle  FCG, 
hut  Imto  the  greater  angle  is Jubtended 
the  greater  [ide(  by  the  19.  ofthe  firft). 

Wherefore  the  line  FC  is  greater  then  the 
line  F  G.  'But  the  line  F  C  is  equall  to  the 
line  F'Bjfor  they  are  dr awen  from  the 
centre  to  the  circumference:  Wherfore  the 
line  FB  alfo  is  greater  then  the  lineFG, 
namely /he  kffe  then  the  greater.^hich  is  impojlihle.  Wherefore  the  line  EG  is 
not  a  perpendicular  line  lento  the  line  D  F.And  in  like fort  may  K>e  proue/hat 
no  other  line  is  a  perpendicular  line  Imtoj  line  D  F  bejides  the  line  F  C:  Where¬ 
fore  the  line  FC  is  a.  perpendicular  line  to  DE.  If  therefore  a  right  line  touch 
jn  - '  *  '  ■'  -  Cc.iij. 


An  other  de- 
monflration 
after  Qrsn~ 
tint. 


^Iheihird^Booltp 


4  circle  ^frorfiy  centre  to}  touch  be  drawena  right  line  y  right  line fo  dr  amen 
fall  be  a  perpendicular  line  toy  touch  line :  lohich  Teas  required  to  be proued. 


f  An  other  demonflration  after  Orontius . 

Suppofe  that  the  circle  geuen  be  A  B  C,  which  let  the  right  lyne  D  ton  ch  in  the 
point  C»  And  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  be  the 
point  F.And  draw  a  right  line  from  F  to  C.Then 
I  fay  that  the  line  FC  is  perpendicular  vnto  the 
line  DE. For  if  the  lineF  C  be  notaperpediculer 
vnto  the  line  D  E,  then, by  the  conuerfe  ofthe  x. 
defi  nition  of  the  firft  boke,the  angles  D  C  F  &  F 
C  E  fbal  be  vnequalb&:  therfore  the  one  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  a  right  ang!e,and  the  other  is  lelfe  then 
a  right  angle ,  (Tor  the  angles  DCF  and  F  C  E 
are  by  the  x  3  .of  the  firft  equall  to  two  right  an¬ 
gles)  Let  the  angle  FCE,ifit  be  poffible,be  grea¬ 
ter  then,  a  right  angle,  that  is,  let  it  be  an  obtufe 
angle.Wherfore  the  angle  DCF  fhal  be  an  acute 
angle.  And  forafmuch  as  by  fuppofitio  the  right 
lineD  E  toucheth  the  circle  AB  C ,  therefore  it 
cutteth  not  the  circle.  Wherefore  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  B  C  falleth  betwene  the  right  lines  DC&CF:&  therfore  the  acute  and  re&iline 
angle  D  C  F  (hall  be  greater  then  the  angle  ofthe  femicircleBC  F  which  is  contayned 
vnder  the  circumferece  B  C  8c  the  right  line  C  F.And  fo  fhall  there  be  geue  a  re&iline  & 
acute  angle  greater  then  the  angle  of  a  femicircle:  which  is  contrary  to  the  1 6 ,  propo¬ 
rtion  of  this  booke.Wherfore  the  angle  D  C  F  is  not  leffe  then  aright  angle, In  like  fort 
alfo  may  we  proue  that  it  is  not  greater  then  a  right  angle.Wherfore  it  is  a  right  angle, 
and  therfore  alfo  the  angle  F  C  E  is  a  right  angle.Wherefore  the  right  line  F  C  is  a  per¬ 
pendicular  vnto  the  right  line  D  E  by  the  10. definition  of  the  firft ;  which  was  required 
to  be  proued.  \  _•  >  - 

^The  \  jfTheoreme .  fhe\<y.  Tropoftion. 

ffa  right  lyne  doo  touche  a  circle,  and  from  the  point  ofthe 
touch  he  rayfed  vp  vnto  the  touch  lyne  a  perpendicular  lyne, 
rath  at  lyne Jo  rayfed vp  is  the  centre  ofthe  circle . 


Demonftra - 
tion  leading 
to  an  impo/0 
fbilkie. 


rife  that  the  right  line  D 
| touch  the  circle  ABC  in 
j  C,  And  from  C  raife'Tpfyy  n.oj 
the  frjlfnto  the  line  IDE  a  perpendicu* 
lar  line  C  A.  Then  I  fay  jth at  in  the  line  3 
C  A  is  the  centre  of the  circle .  For  if  not, 
then  fit  be  pofible }  lety  centre  be  Trith* 
out  the  line  C  A  }as  inj poynt  F  And  ( by 
the  firjl petition)  draw  a  right  line  from  C 
to  F.  And  for  afmuch  as  a  certaine  right 
line  D  E  toucheth  the  circle  A  ©  C?and 
from  the  centre  to  the  touch  is  drawena 
right  line  C  l\  therefore  ( by  the  i8»  ofthe  third)  F  C  is  a  perpendicular  line  to 

\  •  '  •  '  '  DE . 


ofSuclides  Elementes *  Fol,$6* 

0  E.  Wherefore  the  angle  FCEis  a  right  angle .  Eut  the  angle  jfCE  isalfo 
aright  angle:  Wherefore  the  angle  EC  E  is  equal!  to  the  angle  A  CE, namely s 
the  lejfe  Imto  the  greater :  yohich  isimpofible  Wherefore  the  poynt  F  is  not  the 
centre  of the  circle  A  E  C,  And  in  like  fort  may  ypeproue  ,y  it  is  no  other  Cohere 
hut  in  the  line  A  C .  If  therefore  a  right  line  do  touch  a  circle, and  from  the  point 
of the  touch  he  raifed  Ipp  Imto  the  touch  line  a  perpendicular  line ,  in  that  line fc 
rat  fed  lop  is  the  centre  of the  circle :  y&hich  % vas  required  to  he  proued , 

f^pThe  18,  clheoreme%  TheiQ.fPropoJitwn. 

In  a  circle  an  angle  fet at  the  centre Js  double  to  an  angle  fet 
at  the  circumference  ,fo  that  both  the  angles  haue  to  their 
bafeoneand  the  fame  circumference. 

Vpfofe  that  there  be  a  circle  ABC,  and  at  the  centre  thereof , namely } 
the poynt  EJety  angle  EEC  he  fet,&  at  the  circumference  let  there 
be  jet  the  angle  E  A  C,  and  let  them  both  haue  one  and  the fame  bafe, 
namely, the  circumference  EC,  T  hen  I fay,  that  the  angle  EEC  is 
double  to  the  angle  E  AC,  0rawj  right 
line  A  E,and(by  the J'econd  petition  fx* 
tend  it  to  the  poynt  F.  Flow  for  afmuch 
as  the  line  A  E  is  e quail  to  the  line  E  E, 
for  they  are  drawen from  the  centre  lento 
the  circumference ,  the  angle  EAE  is  e*  ^ 
quail  to  the  angle  EE  A(  by  the  S  *  of the 
firfl  ) .  Wherefore  the  angles  EAE  and 
E  E  yf  are  double  to  the  angle  EyfE, 

Eut  (  by  the  Z1*  of  the  fame  )  the  angle 
EEF  is  equall  to  the  angles  E  jdE  and 
E E yf:  Wherefore  the  angle  EEF  is 
double  to  the  angle  E  A  E .  And  by  the 
J'ame  reajon  the  angle  F  EC  is  double  to  the  angle  E  ylC.  Wherefore  the  “tohole 
angle  EEC  is  double  to  the  ivbole  angle  E  A  C, 

KAgaine  fuppofe  that  there  he  fet  an  other  angle  at  the  circumference  ,  and  let 
the Jame  be  EE)  C.  And(by  the firft  petition)draw  a  line  from  0  to  E.  And  (by 
the fecond  petition)extend  the  line  0Elonto  the  poynt  G .  yfnd  in  like fort  may 
ice  proue,that  the  angle  G  EC  is  double  to  the  angle  E  0  C.  Of  yohich  the  an * 
gle  G  EE  is  double  to  the  angle  E0E.  Wherfore  the  angle remayning  E  EC 
ts  double  to  the  angle  remayning  E0  C.  Wherfore  in  a  circle  an  angle  Jet  at  the 
centre, is  double  to  an  angle  fet  at  the  circumference  fa  that  both  the  angles  haue 
to  their  hafe  one  and  the  fame  circumference :  lehich  yeas  required  to  be  demon* 
sirated, 

'  Ccfnij.  z’&  'Tbe 


T Wo  cafes 
in  thys  Pro* 
f  option  the 
one  when  the 
angle  jet  at 
the  circumfe - 
renceinclu- 
deth  the  cen~ 
ter* 

VemonfttA- 
mn . 


The  ether 
wbe  the  fame 
angle  fet  at 
the  circumfe - 
renccinclu- 
deth  not  the 
center* 


Irhff  hc  ip.  'Theorems.  fths  zi.  TroPofitwn. 

'  vj~  "  -  ‘  •'■v  •  •''  '  ■  ■  -  :  l  .<  V-'V-i  v%-'*yv.V'  i! 

In  a  circle  the  angles  Tvhich  conjlsl  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
JeBlon  or  figment ,are  equall  the  one  to  the  other , 

‘ \  ’  '  v- *  '  4  w  •/-.  Mr  1  V  “  *  *  •;*  a,**“->* 

:  :  o  i  \  .  •••■’■  .C.<;C  -  A  ?  ■: ;  ; 

Vppojey  there  be  d  circle  A3  C  Dps  in  the  fegment  therof'B  A  E  D, 
let  there con ftfi  thefe  tingles  3  AID  and  3  ED .  Then  I fay,  that  the 
angles  3  AD  and  3  ED  are  equall  the  oneto  the  other. Take(by  the 
fir  ft. of  the  third  )  the  centre  of  the  circle 
Conjlmtm*  yd  3  CD,and  let  the  fame  be  the  point  F. 

Andfhy  thefirfipeiition)drct\v  theje  lines 
pemon  first*  <J$p  anp  FT),  ISLow  for  afinuoh  as  the 
angle  3FD  is fet  at  the  centre,  and  the 
angle  3  AD  at  the  circumference ,  and 
they  bane  both  one  andy fame  bafeyiame* 
lyphe  circumference  3C  D  .therefore  the 
angle  3  FD  is  (by  the  Tropofition going 
before  )  double  to  the  angle  3  AD :  and 
by  the fame  reafon  the  angle  3FD  is  aU 
fo  double  to  the  angle  3  ED.  Wherefore 
(  by  the  7*  common  fentence  )  the  angle 
3  jdD  is  equall  to  the  angle  3  ED  .Wherefore  ina  circle  the  angles  “Which 
cohfifte  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fegment yire  equall  the  one  to  the  other  :  1 vhich 
"Was  required  to  be proued. 


Three  cares  m 
this  Propefi- 
tion. 

The firti  cefe. 
The  fecond 

uje. 


1b  this  proportion  are  three  cafes.For  the  angles  confifting  in  one  and  the  felf  fame 
fegnienr,the  fegment  may  either  be  greater  the  a  femicircle,  or  lefle  then  a  femicircle, 
orelsiullafemiciycle^Forthe  firfl  cafe  the  demonftration  before  put  ferueth. 


But  now  fuppofe  that  the  angles  BzAD 
and  B  E  Dd  o  confift  in  the  fe&io  BAT),  which 
let  be  leffe  then  a  femicircle. Euen  in  this  cafe  al¬ 
io  I  fay  that  the  angles  2?  A  D  and  B  ED  are  e- 
quail. For  draw  a  right  line  from  A  to  E.  And  let 
the  lines  A  D  and  BE  cutte  the  one  the  other  in 
thepoynt(7,  wherefore  the  fegment  cACEis 
greater  then  a  femicircle.  And  therfore  by  the 
firfl  part  of  this  propofition  the  angles  whiche 
are  in  it,  namely,  the  angles  %A  T  E  and  EDA 
are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  And  forafmuch 
as  in  the  triangle  eA  B  G  the  inward  and  oppo¬ 
site  angles  (7  and  Cj  A B  are  equall  to  the 
outwarde  angle  B  G  D,  and  by  the  fame  reafon 
the  two  angles  E  D  (7  and  G  E  D  of  the  triangle 
D  EG  are  equall  to  the  felfe  fame  outward  angle 
B  GD.  Wherfore  the  two  angles  A  B  G  and  G  A 
B  are  equall  to  thc-Wo  angles  ED  G  and  G  ED 


by  the 


Fo/.p  7. 


by  the  firft  commofentenec.From  which  if  there 
be  taken  equall  angles,  namely,  j4B  G ,  and E <D 
G}  the  angle  remainyngZf-^G’  (hall  be  equall  to 
the  angle  remayning  D  E  G, that  is,theangle  B  A 
D  to  the  angle  D  E  B( by  the  third  common  fen- 
tence)  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  felre  fameconftru&ion  and  dcmonftrati-  ^ 
cn  will  alfo  ferue,if  the  angles  were  fet  in  a  femi- 
circle  as  it  is  playue  to  feejn  the  figure  here  fet. 


0 


The  third s&fe* 


fr&The  lo.Theorcme,  The  21*  Trope  fit  ion. 

If  within  a  circle  be  deferibed  a  figure  of  former  fides,  the  an¬ 
gles  therof  which  are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other >  are  equall 
to  two  right  angles . 


f  ^PP°fe  ^?at  there.  a  circle.  ABC  ID, and  let  there  he  deferibed  in  it 
i^nX^  a  figure  of  fiver fides , namely ,  A  B  CD.  T  hen  I fay ,tbat  the  angles 
thereof  finch  are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other, are  equall  to  two  right 
■ — | —  'angles.  Draw  (by  the firft  petition )  thefe  right  lines  A  C  and  B  D.  Conjhufih® 
Tdow  for  ajmuch  as  (by  the  3  i*  of the  firft)  the  three  angles  of euery  triangle  are 
equal l  to  two  right  angles:  therforey  three  angles  of  the  triangle  ABC,  namely .  Demon 
CAB,ABCyandBCA,areequaUto  ***. 

two  right  angles .  But  (by  the  zi.  of  the 
third )  the  angle  CAB  is  equall  to  the 
angle  B  DC  for  they  conffi  in  one  and 
the felf fame fegmet,  namely,  B  ADC. 

And  (by  the  fame  Tropofition)  the  an* 
gleACB  is  equall  to  the  angle  A  DB, 
for  they  conffi  in  one  arid  the  fame  fig * 
merit  ADC  B  .  Wherefore  the  K>ho/e 
angle  AD  C  is  equall  toy  angles  B  AC 
and  ACB: put  the  angle  ABC  com * 
monto  them  both.  Wherefore  the  angles 
A  B  C,B  A  C,  and  A  C  B,are  equall  to 
the  angles  ABC  and  ADC.  But  the 

angles  ABC,  B  AC,  and  A  C  B,  are  equall  to  two  right  angles .  Wherefore 
the  angles  ABC  and  ADC  are  equall  to  two  right  angles .  And  in  like fort 
alfo  may  ive  prone, that  the  angles  BAD  and  DCBare  equall  totworight 

angles: 


’Demonfird- 
tion  leading 
to  an  impof- 
fibilme . 


An  addition 

cf  Cam  pane 
dsmonjlrated 
by  Pdsiarms. 


"Demonjlra 
tivn  leading 
to  an  impofii- 
bilitts , 


-  '  ^  i  f  J(v  - 

.  2/  therefore  ‘toitbin  a  circle  be  defcrihed  a  figure  offower fides,  the  an* 
gles  thereof  ~%>btcb  are  oppofite  the  one  to y  other,  are  equal!  to  two  right  angles: 
Tvhich  t>as  required  to  he proued. 


>-&'! he  zuT heoreme ,  The  1 3 . Tropofition . 

cOpon  one  and  the  fife  fame  right  line  can  not  be  defcrihed 
Wo  like  and  vne  quail fegmentes  of circles  falling  both  on  one 
and  the felfe fame  fide  of  the  line. 


Or  if  it  he  pofiihlejet  there  he  defcrihed  lapon  the  right  line  A  B 
two  like  zjr  Imequall fe Elions  of  circles , namely ,  ACB  iy  ABB, 
falling  hoth  on  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide  of  the  line  J  B .  And 
(by  the  fir  ft  petition )  drawe  the  right  line  JC  B,  and(  by  the 
third  petition)  drawe  right  lines  from  C  to  B,  and  from  B  to  B. 
.And  for  afinuch as  the figment  ACB 
is  like  to  the  figment  jC B  B :  and  like 
fegmetes  of  circles  are  they  dnch  haue 
equal l  angles  (  by  the  io,  definition  of 
the  third).  Wherefore  the  angle  A  CB 
is  e quail  to  the  angle  ABB ,  namely , 
the  outward  angle  off  triangle  CBB 
to  the  in  ward  angle :  ~$>bicb(  by  the  1 6* 
of thefirft)  is  imqmfiihle.Wherfore  lop* 
on  one  and  the  felf  fame  right  line  can  not  he  defcrihed  two  like  ty  Unequal! peg* 
mentes  of  circles  falling  both  on  one  ty.  the felfe  fame fide  of the  line:  T vhich  "tyas 
required  to  be  demonjlrated. 

Here  Campane  addeth  that  vpon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  right  lyne  cannot  be 
deferibed  two  like  and  vnequall  lections  neither  on  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide  of 
the  lyne,nor  on  the  oppofite  fide.That  they  can  not  be  delcribed  on  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  fide3hath  bene  before  demonftrated3and  that  neither  alfo  on  the  oppo¬ 
fite  fide3Pelitarius  thus  demonftrateth. 


V 


A  B 


.  Let  the  fe&ion  A  B  C  be  fet  vppon  the  lyne  'A  C,and  vpon  the  other  fide  let  be  fee 
the  fe&ion  ADC  vppon  the  felfe  fame  lyne  A  C, 
and  let  the  fe&ion  ADC  belyke  vnto  the  fe&i¬ 
on  ABC.  Then  I  fay  that  the  fe&ions  A  B  C  and  A 
D  C  being  thus  fet  are  not  vnequal.Forifit  be  pof- 
fible  let  the  fe&ion  A  D  C  be  the  greater.  And  de- 
uide  the  line  A  C  into  two  equal  partes  in  the  point  A 
E.  And  draw  the  right  lyne  BED  deuiding  the  lyne 
A  C  right  angled  wife.  And  draw  thefe  right  lynes  A 
B,  C  B3A  D  and  C  D,  And  forafmuch  as  the  lection 
A  D  C  is  greater  then  the  fe&ion  A  B  C,  the  perpen 
dicu.lar  lyne  alfo  E  D  (hall  be  greater  then  the  per¬ 
pendicular  lyne  E  B  :  as  is  before  declared  in  the 
ende  of  the  definitions  of  this  third  booke*  Wher- 


ofSuclides  Elemmtem  Foh  p8 * 

fore  from  the  ly  ne  E  Dgut  of  a4y  netiquaj.l  tp  the  Iyne  E  B  s  which  let  be  E  F.  And  draw 
tfiefe right  iynes  A  F  and  C  F.Now'  then(by  the  4*of the  firlljthe  triangle  A  E  B  (hall  be 
ecpiall  to  the  triangie.A  E'F,and  the  angle  E  B  A  iliall  be  equall  to  the  angle  E  FA.  And 
by  the  fame  reafon  the  angle  E  B  C  (hall  be  equall  to  the  angle  E  F  G  .  Wherefore  the 
whole  angle  A  B  C.  is-equail  to  the  whole  angle  A  F  C.But  by  the  z  i.  ofthefirfigthe  an¬ 
gle  A  F  C  is  greater  then  the  angle  A  D  C.Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  A  B  C  is  greater  then 
the  angle  A  DC.  Wherefore  by  the  definition  the  fedtions  AB  Cand  AD  Care  not 
iyke,which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition.  Wherefore  they  are  not  lyke  and  vnequall ; 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


S^The  iiLTheorme ,  TThe  i^SPropoftion. 

Like fegmentes  of  circles  defcriledvfipon  equall  right  lines, 
are  equall  the  one  to  the  other . 


Wppofe  thatypon  thefe  equall  right  lines  AB  and  CD  he  deferibed 
P thefe  like  fegmentes  of  circles /Lamely >  AF  B  and  CFO).  Then  I fqy} 
^  that  the figment.  ABE  is  equall  to  the  ferment  CFD  .  For  putting 
the fegment  A  E  B  'Opon  the  figment  C  FDynd  the  poynt  A'Opon  y  pojnt  C} 
and  the  right  line  A  B  hpon  the  right  line  C  D }  the  poynt  B  alfo  (hall fall  Tvpon 
the  poynt  Dfiory  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  C  D.And  the  right  line  AB  ex> 
aFily  agreing  Soith 

the  right  line  CDfi  E  F 

fegment  alfo  AEB 
Jhall  exaFlly  agree 
"S nth  the  fegment 
CFD  .  For  if  the 
right  line  AB  do 
exactly  agree  loith  /i 
the  right  line  C  D , 

andthe figment  AEB  do  not  exaFlly  agree  *t»ith  the figment  CFD?  but  dif¬ 
fer  eth  as  the figment  CGD  doth:  Now(by  the  i  of  the  third)  a  circle  cutteth 
not  a  circle  in  more  pointes  then  two  fit  the  circle  CGD  cutteth y  circle  C  FD 


in  more  pointes  the  two  y  hat  is  yn  the  points  Cfiynd  D:K>hich  is(by  the  fame ) 
impofiible  .Wherefore  the  right  line  AB  exaFlly  agreing  leith  the  right  line 
C  Dy  the  fegment  AEB  Jhall  not  hut  exactly  agree  hath  the  fegment  CFD: 
Wherefore  it  exaFlly  agreeth  K>ith  and  is  equall  'Onto  it .  Wherefore  like  fig* 
mentes  of  circles  defer ibed'Opon  equall  right  lines ,are  equall  the  one  to  the  other: 

‘ Hebich  "Mas  required  to  be proued. 


ThisFropofition  may  alfo  bedemonftrated  by  the  former  propofition.  For  if  the  fe- 
&ions  AEB  and  CFD  being  like  and  fet  vpon  equall  right  lines  esf  B  and  C‘Z>,  ihould 
be  vnequailythen  the  one  beyng  put  vpon  the  other, the  great;  r  iliall  exceede  the  leife: 
but  the  line  A  A  is  one  line  with  the  line  C'Di  Cq  that  tlierby  ihalfolloiy  the  contrary  of 
the  former  Propofition. 

an  A  '  Belitarim 


Demonftra-* 
tion  leading 
loan  impoF 
fibiline. 


An  other  de-* 
monjiration. 


*An  other  /#- 

monjlrAtio 
$er  Fslitmnu 


Conjlmtlkn, 


three  cafes  in 
skis  Frapo/i- 
tiott. 

the prft  cafe, 

V  V ,  '  v, 

DymmUrA- 

Sion* 


Belitarius  demonUrateth  this  Proportion  an  other  7$  ay. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  tsf B  ScC  D  which  let  be  equall  .•  and  vpon  the 
let  there  be  fet  thefelike  fcftions  A  B  /^and  C  D  E.yhcn  I  fay  that  the  faid  fedions  are 
equall.For  if  no  when  let  C  E  D  be  the  greater  fedion.  And  deuide  the  two  lines  *A  B 
and  CDinto  two  equall  partes,thcline  A 
Bm  the  pointed,  and  the  line  CD  in  the 
point-G’.And  cred  two  perpendicular  lines 
F  ifand  G  A.Anddraw  thefe  right  lines  A 
XdcKB;  EC}ED.  Andforafrauchasthe 
fedion  CAD  is  the  greater,  therefore  the 
pcrpendicularline  GDIs  greater  then  the 
perpendicular  F  if:  From  the  lyncG  E  cut 
of  a  line  equall  to  the  line  fifjwhich  let  be 
G  H :  and  draw  thefe  right  lines  C  i/and  H 
DfAnd  forafmuch  as  in  the  triangle  *A  IC 
F  the  two  iides  A  F  and  F  K  are  equall  to  the  two  fides  CGScG  H  of  the  triangle  CH~ 
G,and  the  angles  at  the  pointes  A  and  G  are  eq  ual  ( for  that  they  are  right  angles)  thcr- 
forefby  the  4. of  the  firft)the  bafe  K  is  equall  to  the  bale  CH, and  the  angle  A  K F  to 
the  angle  CHG.And  by  the  famereafon  the  angle  B  K  Fis  equall  to  the  angle  D  H  G. 
Wherfore  the  whole  angle  A  KB  is  equall  to  the  whole  angle  C H  D.But  the  angle  CH 
Dis  greater  then  the  angle  C  ED  by  the  2 1  .of  the  firft*Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  A  KD 
is  greater  then  the  angle  C E  D.  Wherfore  the  fedions  are  not  lyke,  which  is  contrary 
to  the  fuppofition. 

•4 

The  3 .  Trobleme .  The  25.  Tropofition . 

ctJ figment  of  a  circle  beynggeuen  to  deferibe  the  whole  cir > 
c/e  of  the  fame  fegment . 

Vppofe  that  y figment geuen  be 
ABC.lt  is  required  to  dejerihe 
the  yohole  circle  of  the fame fig* 
ment\AB  C.  Deuide  (by  the  10.  of  the 
frjljtbe  line  A  C  into  two.equall  partes 
m  the poynt  D .  And  (by  the  1  u  of  the 
fame) from  the  poynt  D  raife  yp  ynto 
the  line  A  C  a  perpendicular  line  B  D. 

And  ( by  the frit  petition)  draw  a  right 
fine from  A  to  \BJSLow  then  the  angle  ABD  being  compared  to y  angle  rB  A  (Dp 
is  either  greater  then  itfir  equall  lento  ityr  lejfe  then  it. 

First  let  it  he  greater,  And  ( by  the  23  ♦  of  the ftmeftpon  the  right  line  B  As 
and  ynto  the  poynt  in  it  A,  make  ynto  the  angle  ABD  an  equall  angle  B  A  E. 
And(by  the fecond  petition)extend  the  line  B  D  ynto  the  poynt  E.  Andfby  the 
fir ft petition)  draw  a  line from  E  to  C.  Nora  for  afinuch  as  the  angle  ABE  is  e* 
quail  to  the  angle  BAE,  therefore  (by  the  6  ♦  of  the firfi)the  right  line  EB  is 
equall  to  the  right  line  A  E .  And  for  afinuch  as  the  line  AD  is  equall  toy  line 
D  C  and  the  line  D  E  is  common  to  them  both :  therefore  thefe  two  lines  A  2) 

and 


of  Suclides  Elemerites * 


FoLpp, 


and DE}  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  C ID  and  D  E  the  one  to  the  other .  And 
the  angle  .A  D  E  is  ( by  the  4  *  petition')  equall  to  the  angle  C  D  Ey for  either  of 
them  is  a  right  angle .  JV here  fore  ( by  the  4 .  of the firft  )  thebafe  AE  is  equall 
to  the  bafe  C  E .  'But  it  is  proved  ghat  the  line  A  E  is  equall  toy  line  B  E.Wber* 
fore  the  line  BE  a  jo  is  equall  to  'the  lineC  E.  Wherefore  thefethree  lines  A  Ey 
E  Byand  E  C  yare  equall  the  one  to  the  other  .  Wherefore  making  the  centre  E? 
and  the  space  either  A  Ey  or  EByor  E  C:  defcribe  (by  the  third  petition)  a  cir* 
demand  it  fallpqffe  by  the  poyntes  Ay  By  C .  Wherefore  there  is  defcribed  the 
ivhole  circle  of the  fegment  gemn..  And  it  is  mamfeffthat  the fegment  ABC 
is  lejfe  then  a  femicircle for  the  centre  Efalleth  without  it* 

Tlx  like  demon f  , ration  dlfo  Will 
feme  if  the  angle  ABD  be  equall  to 
the  angle  B  AD  .  For  the  line  A  D 
being  equall  to  either  of  the fe  lines y 
B  Dy  and  D  Cy  there  are  t  hree  lines y 
D  A yD  By.ndD  Cy  equall  the  one  to 
the  other .  So  that  the  point  D fall  be 


B 


ry/ri  • 

i’  ^ 

...  XV, 

■  ;  “4 

j  / 

’  \ 

Thefctoni 

Safe* 


and  ABC  fall  be,  a  femicircle.  , 

But  if  the  angle  ABD  be  leffe  then  the  angle 
B  AD  y  then  ( by  the  2t,*of  the  firfi)  t>pon  the  right 
Me  B '  Afnidisnio  the point  in  it  A }  make  TpMo  the 
angle  ABD  an  equall  angle  withiny fegment  A  B  C. 
Andfo  the  centre  of  the  circle  f  allfall  my  lineD  By 
and  it  fall  be the point  E:  and  the  fegment  ABC 
greater  then  a femicircle  Wherefore  a fegment 


the  third 
cafe. 


beinggeuen yhere  is  defcribed  the  whole  circle  of  the  fame  fegment ;  which  Was 
required  to'be  donfty^ 


noj 

of 


X"; 


,  $&{ Corollary*  1 

,  »  flic  '■  nsriT  .  I 

Hereby  angle 

is  equall  to  the  angle  2)  BfJ4ihttt  in  ajfeQionleJie  thenajetnicir - 
dSrkh  afimkfcelejtuffta&r. 

.  .nob  %Q i 

;Thereis  alfoaJTother  generall-w'-aytofindcputthe' 

fore  faid  centre,  which  will  feme  Indifferently  for  any 
faction  vvhatfoeuer.-  And  thafis  tfius.  '^Taicein  the  cir¬ 
cumference  geuon  or  {eaion  ^AC’fhree  pointes  at  all  v  ,  .  g 

sueiitures  vvhichller  be  A,B,C\  And  draw  thefe  lines  A 
B  and 'A  C(by  the  firft  peticion)'  Andf  by  the  1  o.ofthe 
firft)  deuide  into  two  equall  partes  either  of  the  fayde 

iines^he  line  a^Sinthe  point  ©p&sthfelii®ei^Cjn  tie 

point  E.  And  (by  the  11.  ofthefirfl^ifrd'Orth^pointgB^.-'u ' 

Dd.joj  D  and 


id'N.-  v  f 


Another 
more  ready 


Utmonfirfr 


An  ad  dition* 


An  other  eon- 
jlructionand 
demotiflretion 
of  this  Propo¬ 
rtion  after , 
Campari  e 


t&w 


©  and  £  rayfe  vp  vnto  the lines  and  BC perpendicular  lyrics  *& F  and  iZF.  Map 

forafmuch  as  either  of  thefe  angles  B  D  £,and£  EF  is  a  right  angle, a  right  line  produ¬ 
ced  frotn  the  point  D  to  the  point  £,  lhall  deuide  either  of  the  faid  angles :  and  foraf- 
much -as  it- fallefh  vppon  the  right  lines  't>  F  and  %  F,it  fhall  make  the  inward  angles  on 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide,  namely,  the  angles  2)  EF 
and-£  i?  F.leife  then  two  right  angles.  Wherefore  fby 
the  fife  peticipn)  the  lines  D  F  and  £  F  being  produced 
lhallconctirre*  Let  them  concurre  in  the  point  F.  And 
forafmuch  as  a ■  certain e  right  line  D  F  deuideth  a  cer- 
taine  right lyneexfF  into  two  equal!  partes  and  per¬ 
pendicularly,  therfore  ( by  the  corollary  of  the  firftof 
this  booke)  in  the.  line  D  F  is  the  centre  of  the  circle,&: 
by  the  fame  reafon  the  cen  tre  of  the  felfe  fame  circle  A 
lhalbe  in  the  right  line  £  F.Wherfore  the  centre  ofthe  . ,  „ 

circle  wherof  ABC  is  a  feftion,is  in  the  point  F,which  is  comrmo  fo  either  of  the  lines 
'D  Fand  £  F.  Wherfore  a  feftion  of  a  circle  being.  geue,namely,the  fedtion  ATS  Cthere 
isdefcnbedthecircleofthe  fame  fedion:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

And-bv  this  laft  generall  way, if  there  be  geuen  three  pointes,  fet  howfoeuer,  fo  that 
they  be  not  all  three  in  one  right  line,a  man  may  deferibe  a  circle  which  fhall  paffe  by 
all  the  faid  three  pointes.  For  as  in  the  example  before  put, if  you  fuppofe  onely  the  3. 
pointes  A,ByC,  to  be  geuen  and  not  the  circumference  A  B  Cto  be  drawen,yet  follow¬ 
ing  the  felfe  fame  order  you  did  before,  that  is,  draw  a  right  line  from  *A  to  £  and  an 
other  from  B  to  C  and  deuide  the  faid  right  lines into  two  equall  parts,in  the  points  D 
and  £,and  cre<5t  the  perpendicular  lines  D  £and£  Fcutting  the  one  the  other  in  the 
pointF,anddrawaiightline  from  F to £:and making  the  centre  thepointF,  and  the 
Space  F  B  deferibe  a  cirefoan^  it  lhall  pafie  by  . the  pointes  A8cC:  which  may  be  pro-? 
ued  by  drawing  right  lines  fibm-v?  to  F,and  from  F  to  C.  For  forafmuch  as  the  two 
fetes  A  V  zndJ&'F  of  the  triangle  ADF  are  equall  to  the  two  fides  S  TT  and  £>  F  of  the; 
triangle  cB/D\F(Sax  by  fuppofitidn  the  line  tAT) is  equall  to  the  IineJ9£,  and  thelyne, 
£>Fis  cpinmontothem  both)  and  the  angle  A'DFis  equall  to  the  angle  B  D  F  (for 
they  are  both  right  angles  )therfore(by  the  q..of  thefirft Jthe  bafe  AF  ts  equall  to  the' 
bafe  B  F.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  line  F  C  is  equal!  to  the  line  F  B.  Wherefore  thefe. 
thred  lines  F  A,F  B  and  F  C  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  makyng  the 
centre  the  point.  F  and  the  fpace  F£,it  (hall  alfo  paffe  by  the  pointes  A  and  C ,  Which 
was  req aired  to  be done.This  proposition  fs  very  neceffary  for  many  things  as  you  fhal 
afterward. fee.-  -.;r  .  •  .■  ;  :  ^  '.v^y.  . 

Campane  putteth  all  other  way,  how  to  deferibe  the 
whole  circle  of  a  feftio  geuen .  Suppofe  that  the  fc&ion 
be  ^F.It  is  required  to  deferibe  the  whole  circle  ofthe 
fame  fe&ion.Draw  in  the  fettion  twolmes  at  all  aduen- 
tures  AC  and  B  FLwhich  deuide  into  two  equal! parts 
AC  in  the  point  £, and  B  (D  m  thepointe  F.Then  from 
the  twopotnteS  of  the  deaifion&draw  within  the  fe&i- ' .  ] 

on  two  perpendicular  lines  Ft?. and  F  H  which  let  cutte- 
the  one  the'  , other  in  the.pjmttfc^Mdth-e  centre  of  the 
circle  lhall  bein  either  of  the  faid  perpendicular  lines 
by  the  cdrollairy  of  the  firft  of  this  booke.  Whrirfore  the  p 
cle:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

But  if  the  lines  EG  8c  FH  do  not  cucthe  one  theo- 
ther, but  make  one  right  line  as  doth  6? Ffinthefecod 
figure:  which  happeneth  when  the  two  lines  AC  and 
B  D  arc  equidiftant. Then  the  line  G H,  being applycd 
to  cither  part  of  the  circumference  geuen,  (hall  paffe 
by  the  centre  of  the  circlc,by  the  felfe  feme  Corollary.. H 
For  thelines  £  G  and  F  H  cannot  be  equidiftant.  For 
then  one  and  the  felf  feme  circumference  ftrould  hauc 
two  centres.Whcrfore  the  line  ALC?  being  deuidedia- 

hi:  to  .bC 


centre  ofthccifw 


l  K 

i;  -  1 

F 

C  T/V' 

'  FoLwoe 

to  two  equal!  partes  in  the  point  Kxhx  faid  point  K  (hall  be  the  centre  of  the  fe&ion. 

Pelkaiius  here  addeth  a  bride  way  how  to  finde  out  the  centre  of  a  circle3which 
is  commonly  vied  of  Artificers, 

Sup  pole  that  the  circumference  be  A  B  C  D,frhofe  centre  it  is  required  to  finde  our. 
Take  a  point  in  the  circumference  geuen  which  let  be  A,  vppon  which  deferibe  a  circle 
with  what  openyngofthecompaileybu  will, which  let  be  EFG.  Then  take  an  other 
point  in  the  circumference  geuen  which  let  be  B,  vpon  which  deferibe  an  other  circle 
.  with  the  fame  opening  of  the  compaffe  that  the  cir- 
cle  EFG  was  ddcribed,-  and  let  the  fame  be  E  H  G , 
which  lec'cut  the  circle  E  F  G  in  the  two  pointes  E 
andG-.f  I  haue  not  hc_re  drawen'the  whole  circles, 
blit  onely  tliofe  partes  of  them  which  cutthe  one 
theother  for  auoyding  of  confufion )  And  drawe 
from  thofe centres  thefe  right  lines  A  E,  B  E,  AG, 
and  B  G, which  foure  lines  lhail  be  equal!,  by  reafon 
they  are  femidiameters  of  equall  circles.  And  draw 
a  right  line  from  A  to  B,  and  fo  lhail  there  be  made 
two  Ifofedes  triangles  A  E  B,and  A  G  B  vnto  whom 
the  line  A  B  is  a  common  bale.  Now  then  denide  the 
line  A  B  into  two  equal  partes  in  the  point  K  which 
rouft  nedes  fail  betwene  the  two  circumference  E  P 
G and  EHG,  otherwife  the partfhould be  greater 
then  his  whole,  Drawe  a  line  from  E  to  K  and  pro¬ 
duce  it  to  the  point  G.  Now  you  fee  that  there  are 
two  Bofceles  triangles  deuided  into  foure  equall 
triangles  E  A  K,  EBK,GAK  and  GBE.  For  the 

two  (ides  A  Band  A  K  of  the  triangle  AEK  are  equall  to  the  two  fides  BE  andBK  of 
thetriangleB  EK5and  the  bafe  EK  is  common  to  them  both.  Wherefore  the  two  an¬ 
gles  at  the  point  Kof  the  two  triangles  A  EKand  B  EKaiebythe  8,ofthe  fir  ft  equall: 
and  therfore  are  right  angles.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  other  angles  at  the  poynte  K 
are  right  angles, Wberfbre  E  G  is  one  right  lyne  by  the  14.  of  the  .firft .  Which  foraf- 
much  as  it  deuideth  the  line  A  B  perpendicularly,  therefore  it  pafteth  by  the  center  by 
by  the  corollary  of  the  firft  of  this  booke.  And  fo  if  you  take  two  other  poynte  s,name« 
C  and  D  m  the  cfrcumference  gcuen,and  vpon  the 
deferibetwo  circles  cuttyng  theone  the  other  in 
the  pointes  L  and  M,ahd  by  the  faid  poyntes  pro¬ 
duce  a  right  li  ne,  it  (hall  cube  the  lyne  E  G  beyng 
produced  in  the  pointe  N,  w hich  ('ball  be  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  circle  by  the  fame  Corollary  of  the  firft 
of  this  booke,if  you  imagine  the  right  line  C  D  to 
be  drawen  and  to  be  deuided  perpendicularly  by 
the  lyne  L  M,  which  it  muft  needes  be  as  wc  hauc 
before  proned.  And  here  note  that  to  do  this  me¬ 
chanically  not  regardyng  demonftration  ,  you 
neede  onely  to  markethe  poyntes  where  the  cir¬ 
cles  cut  the  one  the  other,namely,  the  poyntes  E, 

G,andL,M,  and  by  thefe  poyntes  to  produce  the 
lines  ii  G  and  L  M  till  they  cut  the  one  the  other, 
and.  where  they  cut  the  one  the  other,  there  is  the 
centre  of  the  circlets  you  fee  herein  the  feconde 
figure. 


"Pd.ij' 


*A  ready  way 

to  finde  ohs 
the  center  of  4 
circle  co  mmo* 
ly  yjed  a- 
mmgft  artb- 
feen. 


ConjlmUm. 

Demonftm- 
nm » 


23.  'Theoremc*  1  he  16*  Tropofition* 

Equall  angles  in  e quail  circles  eonfifl  in  equall  cirmferences * 
whether  the  angles  be  drawen  from  the  centre  syor  from  the 
circumferences . 

^ppofe  that  thefe  circles  A  3  C  and  ID  E  Ffe  equall.  And  from  Mr 
\centres  piamely 3the pointes  G  and  If  let  there  he  drawen  thefe  equal! 
'angles  3G  C  and  ELLF:  andhkewife from  their  circumferences  thefe 
equall  angles  3  AC  and  EDF.  Then  1 fay3  that  the  circumference  3  If  C 
is  equall  to  the  circumference  E  LF .  Draw  (by  the firft petition)  right  lines 
from  3  to  Cj  and from  E  to  F.  And for  afmuch  as  the  circles  A3  C  and  DEE 
are  equally  he  right  lines  aljo  drawen  front  their  centres  to  their  circumferences  „ 
are  (by  the firft  definition  of  the  third  )  equall  the  one  to  the  other  .Wherefore 
thefe  two  lines  3  G  and 
G  C3are  equall  to  thefe  two 
lines  E  FI  and  EL  F.  And 
the  angle  at  the poynt  G  is 
equall  to  the  an  fie  at  the 
point  LI:  Wherfore  ( by  the 
4  *of the  firfijt  he  hafe  3  C 
isequaMtoybafe  EE.  And 
for  afmuch  as  the  angle  at 
thepbynt  A  is  equall  to  the  angle  at  the  point  D}  therefore  the  fegment  3, AC 
islilye  iq  ihe  fegment  E  D  F.  And  they  are  defcribed  W>pon  equall  right  lines  3  C 
and  E  F .  3ut  like  fegmentes  of  circles  defcribed  ypon  equall  right  lines }  are  (by 
the  24.  of  the  third)  equall  the  one  to  the  other ,  Wherefore  the  fegment  3  A  C 
is  equall  to  the fegment  EDF.  And  the  ‘whole  circle  A3C  is  equall  toy  'wide 
circle  DEE .  Wherefore  ( hy  the  third  common J  en  tence)  the  circumference  re* 
mayning  3  JfiC  is  equall  to  the  circumference:  remayning  ELF  .  Wherefore 
equall  angles  in  equall  circles  confifi  in  equall  circumferences whether  the  angles 
be  drawen  from  the  centres  or  from  the  circumferences:  'which  Seas  required  to  he 
demonstrated. 

....  "■  • 

\  -  \  :  V 

:  .  '  - 

he  %^Theonfae*  .  ■  -*7-  'Trop.ojttion. 

In  equall  circles  the  angles  which  conffjn  equall  .circumfer 
rences 9ar e  equal!  the  one  to  the  other  ?  whether  the  angles  he 
drawen  from  the centres yor from  the  circumferences « 

■Suppofe 


*  i 


cfSuclidesElementcs.  FoLxou 

\  yppofij  Cfoefe  circles  AB  C,and  ID  E  F,  be  e quail.  Andy>pon  thefe 
equall  circumferences  of  the fame  circles yiamely  gbpon  B  C  and  EF, 

I  let  there  con  ft f  thefe  angles  IB  GC  and EH  F  drawen from  the  cen - 
tres  yindalfo  thefe  angles  BAC  and  ED  F  drawen  from  the  cir* 
cumferences .  T  hen  I fay,  that  the  angle  BGC  is  equall  to  the  angle  EHF, 
and  the  angle  BAC  to  the  angle  ED  F.  If  the  angle  B  G  C  be  equall  to  the  an * 
gle  E  H  Fgthen  it  is  manifelljhat  the  angle  BAC  is  equall  to  y  angle  ED  F 
(by  the  20.  of  the  third).But  if  the  angle  B  G  C  be  not  equall  toy  angle  EHF 
then  is  the  one  of  them  greater  then  the  other .  Let  the  angle  BGC  be  greater 
And  (  by  the 
21'ofthefirft) 
ypon  the  right 
line  BGPand 
ynto  the  point ; 

geuen  in  it  G,  c?  \  . 

make Ipnto  the ,  /  \ 

angle  EHF  \  I  j  \vY 
an  equall  am  V  J  /  \\Y 

gurnet  xy  \A 

(by  the  26*  of  b"^~ — — 

j  third') equall  \ 

angles  in  equall  circles  confifl  fyo  equall  circumferences  whether  they  be  drnwm 
from  the  centres  or from  the  circumferences .  Wherefore  the  circumference  B  ^ 
is  equall  to  the  circumference  EF .  Bui  the  circumference  EF  is  equall  to  the 
circumference  B  C:  Wherefore  the  circumference  B  F(  alfo  is  equall  to  the  cir* 
eumference  BC ,  the  lejfe  to  the  greater :  Hfhichis  impofiihle ,  Wherfore  the  an* 
gle  BGC  is  not  Unequal!  to  the  angle  E  HE:  Wherefore  it  is  equall.  And  (by 
the  20.  of the  third )tbe  angle  at  the  point  A  is  the  halfe  of the  angle  B  G  C:and 
(by  the fame )  the  angle  at  the  point  D  is  the  halfe  of the  angle  EHF.  Where * 
fore  the  angle  at  the  point  A  is  equall  to  the  angle  at  the  point  D.  Wherefore  in 
equall  circles ,t he  angles  ^ohich  confifl  in  equall  circumferences  yare  equall  the  one 
to  the  other  pxhether  the  angles  be  drawen  from  the  centres  or  from  thecircumfe * 
rences :  Ichich  leas  required  to  be proued. 


Demnftr&* 

tioh  leading 
to  an  impof- 
fihlitko 


$&The  25.  'Thecremc.  Ifhe  28.  Tropofitlon. 

In  equall  circles,  equall  right  lines  do  cut  assay  equall  cir* 
cumferences  ^ he  greater  equall  to  the greater, and  the  lefie  e* 
quad  to  the  le [te* 

.  S)d.ij. 


Suppofc 


Cwflruftm. 


DemnBra* 

sim,. 


The  tonncrfe 
of  the  former 
Fropofition. 

Conflru  ction • 

T>emon$rA~ 

tmi. 


F^pofe tfatthefid'rchs  ABC*,  dndfD  M-Ffic efiimll.  Andfiiftkefrf hi 
J  there  be  graven  fhefifyuaH  tight  iikexfB  C and  EF}  Tthichfit  cytawpy 
llthefe  dHtmfenntei  B  A  C ahfidbE  F  beirig  ihegrmter  }<Malfo  fhefo 


titcimference  B&  V  is  eqmfy  tithe  lejfe  circumference  E  HF.  Take  (by  the 
fifftof the  third)  the  centres  dflhedYctCsfind  let  the  fume  he  the  pointts  Efand 
<L .  And  dfttw  thefe  fight  fines ?  3fB}  Jf€>  and  L  F .  And  for  afmpchps 

the  drcltsrane^diyMrfit^hj  thefirft  definition  of  the  third)  the  fines  "pBch 
are  dycnvenfro  thFcenM'  -  ■  "■  .  .  ^ 

tres  are  eqtcall  .Where* 
fore  thefe  two  lines  (B  If 
mid  JfC y  are  equall  to  /  jg. 

thefe, two  lines*  E  E  and  \  p 
E  f.  And  (by  fuppofiti* 
onjthe  bafe  EC  is  equall  c, 

to  the  ba(W 
fo 


•My  fir  I 


the  angle  B'ffC'i's  equall  to  the  angle  ELF.  (But  (by  the  26*  of  the  third) 
equal!  angles  draw en from  the  centres }conffl  tpon  equall  circumferences, Wher* 
fore  the  circumference  BGCis  equall  ti  the  circumference  E  H F;  andj  nhok 
-Wflt  fiJMGAs  equall  to  the  fihole  circle  STEF  .‘wherefore  the  circumference 
yemqyningB^G,  is(by  the  third  common  fentenee)  equall to  the drcumfmnct 
rmdynirtg  ESTF.  Wherefore  in  circles  (equall  right  lin^s  do  cut  away  email 
cfcufifirtncesythegreater  equall  to  the  greater ^and  thekffe  equall  to  the  ieffi: 
fihichipasrequdredhbeproued.  -'"w"  ‘  ,  "  "...  • 

■  .>  '  ‘  ■  •  •  •  ■  - 

i&tfhepretoe.  ,  J 

■  f  %  1  v  ^  ^  :*'t "  fi/  ■ 

M  ^UAlickcks finder  ^uaUfircumfir^cfis  ^efukended 


enm-mig 


hefe  circles  A  BC  and  S)  EF fie  equall,  ytnd in  them 
let  there  fie  tafjm  *  thefe  equall  circumferences* 3  B  G  C  and  EM  Ft 
anddrawe  thefe  right  lines  (B  C  ana  EFfThenlfyythat  the  right 
BC  is  equall  to  the  right  line  E  F .  T dke  ( by  thefirfi  of)  third ) 
tlk  ’Centres  of  the  circles  y  anil  let  them  be  thepointes  Jf  and  E,  and  draw  thefe 
rigbtiines  If  Bj  IfC,  E  EyE  F.-, find for dfrhucb  as  the  circuiFferenceB  G  C 
is  equall  ifitlfi  circumference  EH  Fyhe;. angle B:hf 6  is  equall  tofiangle  ELF 
( by  the  27,  of  the  third)  .  And  for  afmucb  as  the  circles  jC BC  and  Sj  E  F are 
equalltheone  to  the  Miter yherefire  (  by  the firfi  definitwnofitbe  thirdfme  lines 
'  *  ’  Tehich 


■  jVi  *  1 


a  i 


FoIaoz* 


be  cen  t  r  es 
are  equall. 

WhWtfbri- 

z*'he(ei 


K-fy 


are 


nw, 

t  i-T  *V'.» 


tpejen jjges 
jf  $.  and 

fir  jtf  they  ^  .vi  ,  .  f,  v  , 

comprehend  equal! angles .  Wherefore  (lip  the  4  ♦  dfihefrftjthe'hnfe  !BC 
quail  to  thebafe  EF  .Wherefore  in  equall  circles  "under  equdfl  Circulnferekce't^ 
are  fuhtended  equal l  right  lines :  yhich  yds  required  to  he  demon frated. 


The  4..'  Troblenie .  The  30.  Tfopoftim, 

'  a  circumferencegeuen  into  Wo  eqtialtparUW 

1  1 1  is  reauired  ttfdi* 


W^yp^Fppofe  that  the  circumference geuen  hejiHb3. 
%ide  the:?ircumfererice..A0  %ihib  two  equall p, 


artes.  (Draw  ar  is 


tWfoMiVr'dyfe^fp  ZtfitoA'B  a  perpendicular  Unit  &  And  draw thefe right 
Him  A  3D  Md0B:Andfbrafmuch  as  the  line  A  €  is  equall  to  the  ImeCBfsp 
the  line  C  0  is  common  to  them  both y  there* 
fore  thefe  two  lines  A C  and  C(D  are  equal t 
to  thefe  two  Ims  rB  C  mdC(D.And( by  the 
4. petition,)  the.  angle  A  CD  is  equal!  to  the 


'  cV  ’  ds.  *  -  •  -  ;  7  V  X  S 

the,  bafeA  0  is  effaff.  to  the  b.afe  D  T$f  Bui 
equall  right  lines  do  cut  away  equall  eircum? 
ferefcespthe greater  equall  to  the  greater ftP 


"  a 


zjgliheoreme.  ^Fb.e^u 

fnaemk  m thefommrpk  &  a.rigfamgfr. 

*&d]wi*  bill 


Conftmtm . 


Dmonftr <#- 
tm r. 


The  firft  part 
nfthtt  ThcQ • 

reme. 


Smn&pwt* 


"lUtip&rt. 


fTbe  third fBoo^e 

but  an  angle  made  in  the  fegment greater  then  the  femieirck 
islejfethena  right  angle ,and an  angle  made  in  the  fegment 
lejje  then  the  femicircle,  is  greater  then  aright  angle .  Jnd 
moreouer  the  angle  of  the  greater  figment  u  greater  then  a 
right  angle:  and the  angle  of  the  lejje fegment  is  lefe  then  a 
rightanglc.  T 

K|||  P°fi  ^dt  the  cFcle  be  AB  C  D,and  let  the  dimetient  of  the  circle  be 

right  line  BC,  and  thecetre  therof the  point  R.  And  take  inthefr 
miclrcle  a  point  at  all  auentpres ,and  lei  the  fame  he  (D*  And  draw  theft 
right  lines  B  A, A  C^A Dyxndfp  C.Then  I 
Jay  that  the  angle  in  the  femicircle  BAC, 
namely,  the  angle  B  AC  is  a  right  angle. 

And  the  angle  A  B  Clinch  is  in  the  fegment 
AB  C  being greater  then  the  J'emicircle ,  is 
lefe  then  a  right  angle.  And  the  angle  A  ID 
C -ftbicb  is  in  the  fegment  A  ID  C  being  lefe 
then  the  femicircle  is  greater  the  a  right  an « 
gle.-Draw  a  line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point 
E,and  extend  the  line  B  A  Imto  the  point  K 
And  forafmuch  as  the  line  BE  is  equall  to 
the  line  E  A,  ( for  they  are  dr awen  from  the 
centre  to  the  circumference)  therfore  the  an * 
gleEAB  is  equall  to  the  angle  E  B  A  (by 
the  q.of  the firH).  Againe forafmuch  as  the 
line  A  E  is  equall  to  the  line  E  C,  the  angle 

ACE  is  ( by  the fame)equall  to  the  angle  C  A  E.Wherfore  the  ^ hole  angle1. B  A 
C  is  equal!  to  thefe  two  angles  ABC  and  A  C  B.But  the  angle  FAC  lobich  is 
an  outward  angle  of  the  triangle  AB  C  is  (by  the  32.  o  f  the  firH)  equall  to  the 
two  angles  ABCzy  AC  B. Wherfore  the  angle  B  AC  is  equall  to  the  angle  F* 
A  C. Wherfore  either  of  them  is  a  right  angle .  Wherfore  the  angle  BAC  t>bich 
is  in  the femicircle  BAC  is  a  right  angle. 

And forafmuch  as  (by  the  17*  of  the  firH)  the  two  'angles  of the  triangle  A 
'B  C, namely  ,A  B  C  and  BAC  are  lefle  then  tworight  angles ,  and  the  angle  B 
'A  C  is  a  right  angle. 'Therfore  the  angle  AB  Cis  lefe  then  aright  angle, and  it 
is  in  the  fegment  ABC  lohich  is  greater  then  the Jemkirde . 

And forafmuch  as  in  the  circle  there  is  a  figure  offourefides ,  namely,  AB 
C  D.  But  if whin  a  circle  be  defcribed  a  figure  offoure fides ,  the  angles  therof 
•tyhich  are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other  are  equall  to  two  right  angles  (by  the  22» 
*&f the  third)  Wherfore  (by  the  fame )  the  angles  ABC  and  ADC  are  equal l 

.  te 


ofSucliJes  Ekmentes .  FoLio^ 

to  two  right  angles  SB  ut  the  angle  AB  C  is  lefie  then  a  right  angle. Wherfore  the 
angle  remaining  AD  C is greater  then  a  right  angle ,  and  it  is  m  a  figment 
'W Inch  is  kfie  then  the  femicirck \ 

Now  ctlfi  I  jay  that  the  angle  of  the  greater  figment ,  namely  ,  the  angle 
yghicb  is  comprehended  'tinder  the  circumference  A  B  C  and  the  right  line  A  C 
is greater  then  aright  angle , and  the  angle  of  the  lefie  figment  comprehended 
tinder  the  circumference  AID  C ,  and  the 
right  line  AC  is  kfie  the  aright  angle; thick  / 

may  thus  he  proued.  Forafmuch  as  the  angle 
comprehended  lander  the  right  lines  BA  and 
AC  is  aright  angle,  therfore  the  angle  com * 
prehended -louder  the  circumference  ABC 
and  the  right  line  A  C  is  greater  then  a  right 
angle :  for  the  ~^bole  is  euer greater  then  his 
part  ( by  the  p.  common Jentence. 

Againe for af much  as  the  angle  comprt * 
bended  louder  the  right  lines  A  C  and  A  F 
is  a  right  angle ,  therfore  the  angle  com * 
prehended  lender  the  right  line  C  A  and  the 
circumference  ADC  is  lefie  then  a  right  an* 
gle. Wherfore  in  a  circle  an  angle  made  in  the 
femicirck  is  aright  angle, but  an  angle  made 
in  the figment greater  then  the femicircle  is  lefie  then  a  right  angle, and  an  an* 
gle  made  in  the fegment  lefie  then  the femicirck,  is  greater  then  a  right  angle < 
And  moreouer  the  angle  of the  greater figment  is  greater  then  a  right  angle:  ejr 
the  angle  of  the  lefie  figment  is  lefie  then  a  right  angle  :  lohich  mas  required  to 
be  demonstrated.  -A 

_  M  other  demonstration  to  proue  that  the  angle  B  AC  is  a  right  angle. For* 
dfmuch  as  the  angle  AFC  is  double  to  the  angle  B  A  E(by  the  ^*cf thefirfi ) 
for  it  is  equal!  to  the  two  inward  angles  mhich  are  oppofite.  But  the  inwarde  an* 
gks  are  ( by  the  5.  of the  fir  A)  equall  the  one  to  the  other, and  the  angle  A  E  B  is 
double  to  the  angle  E  A  C.  Wherfore  the  angles  A  EB  and  A  EC  are  double  to 
t  he  angle  B  A  C.  But  the  angles  A  E  B  and  A  EC  are  equall  to  two  right  an* 
gks:  Wherfore  the  angle  B  AC  is  a  right  angle.  Which  mas  required  to  he  de* 
i  monSirated. 

y^Correlarj, 

fb,  •  .  ,  ‘  »>  -  ‘ 

Her  eby  11  is  niantfjl fib  At  if  in  a  triangle  one  tingle,  he  etfuall 
to  the  two  01  her  angles  remaining  the  fame  angle  is  a  right 


The  fourth 

part. 


The  eft 
USt  part* 


•Another  De¬ 
monstration 
to  prone  that 
theang’e  in  a 
femicircle  is  4 
right  angle. 


A  CtmUasy. 


A*t  addition 
•■affelifatiHS, 


\ Denton  Sira - 1 
tion  leading 
So  an  abjurdi* 

th i. 


iAn  addition 
of  Cam  fane. 


X  . 


angle', for  that  the  fide  angle  to  that  one  angle  ( namely ,  the 
angle  which  is  made  of  the fide  produced  without  the  trian~ 
gle)  is  e  quail  to  the  fame  angles Jaut when  the  fide  angles  are 
equal!  the  one  to  the  other ft hey  are  alfo  right  angles . 


f  yfn  addition  off’elitarius. 


v\  V 


ppofite  vnto,  the  right 

'  ‘  C  ‘  '  '  \\  V  :  '*.?  '•  i  .' 

:\.  ■  m*  •  'c;  . :  ■  v  v 

1  \  .  '  • A  i  A.:  •  ~v  Y>  v  Y 


If  in  a  circle  be  infcribed  a  redangle  triangle  ,  the  fide  o 
angle  fhall  be  the  diameter  of  the  circle. 

Suppofe  that  in  the  circle  ABC  be  infcribed  a 
re&anglc  triangle  A  B  C,  whofe  angle  at  the  point 
B  let  be  a  right  angle. Then  I  fay  .that  the  iide  A  C 
is  the  diameter  of  the  circle .  -For  if  not,  then  fhall 
the  centre  be  without  the  line  A  C,as  in  the  point 
E.And  draw  a  line  from  the  poynt  A  to  the  point 
E,& produce  it  to  the  circumference  to  the  point 
D ;  and  let  A  E  D  be  the  diameter  :  and  draw  a  line 
from  the  point  B  to  the  point  D.Now(by  this' 3  1*  Aj 
Propofitio)  the  angle  A  B  D  flia.ll  be  a  right  angle, 
and  therefore  fhall  be  equall  to  the  right  angle 
ABC, namely,  the  part  to  the  whole  :  which  is  ab- 
furde.  Euen  fo  may  we  proue,  that  the  centre  is  in 
no  other  where  but  in  the  line  A  C.  Wherfore  A  C 
is  the  diameter  of  the  circle  :  which  was  required 
£0  beproued. 

f  Jin  addition  ofCampane. 

-  -  '.v 

By  thys  31.  Propofition,and  by  the  16.  Propofition  of  thys  booke,  it  is  mani¬ 
fold, that  although  in  mixt  angles, which  are  contayned  vnder  a  right  line  and  the 
.circumference  of  a  circle,there  may  be  geuen  an  angle  Idle  &  greater  then  a  right 
angle, yet  can  there  neuer  be  gene  an  angle  equall  to  a  right  angle.For  euery  fe&i- 
on  of  a  circle  is  ey  ther  a  femicircle,  or  greater  then  a  femicircle, or  Idle, but  the  an¬ 
gle  of  a  femicircle  is  by  the  i<5.of  thys  booke,  Idle  then  a  right  angle,  and  fo  alfo  is 
the  angle  ofa  Idle  Fedion  by  thys  3 1  .Propofition :  Likewife  the  angleofa  greater 
jedfion,  is  greater  then  a  right  angle,  as  it  hath  in  thys  Propofition  bene  proued. 

he  28.  Theorem,  The  3 zfPropoftion . 

If  a  right  line  touch  a  circle ^and from  the  touch  be  draymen  a 

nght  line  cutting  the  circle:  the  angles  which  that  line  and 

the  touch  line  maM,are  equall  to  the  angles  which  confjl  in 

the  alternate  fegmentes  efthe  circle . 

Y  Vppofe  that  the  right  line  EF  do  touch  the  circle  jlECD  in  the 
\  point  F> ;  and  from  the  point  F>  let  there  he  drawen  into  the  circle 
\AFCD  a  right  line  cutting  the  circle ,  and  let  the  famehe  FED. 
"  T hen  I  fay ?  that  the  angles  Svhich  the  line  D  together  Ipith  the 

touch 


of  Smiths  Ekmefrte's.  Pol .  104,* 

touch  line  EF  do  make ,  are  equallto  the  angles  "Which  are  in  the  alternate  peg* 
mentes  of  the  circle  ythat  is  y  the  angle  FBD  is  equall  to  the  angle  "Which  conji* 
fieth  in  the  fegment  B  A  Dy  and  the  angle  EBD  is  equall  to  the  angle  scinch 
conflict!)  in  the fegment  BCD.  f aije  l)p  (by  the  it,  of the  frJl)fromy  point 
B  » the  right  line  EF  a  perpendicular  line  B  A .  And  in  the  circumference 
B  D  take  a  point  at  all  aduenturcs}and  let  the fame  he  C.  And  draw  thefe  right 
lines  ADyD  C,md  CB.  And  for  afmuch  as  a  certaine  right  line  EF  tou* 
cheth  the  circle  A  B  C  in  the  point  B>  and from  the  point  B  ‘inhere  the  touch 
is  ra^fedio^nioihe'iouch  Im&perpen*  ■ 
dicular  B  A.  fherfore(hy  the  is?«  of  the 
third )  in  the  line  B  A  is  the  centre  of  the 
circle  ABC  D.Wherforey  angle  A  D  B 
being  in  the  femictrcle,  is(by  the  Z1*  of  the 
third )  a  right  angle  .  Wherefore  the  an* 
gles remaining  BAD  and  A B Dyare 
equall  to  one  right  angle .  But  the  angle 
AB  Fisa  right  angle.Wherefore  the  an* 
gle  ABF  is  equall  to  the  angles  BAD 
and  A  BD .  F  a  he  away y  angle  ABD 
* which  is  common  to  them  both.Wherefore 
the  angle  remayning  DBFfs  equall  to 
the  angle  remayning  BAD }  * which  is  in 
the  alteimate fegment  of the  circle .  And  for  afmuch  as  in  the  circle  is  a  fgure  of 
power fades  ymnelyyA  3  C  D)therfore(by  the  22*  of  the  third)  the  angles  "Which 
are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other yare  equall  to  two  right  angles.  JVberforethe  an* 
gles  B  A  D  and  BC  Dy  are  equall  to  two  right. angles .  But  the  angles  DBF 
and  D  B  E}  are  alfo  equall  to  two  right  angles .  Wherefore  the  angles  DBF 
and  DBE^are  equall  to  the  angles  BAD  and  BCD.  Of  "which  "We  bant 
pmied  that  th; angle  BAD  is  equall  to  the  dngle  D  BF .Wherefore  the  an* 
gleremaynmg  D  B  Ey  is  equall  to  the  angle  remayning  DCB}  "which  is  in  the 
alternate  fegment  of  the  circle-  ytamelyjn  the fegment  D  C  B.Ifther fore  aright 
line  touch  a  circle yand  from  the  touch  be  drnwen  a  right  line  cutting  the  circle: 
the  angles rwhich. that  line  and  the  touch  line  make y  are  equall  toy  angles  "Which 
cmfft  my  alternate fegmentes  of  the  circle :  * which  - Was  required  to  be  proued. 

In  thysPropoimon  may  be  two  cafes .  For  the  line  drawer*  from  the  touch  and 
Siting  the  circle,,  may  ey  they  patfe  by  the  centre  or  not .  If  it  pafle  by  the  centre, 
then  is  it  manifeft  (by  the  i8  .  6fthysbooke)  that  itfalleth  perpendicularly  vpon 
the?  touch  line,and  deuideth  the  circle  into  two  equal!  partes,  fo  that  all  the  angles 
itf  &he  feinidrcle,are  by  the  fbrihef  Propofitioh, right  angles,  and  therfore  equal! 
to  the  alternate  angles  made  by  thcfayd  perpendicular  line  and  the  touch  linc.Ific 
paiTe  not  by  the  centre,  then  followe  the  conftm£tion  and  dcmon&adon  be¬ 
fore  put.  '' 


Cenjbufiiots, 


Bmortfira- 

tion. 


Two  cafes  in 
this  Prope/i* 
tisn. 


Three  cafes  in 
this  tiopo/i- 
tion. 

The  firtt  (tfe, 
Conftruftion. 


Vemon/ka- 

tioti. 


Thefecond 

safe. 


l&The  ^.Trobleme.  "The  fifProfoJitm. 

t,  v  V*  .  •  -  '•  •  r  '•  rj  •  i  .  .«  v <? 

Vppon  a  right  lynegeuen  to  defcnbe  a  fegment  of  a  circle » 
mickfhall  contaynean  angle  e quail to  a  reBilirie  angle geue. 

$rppofe  that  the  right  linegeuen  he  A  Bqand  let  the  reBiline  angle gc* 
iten  be  C.It  is  required  Tpon  the  right  line  geue  A  Bto  defiribe  a [eg* 
ment  of  a  circle  "Which Jhall  contayne  an  angle  equal!  to  the  angle  C 
-Now  the  angle  C  is  either  an  acute  angle ?  or  a  right  angley  ordn  ob * 
tufe  angle* 

Firfty  let  it  be  an  acute  angle  as  v  ■ 

in  the firft  defcription.A n d( hy  the  23 
of  the  firfi)  Wpon  the  right  line  A  B 
and  to  the  point  in  it  A  defcnbe  an 
angle  equal  to  the  angle  Cy  and  let  the 
fame  be  (DAB*  Jf her fore  the  angle 
ID  Addis  an  acute  angle .  From I the 
point  A  raife  T>p(by  then •  ofyfrfr) 

''mi  to  the  fine  AD  a  perpendiculer 
line  A  FL  Andfhy  the  J  9  •  of  the  frjl ) 
deidde  the  line  A  B  into  two  equall 
partes  in  the  point  F.  And  (by  the  n. 

'of  the  Jhfiefftofn  ihepbintFfaife&p  Tmto  the  line  A  IB  a  perpendicular  tynq 
FGfnddYinn  dime fromGtoB.Andforafmdchas  the  line  A  F  is  equall  to  the 
line  F  3  and  the  line  FG  is  comm  on  to  them  both y  therfore  thefe-  two  lines  AF 
'and  FG  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  F  B  and  F  G:  and  the  angle  AFG  is  (by 
the  4g)Ctidon)  equall  to  the  angleG  F  B.  JVherfore(hy  the  4.  of  the  fame )  the 
bafe  A  G  is: equall  to  the  bafe  G  B.  Wherfore  making  the  centre  G  and  thefpace 
GA  dejdrtbe  {by  the  5  .peticion)  acircle  and  it  fall  pajfe  hy  the  point  B :  de* 
fcribefuch  acircle  &  let  the  fame  be  A  B  Be  Arid -draw  'a  line  from  E  to  B.Nop. 
fora'/imch  'as  from  the  ende  of  the  diameter  A  E,  namely }  from  the  point  A  is 
Urawen  a  right  line  A  D  making  together  "With  the  right  line .  A  E  a  right  am 
gkfherfrr/fhythe  cor fellary vf the  16.  of  the  third)  the  line  A  D  toucheth  the 
circle  'A*  B"E.  AndfotafMmhdsAcertaint  "'right  line  AD.  toucheth  the  circle 
A1. B  Egs  from  the  point  A  Cohere  the  touch  is  (is  drawen  intoy  circle  a  certaine 
right  line  A3:  therforefhy  the  32.  of the  third)  the  angle  D  A  Bis  equal!  to  the 
angle  A  EByvhich  is  in  the  dltefndte fegment  of  the cir  cle. But the angle  DAbB^ 
is  equall  to  the  angle  C ^herfore  f  he  angle  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  A  E  B.IVher* 
fore  hpon  the  right  linegeuen  A  Bis  deferibed a  fegment  of  a  circle  "which  com. 
tayneththe  angle  AEBfWhkh  is  equall  to  the  angle geuen /tamely yto  C.  : 

Butmufi'ppofe  that  the  angle  Cbe  a  right  angle.  It  is  againe  required 

■pm  *** 


of Sticlides  Elements s.  FoL 

port  the  right  line  ABto  defcribe  a  feg* 
merit  of  a  circle ,  which  JhaU  contayne  an 
angle  equal  to  the  right  angle  C. Defcribe 
againe  "Upon  the  right  line  A  B  and  to  the 
point  in  it  A  an  angle  BAD  equal  to  the 
reclilme  angle  geuen  C  (by  the  23*  of  the 
fr$l)  as  it  is  jet  forth  in  the  fecond  de*  ^ 

J crip t ion.  And  (by  the  10 ,of  the  fir  ft )  de *  ' 
nide  the  line  AB  into  two  equall  partes 
in  the  point  F.  And  making  the  centre  the 
point  F  and  the J 'pace  F A  or  FB  defcribe 
(by  l he  3 . petition)}  circle  ABB.  Wher*  ** 
fore  the  right  line  A  D  toilcheth  the  cir* 

cle  A  FB  :for  that  the  angle  BAD  is  a  right  angle W her fore y  angle  BAD 
is  equall  to  the  angle  "Which  is  in  thefegment  A  E  B}for  ^Je  angk  ‘Which  is  in  a 
Jemicircle  is  a  right  angle(by  the  31*  of  the  third )  But  the  angle  BAD  is  equal 
to  the  angle  C.  JVherfore  t here  is  againe  defcribe  d lapon  the  Itne  AB  a  Jegment 
of a  circle  jUamely  }A  FBpwhicb  contained?  an  angle  equall  to  the  angle  geuen 
namely  }to  C. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  angle  C  be  an  obtufe  angle.  Vpon  the  right  tine  AB 
and  to  the  point  in  it  A  defcribe  (by  the  of  the firft)  an  angle  BAD  equall 

to  the  angle  C:  as  it  is  in  the  third  defcription.  And from  the  point  Arayjb  Wp 
Tmto  the  line  AD  a  perpendiculer  line  A  B 
(by  then-  of the frjl )  And  agayne  by  the 
10  .of the fir  ft)  deuide  the  line  A  B  into  two 
equall  partes  in  the  point  F.  And  from  the 
point  F  rayfc  lop  Imto  the  line  A  Ba  per  pi* 
dicular  line  F  G  (by  the  11.  of  the  fame) 
draws  a  line  from  G  to  B.  And  now  forafi 
much  as  the  line  A  F is  equal  to  the  line  FB} 
and  the  line  F G  is  common  to  them  both - 
th  erf  ore  thefe  two  lines  A  F-aiidFG  are  e* 
quail  to  thefe  two  lines  B  F  and F  G :  and 
the  angle  A FG  is  (by  the  4  ♦  peticion)  equall  to  the  angle  B  FG :  "wherfore  (by 
the  4  *  of  the  fame)  the  bafe  AG  is  equall  to  the  bafe  G  B.Wherfore  making  the 
centre  G/ind  t he f pace  G  A defer ibe( by  the  3* peticion)a  circle  and  it  fhall pafie 
by  the  point  B:  let  it  be  deferibed  as  the  circle  AEB  is.  Andforafmuch  as  from 
the  ende  of the  diameter  A  B  is  drawen  a  perpendiculer  line  AD  therefore  (by 
the  correllary  of the  16.  of the  third)  the  line  AD  touche  th  the  circle  AEByr 
from  the  point  of  the  touche jnamely,  A  js  extended  the  line  A  B. JVherfore  (by 
the  32‘  of the  third )  the  angle  BAD  is  equall  to  the  angle  A  HB  lohich  is  in 
the  alternate  fegment  of  the  circle. But  the  angle  BAD  is  equall  to  the  angle  C 

Ee.j.  Wher <* 


E 


Demnffrs* 


Thethiri 

cafe., 

CmfmUwh 


Qmenjlrfa 
mm » 


Cotijlruftion . 


Vemonjlra - 
tmu 


Wherefore  the  angle  Tohich  is  in  the  fegment  A  HE  is  equal!  to  the  angle  C. 
Wherfore  ypon  the  right  linegeuen  A  Ejs  defcribed  a fegment  of  a  circle  AH 
Epvihich  contayneth  an  angle  equal!  to  the  angle gotten ,  namely  .  C:  Tsthich  leas 
required  to  he  done.  \  .  4 

S^fThe  C.Troblems*  The  54.  . £ Tropofition . 

From  a  circle geuen  to  cut  away  afeBion  which  fhal  contains 
an  angle  e  quail  to  a  reBtline  angle  geuen* 


j{:  Vppofe  that  the  circle  geuen  he  AC  and  let  the  reHiline  angle  geuen 
^y^r.be  D.  It  is  required  fro  the  circle  A  3  C  to  cut  away a fegment  "Which 
fall  contayne  an  angle-  equal!  to  the  angle  D.  Draw(bythe  17  of  the 
/  third)  a  line  touching  the  circle,  and  let  the  fame  be  EE:  and  let  it 

touche  in  the  point  3.  And  (by  the  23.  of 
the  prfi)  hpon  the  right  line  EF  and  to 
the  point  in  it  3  defer ibe  the  angle  F  EC 
equal l  to  the  angle  ID.  ISiom  for aj much  as 
a  ccrtayne  right  line  E  F touche th  the  cir* 
cle  A3  C  in  the  point  3:  and  foray  point 
of  the  touche ynamely fB }  is  drawn  into  the 
circle  a  ckrtaine  right  line  3  C ,  therefore 
(by  the  32*  of the  third)the  angle  FBC  is 
equal!  to  the  angle  3  yfC  Tvhich  is  in  the 
alternate  fegment.  But  the  angle  F 3  C  is  E 

equal!  to  the  angle  D.  Wherfore  the  angle 

3  AC  Tehich  con  file  th  in  the  fegment  3  A  C  is  equal 1  to  the  angle  55.  Where* 
fore from  the  circle  geuen  A  3  C  is  cut  away  a fegment  Eg!  C gtobich  containetb 
an  angle  equal 1  to  the  reHiline  angle  geuen:  Hitch  Teas  required  to  be  done . 

\  ^  a*  —  j>  )  v  \  '  1  '  •  -)  ■  ' 

T* he  zp .  Theorems ,  The  ffropojition • 

If  in  acircle  two  righ  times  do  cut  the  one  the  other Jtherect* 
angle paraUelograme  comprehended  vnder  the  fegmentes  or 
parts  of  the  one  line  is  equaU  to  the  reBangle  paraUelograme 
l  comprehended  vnder  the fegment  or  partes  of  the  other  line . 

'■  '  V-  .  ;  :  .  .  ,,  '  .  ,, 

«  I:  .  ",  -  -  ; .»  '»  ,  y  ;  \\  '  •.  v  '*  -  "4- 

Etthe  circle  be  A E  C  Dy  and  in  it  letthefe  two  right  lines  AC  and 
E  D  cut  the  one  the  other  in  thepoint  E.Thenlfay  that  the  reHangh 
farallelogramme  contayned  lender  the  partes  A  E  and  EC  is  equal!  to 

the 


ofSuclitles  Elementes ,  Fq/aq6, 


be  drawen  by  the  ce  ntre /hen  is  it  manifeji  fhat for 
as  much  as  the  lines  A E  arid  E  C  are  e quail  to  the 
lines  ©  E  and  E  B  by  the  definition  of  a  circle }  the 
re  cl  angle  parable  lograme  alfo  contayned  Imder  the 
lines  A  E  and  E  C  is  equall  toy  reft  angle  paralle * 
lograme  contained  bnder  the  lines  IDE  and  ED. 

But  now fippofe  that  the  lines  A  C  and  ID  B  be 
not  extended  by  the  centre ymd  take(by  the  i.  of  the  third)  the  centre  of  the  cir* 
cle  AD  C  D}and  let  the fame  be  the  point  F,  and  from  the  point  F  draw  to  the 
light  lines  AC  and  ©  B perpendicular  lines  FGand  F  H.  (by  the  n,  of  the 
fir  ft)  and  draw  thefie  right  lines  F  BfF  C  pnd  FE. 

Andforafmuch  as  a  certaine  right  line  FG  drawen 
by  the  centre yutteth  a  certaine  right  line  AC  not 
drawen  by  the  centre  in  fuel?  forte  that  it  rnaketh 
right  angles }  it  therfore  deuideth  the  line  A into 
two  equall  partes  (by  the  3.  of the  third).  Wherfore 
the  line  AG  is  equall  to  the  line  GC.  And  foraf 
much  as  the  right  line  AC  is  deuided  into  two  e* 
quail  partes  in  the  point  G}  and  into  two  Unequal! 
partes  in  the  point  E:  therfore  ( by  the  5  •  of the fecond )  the  re  ft  angle  paralleled 
gramme  contained  lender  the  lines  AE  and  E  C  together  "frith  the  fquare  of  tf?e 
line  E  G  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  G  C.  Tut  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  F 
common  to  them  both  pfrher fore  that  "frhich  is  contained  Imder  the  lines  AEtsr 
E  C  together  -tyitb  thefquares  of  the  lines  EG  and  G  F  is  equall  to  thefquares  of 
the  lines  GFEr  G  C.  But  l?nto y  fquares  ofy  lines  EG  iy  GF is  equally  fquare 
ofy  line  F  E  (by  the  4-1. of  the frit):  and  to  the Jquares  of the  lines  G  C  andGF 
is  equall  the  'fquare  of  the  line  l  C  (by  the fame)  Wherfore  that  1 frhich  is  contain 
nfdynderthe  lines  A  E  and  E  Cpogether  with  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  E  is  e* 
quail  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  FC.  But  the  line  F  C  is  equall  to  the  line  FB.  For 
they  are  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference.  Wherfore  that  "frhich  is 
contained  hnder  the  lines  A E  and  E  C  together  1 mb  the fquare  of  the  lyne  FE 
is  equal  to  the  fquare  of the  line  F  B.And  by  the fame  demonftration  that  "frhich 
is  contained  lender  the  lines  ©  E  and  E  B  together  "frith  the fquare  of  the  line  F 
E  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  B.  Wherfore  that  "frhich  is  contained  "bn* 
der  the  lines  A  E  and  E  C  together  -frith  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  is  equal l  to 
that  - frhich  is  contayned  Imder  the  lines  ©  E  and  E  B  together " frith  the  fquare 
of  the  line  EF.T ake  away  the fquare  of  the  line  EE  "frhich  is  common  to  them 
both. Wherfore  the  re  ft angle  par  allelogramme  remayning  -frhich  is  contayned 
Imder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  C  is  equall  to  the  reftangle  par  allelogramme  remay * 
idngj  which  is  contayned  bn  der  the  lines  ©  E  and  E  B.  If therefore  in  a  circle 
two  fight  lines  do  cut  the  one  the  other :  the  reftangle  par  allelogramme  compre* 

Ee.  tj ,  bended 


the  reftangle parallelogramme  contained  frnder  the 
partes  ID  E  and  E  B.For  if  the  line  A C  and  B  ID 


Two  Cafes  its 
this  fiopo/i- 
tion , 

Ftrft  cafe* 
Detnonftra* 

tion. 


The  fecond 

C*f<?r 

tonfruetkn * 


Vemotiflra - 
s'wu 


Three  cafssin 
this  I’ropQj'i- 
than . 


The  third 
safe. 


-i 


7 he  ttiirdTfooke 

hendedlander  the  fegmentes  or  parts  of  the  one  line  is  equall  to  the  reBan gle  pa$ 
rallelograme  comprehended  lender  the  fegmentes  or  parts  of the  other liner^hich 
"'was  required  to  he  demonUrated. 

In  thys  Proportion  are  three  cafes : For  eyther  both  the  lines  paffebytheceiv 
tte,  or  n  eyther  of  them  paiTcth  by  the  centre :  or  the  one  paffeth  by  the  centre  and 
tire  other  not.  The  two  firlb  cafes  are  before.dcmonilrated.  •*- 7" 

But  now  let  one  of  the  lines  onely,  namely,  the  line  zAC  pafle  by  the  centre,  which 
let  be  the  poynt  F,  and  let  it  cut  the  other  line,  namely,  B  E,  in  thepoynt  E  .  Now 
then  the  lind  AC  deuideth  theline  BE  eyther  into  two  equall  partes,,  or  into  two  vn- 
equall  partes .  Pyrft  let  it  deuide  it  into  two  equall  partes  :Whcreforefa!fo  it  deuideth  it 
right  angled  wyfe  by  the  5.  of  thys  booke .  Drawc  aright  line  from  B  to  F.  Where¬ 
fore  B  EF  is  a  right  angled  triangle .  And  for  afmnch  as  the  right  line  AC  is  deuided 
into  two  equal!  partes  in  the  poynt  F,&  into  two  vnequall  partesjin  the  poynt  £ .  Ther- 
fore  the  .redangle  figure  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  zA  E  and  E  C  together  with  the  fquare  of 
the  line  E  f,i  $  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  C 
(by  the  5.  of  the  fecond).  But  v.nto  the  fquare  of 
the  line  FC  is  equal!  the  fquare  of  the  line  2?  F 
/for  that  the  lines  F  B  and  F  C are  equall).  Ther- 
fore  that  which  is  cctayned  vnder  the  lines  AE 
and  E  C  together  with  the  Square  of  the  line  E  F, 
is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  F,  Butvnto 
•the Square: of th'ciinc B'F, are  equall  the  fquares 
oftheiints  BEzndEF  (by  the  47.  of  the  hrft). 

Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
tines  %AE  and  EC  together  with  the  fquare  of 
theline  E  F.,  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines 
ME  and  EF.  lake  away  the  fquare  of  the  line  ,  - 

EF  which  is  common  to  them  both  ;  Wherefore  that  which  remayneth,  namely,  that 
which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  *A  £  and  EC,  is  equall  to  the  refidue,  namely,  to 
the  fquare  o  f  t  he  line  BE.  B  ut  the  fq  uare  of  the  line  B  £  is  that  which  is  contained  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  B  £  and  E  E  for  (by  fuppofition)  the  line  BE  is  equall  to  theline  E  E, 
Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  E  &£C,is  equall  to  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  BE  and  E  E  s  which  va$  required  to  beproued. 

But  uowlet  the  line  zA Cpaffing  by  the  centre, 
deuide;  the  line  B  D  notpaffing  by  the  centre, vn- 
equalW in  the  poynt  E .  And  fro  the  poynt  £  raife 
vp  vnto  the  line  &AC  a  perpendicular  line  E  H, 
which  produce  on  the  other  fide  to  the  poypt  G. 

Wperefpre  (by  the  3.  ofthisbooke)  the  line  EH 
is  equall  to  the  line  E  G .  Whertore  as  we  haue  be¬ 
fore  proued ,  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  & 
lines  A  E  and  £ C,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  eon- 
tayned  vnder  the  lines  GE  &  E  H ;  but  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  B  E  and  £<Zhisalfo  < 
equall  to  tbft  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
G  E  and  £  H,  by  the  fecond  cafe  of  thys  Propositi¬ 
on  :  Wherfore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  e^£  and  £Cris  equall  to  that  which  is  con-  ■  ,v 

tayned  vnder  the  lines  BE  and  EE  1  which  was  agayne  required  t?  be  proued. 

Amongeftali  the  Propofitions  in  this  third  booke3doubtles  thys  is  one  of  the 
chiefeft .  For  it  fetteth  forth  vnto  vs  the  wonderful!  nature  of  a  circle  .  So  that  by 

« ■  7  *•  r.  w  -  it  '7 


-  M 


.  _  ■  \ 

\ _ \ 

F  •  - 

E 

/ 

\  ■ 

c 

m 


v 


ofSuclides  Element  es . 


Foh\ojt 


it  may  be  done  many  goodly  conclufions  in  Geometry  ,  as  (hall  afterward  be  de¬ 
clared  when  occafion  lhall  feme. 

’W  '*  •*  "  *  '*  '  *  '  ' 

£yThef  o. Theorem  e.  The  %6.  Tropojition* 

*  ■  - '  *  ■.  \\  ,  if.  \  -  ..  ,  'V:.  •'  *  ■  .  ..  ..  •-  -■  \  > -•_  /  _• 

If  without  a  circle  he  tahgn  a  certaine  points  and from  that 
point  he  drawen  to  the  circle  two  rift  lines  fo  that  the  one  of 
them  do  cut  the  circle ?  and  the  other  do  touch  the  circle:  the 
rectangle  parallel ogramm  e  which  is  comprehended  "snider  the 
whole  right  line  which  cutteth  the  circle,  and  that  portion  of 
the  fame  line  that  hetb  hetwene  the  point  and  the  vttercir > 
deference  of  the  circle ,  i  s  equall  to  the fquare  made  of  the  line 
that  touched  the  circle. 

*  •'  -  .  .  >  ei  ■%  i  2d.  . 

Vppoje  that  the  circle  be  AB  C :  and  without  the  fame  circle  taken* 
ny  point  at  all  aduentures/nd  let  the fame  he  CD,  And  from  the  point 
!  D  let  there  be  drawen  to  the  circle  two  right  lines  DC  A  and  D 
and  let  the  right  line  DC  A  cut  the  circle  AC  Bin  the  point  C /aid 
let  the  right  line  B  D  touch  the  fame.  'Then  I jay }  that  the  reftangle parallels • 
gramme  contayned  "tinder  the  lines  AD  and  D  C,  is  e  quail  to  the  fquare  of the 
dine  BD .  IsLow  the  line  DC  A  is  either  drawen  by  the  centre /r  not . 

Fir  ft  let  it  be  drawen  by  the  centre .  And  (by 
the  frft  of the  thirdjlet  the  poynt  F  hey  centre  of 
the  circle  ABC }  and  drdwe  a  line  from  F  to  B< 

Wherefore  the  angle  FBD  is  aright  angle.  And 
for  afmuch  as y  right  line  A  C  is  deuided  into  two 
equall partes  in  the  poynt  F/nd  "tinto  it  is  added 
directly  a  right  line  C  D /her  for e( by  the  6 .  of  the 
fgcond  )  that  'Svhicb  is  contayned  "Snider  the  lines 
A  D  and  D  C  together  yoith  the  Jquare  of  y  line 
C  F,  is  e quail  to  the 'Jquare  of  the  line  FD.  But 
the  Ime  F  C  is  e quail  to  the  line  F  B}  for  they  are 
drawen  from  the  centre  toy  circumference:  Wher * 
fore  that  lohich  is  contayned ". tinder  the  lines  AD 
and  D  C  together  t>ith  the  fquare  of  the  line  FB, 
ts  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  FD.Buty  fquare 
of  the  line  FD>  is  (by  the  47.  of  thefirftj  equall 
to  the '/quarts  of the  lines  F  B  and  BD  (for  the 
angle  FBD  is  a  right  an  fee) .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  "tinder  tfa 
lines  AD  and  DC  together  With  the  Jquare  of  the  line  FByis  equall  to  the 

Ee.iij.  j quarts 


CotlftyuakXi 


Two  cafes  in 
this  Propofi - 
tiov. 

‘IbefirRcapte 


DmmUra- 


Tktf?c9nA 

stft, 

Conflmtim ♦ 


VemonffM* 

eion. 


fquares  of  the  lines  F  $  and  T  0 .  Take  away  the fquartof the  lineFTidhkh 
k  common  to  them  both .  Wherefore  thatlohich  remaynethy  namely,  that  lohicb 
is  contayned lender  the  lines  AT)  and  D  Cy  is  equall  to  the  fquare  made  of  the 
line  D  B  lohichtoucheth  the  circle. 

Tut  now  fuppofe  that  the  right  line  D  C^Ahe 
not  drawen  by  the  centre  of  the  circle  ATC.  And 
(by  the  fir  ft  of the  third)  let  thepoint  E  bey  cen <* 
tre  of  the  circle  fifT  C.  And  from)  poynt  Efiraw 
(by  the  12.  of  the  fir  ft)  Tmto  the  line  AC  a  per* 
pendicular line  EE  y  and  draw  thefe  right  lines 
ETjECynd  ET)  .TSLow  the  angle  EE  ID  is  a 
right  angle  .Andforafmuch  as  a  certaine  right 
line  E  E  drawen  by  the  centre yutteth  a  certayne  E 
other  right  line  AC  not  drawen  by  the  centre  fin 
fuch fort  that  it  maketh  right  angles  3  it  deuideth 
it(byy  third  of the  third)  into  two  equall partes. 

Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  equall  to  the  line  FC. 

And  for afmuch  as  the  right  line  A  C  is  deuided 
into  two  equall  partes  in  the  poynt  Fyi?  7>nto  it  is 
added  directly  an  other  right  line  making  both 
me  right  line y  therefore  (by  the  6 .  of  the fecond) 
thatlohich  is  contayned  Crider  the  lines  Djland  D  C  together ‘With  the  fquare 
of the  line  E  Cy  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of the  line  F  0 ;  put the fquare  of the  line 
E  E  common  to  them  both.  Wherefore  that  nhich  is  contayned  Imder  the  lines 
0  A  and  0  C  together  1 vith  the Jquares  of  the  lines  C  F  andFEy  is  equall  to 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  F 0  and  EE.  Tut  to  the fquares  of  the  lines  F0  and 
F  Ey  is  equall  the  fquare  of the  line  DE(  by  the  4.7 -of  1 the  firfl  )for  the  angle 
EE D  is  a  right  angle .  „ And  to  the fquares  of the  lines  C  F  and  EE,  is  equall 
the fquare  of  the  line  CE  (by  the fame).  Wherfore  that  ahich  is  contayned  Tut* 
der  the  lines  A  0  and  0  C  together  1 nth  the fquare  of the  line  EC  fits  equall  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  ED .  Tut  the  line  EC  is  equall  to  the  line  ET: for  they 
are  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference .  Wherefore  that  lohicb  is  con « 
tayned  lendei  the  lines  A  D  and  0  C  together  loith  the  fquare  of the  line  E  Ts 
is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  ED .  Tut  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  EDyaree* 
quail  the fquares  of the  lines  E  T  and  TD(  by  the  47.  of the firSl)for  the  an* 
gle  ETD  is  a  right  angle :  Wherefore  that  lohicb  is  contayned  lender  the  lines 
A  D  and  DC  together  loith the fquare  of the  line  ETfis  equall  to  the  fquares 
of  the  lines  E  T  and  BD  .Takeaway  the  fquare  of the line ET  lohich  is  com* 
mon  to  them  both:  Wherefore  the  refiduey  namely y  thatlohich  is  contayned 'ion* 
der  the  lines  jiD  and  D  Cy  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  T .  If  therfore 
loithout  a  circle  be  taken  a  certaine  point  y  and from  that  poynt  be  drawen  to  the 
circle  two  right  lines yfo  that  the  one  of  them  do  cut  the  circle  f  and  the  other  do 


ofSttcliJes  Elemenies. 

touch  Whclrcle  i  We.  reftangk  pdralhlogramme  isMch  is  Comprehended  Tmdef 
the  lehole  right  fine  uhichcutteththe  circle  and  that  portion  of  the  fame  line 
that  Ueth  betwene  the poynt  and  the  latter  circumference  of  the  circle  js  equall  to 
the  fquare  made  of  the  line  that  touche th  the  circle :  lohich  leas  required  to  h 
demonftrated .  * 

%  A |  f  ...  ■_  \]  n  t  ; *!.  ,  1  '  ’•."r  V*  -  •  -  - 

fT  ipo  Corollaries  out  of Campane ■* 

If  from  one  andthe felfe fime  poynt  iakfn  Without  a  circle  be  drawen  into  the  circle  lines  hov» 
many  footer :  the  retiangle  Parallelogf amines  contaynedvnder  every  one  of  them  and  hys  outward 

are  t quail  the  one  to  the  other. 

if .  "  '  4  _ .  •-  ■  _  -  '  • •"  -  ,  ■  ' 

And  thys  is  hereby  manifcfl,  for  that  euciy  one  of  thoie  redangle  Parallelo- 
grammes  arcequali  to  the  fqtrare  of  the  line  which  is  drawen  from  that  poynt  and 
toucheth  the  circle  by  thys  3d* Proportion  .  Hereunto  he  addeth* 

If  two  lines  drawen  from  one  and  the feif:  fame  point  do  touch  a  circle,  they  are  equal!  the  one  to 
the  other.  * 

Which  although  it  neede  no  demcnftration,  for  that  the  fquarc  ofeyther  of 
them  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  line  drawen  from  the  fame 
poynt  ana  hys  outward  part :  yet  he  thus  proueth  it. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  circle  B  CD,  whole  A 

centre  let  be  E ,  and  without  it  take  the  point  A „ 

And  from  the  poynt  A  drawe  two  lines  AB  and 
*AD,  which  let  touch  the  circle  in  the  poyntes 
B  and  D .  Then  I  fay , that  they  are  equal! .  Draw* 
thefe  right  lines  EB,ED,  and  AE .  And  by  the 
l8.  of  thys  booke,eyther  of  the  angles  at  the 
poyntes  B  and®  is  a  right  angle.  Wherefore  (by 
the  47.  of  the  frit)  the  fquarc  of  the  line  E, 
is  equall  to  the  two  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and 
EB :  and  by  the  fame  reafon,to  the  two  fquares 
ofthelines  AD  and  ED .  Wherefore  the  two 
fquares  of  the  lines  AB  and  EB,axt  equall  to 
the  two  fquares  of  the  lines  tA  D  and  E  D.And 
rforafmuch  as  the  fquares  of  the  lines  EB  and 
ED  are  eqiiallrthereforethetwo  other  fquares 
ofthelines  AB  and  AD  are  alfo  equall  .Wher- 
fore  the  line  AB  is  equall  to  the  line  A  D ; which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  fame  may  be  proued  an  other  way :  Draw  a  line  from  B  to  D,  And  (by  the  $  .61 
the  firft)  the  angle  EB  D  i  s  equall  to  the  angle  E  D  B .  Andforafmuchasthe  two  an¬ 
gles  A B  E  and  <tA  D  E  are  equall,naniely,for  that  they  are  right  angles  :  if  you  take 
from  them  the  equall  angles  EB  D  &  ED  B,  the  two  other  angles  remayning,  namely, 
the  angles  ABD  and  ADB  flialTbe  equall .  Wherefore(  by  the  <5.  of  the  firft}  the  line 
AB  is  equall  to  the  line  A  D. 


\ 


/\ 


\ 

I  • 

E 

)  1 

/  ! 

/  . 

y 


f  Hereunto  alfo  Telitarius  addeth  this  Corollary. 

Trim  a  poynt  geuen  Without  a  circle, can  be  drawen  vnto  a  circle  onelytivo  touch  lines . 

The  former  defeription  remayning, Ifay  that  from  the  poynt  A  can  be  drawen  vnto 

Ee.iiif  the 


Fits!  CortHa- 


Second  Co* 
tddttry. 


Third  Cord* 

lary,  • 


thecircle  BCD  no  more  touch  lines,but  the  tsvo  lines’  A B  and  AD.  Forifiebepof- 
iible,  let  A  F  alfo  be  in  the  former  iigurc  a  touch  line,touching.the  circle  in  the  poynt 
F.Andprawe  a  line  from  E  to  F.  And  the  angle  at  the  point  F  fhall  be  aright  angle,  by 
the  1 8 .  of  this  booke :  Wherefore  it  is  equail  to  the  angle  E  B  A>  which  is  contrary  to 
the  20. of  the  firir. 

This  may  alfo  be  thus  proued.  For  afmuch  as  all  the  lines  drawen  from  one  and-the 
felfe  fame  poynt  &  touching  a  circle  are  equail, as  we  haue  before  proued,but  the  lines 
3  and  AF  can  not  be  equail,  by  the  8.  Propofition  of  this  booke,  therefore  the  line 
*A F  can  not  touch  tfe circle  BCD „ 


y&ffhe  iiSIheoreme*  1 he  37.  Tropofition* 

If  without  a  circle  be  taken  a  cert  nine point ,  and from  that 
point  be  drawen  to  the  circle  two  right  lines  jf  which y the  one; 

■  doth  cut  the  circle  and  the  other  falleth  vpon  the  circle ,  and 
i ha t  in fuch  fort }t hat  the  rectangle parallelogramme  which  is 
cotayned 'under  the  whole  right  line  which  cutteth  the  circle s 
and  that  portion  of  the  fame  line  that  heth  betwene  the  point 
and  the  y tiercircumferece  of  the  circle  fits  equail  to  the  (quart 
made  of  the  line  that  falleth  ypon  the  circle  :  then  that  line 
that  jo  falleth  vpon  the  circle  fhall  touch  the  circle. 


"This  propor¬ 
tion  ts  the  co¬ 
ney/ e  ofibe 
former. 


Confrufmn, 


Vemonftra- 


r Et  the  circle  be  ABC:  andlcith* 

Of  out  the fame  circle  take  a  point }  and 
»  the fame  be  ID, &  from  the  point 

fffiffD  let  there  be  drawen  to  the  circle 
ABC  two  right  lines  ID  C A  and  D B  2  and 
let  DC  A  cut  the  circle }  and  D  B fall  ypon  the 
circle,  And  that  in  juch Jort}  that  that  fhich 
is  contained  lender  the  lines  AD  and  DCy 
be  equail  to  the  fquare  of the  line  DB .  Then 
I fayjhaty  line  D  B  toucheth  the  circle  ABC, 

Drawe  (by  the  17*  of the  third ) from  the  poynt 
D  a  right  line  touching  the  circle  A  B  C  }  and 
let  the  fame  be  DE.  And(  by  the  fir/1  of  the 
Janie )  let  the  point  F  be  the  centre  of the  circle 
ABC:  and  draw  thefe  right  lines  FE,FB, 
and  F D .  Wherfore  the  angle  FE  D  is  a  right 
angle .  And  for  afmuch  as  the  right  line  D  E 
toucheth  the  circle  ABC ,  and  the  right  line  DC  A  cutteth  the fame ,  therfore 
(by  the  Tropo fit  ion  going  before  )  that  Tvbich  is  contayned  ynder  the  lines  AD 
and  D  C,  is  equail  to  thefquare  of the  line  D  E ,  But  that  Ifbkh  is  contayned 

ynder 


ofSmlkles  Ekmmtes ,  Fol.  lop. 

Suffer  f/;j?  ^ iZ)  and  D  C>  is  fugpofed.  to  be  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 

ID  3,  Wherefore  the fquar  e  of  the  line  D.  E  is  equall  to.  the  fquare  of  the  line 
■CD  3,  wherefore  a  l/o  the  line  DD  E  is  equal i  to  the  line  i&.CB  .  Wnd  the  line  F  E 
is  equal! to  the  line  F  3 for  they  are  drawen from  the  centre  toy  circumference., 
Flow.  thehfrc  thefe  two  lines  CD  E  and.  EF  are  equal!  to  thefe  two  lines  CD  '3 
mid  3  Ey  and  F  D  is  a  common  Fife  to  them  both.  Wherefore  (by  the  8.  of  the 
frsl)  the  angle  D  EF  is  cquall  to  the  angle  D  3  F.3ut  the  angle  D  E  Fis  a 
tight  angle .  Wherefore  alfo  the  angle  D  3  F  is  a  right  angle .  And y  line  F  3 
being produced  yf?all  be  the.  diameter  ofihe  circle .  CBpiffrom  the  end  of the  di * 
ameter  of a  circle  be  drawen  aright*  tine  making  right  angles ,  the  right  line fo 
drawen  toucheth  the  circle  (by  the  Corrcllary  of  the  16*  of  the  third) .  JVherfore 
the  right  line  D  3, toucheth  the  circle  jC3  C .  „ And  the  like  demonstration  Will 
feme  if the  centre  be  in  the  line  A  C.  If  therefore  without  q  circle  he  taken  a  cer* 
taine point yand from  that poynt  be  drawen  to  the  circle  two  right  lines ,  ofmhich 
the  one  doth  cut  the  circle yand  the  other  falleth  logon  the  circle 7  and  that  in  fuch 
forty  that  the  reft  angle  par allelogramme  'Which  is  contayned  londer  the  mhoU 
right  line  mhich  cuttetb  the  circle  pnd  that  portion  of the fame  line  that  lieth  be* 
twene  the  poynt  and  the  litter  circumference  of the  circle  ?is  equal!  to  thefquare 
made  of  the  line  that  falleth  logon  the  circleithen  the  line  that  jo  falls th  logon  the 
circle  Jh all  touch  the  circle :  -which  mas  required  to  be groued, 

-  ./J.  *  .  •  *  7  y- 

fjln  other  demon ft radon  after  Felitarius, 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  circle  B  C  D,  whole 
centre  let  be  £.-and  take  a  point  without  it, name¬ 
ly,^  :  And  fro  the  poynt  A  drawe  two  right  lines 
A  B  £>aand  A  C :  of  which  let  ABE)  cut  the  circle 
in  the  poynt  A,&  let  the  other  fall  vpon  it.  And  let 
that  which  is  contained  vnder  tbefines  tA  D  and 
A  B,  be  equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C .  Then  I 
fay,  that  the  line  AC  toucheth  the  circle  .  For 
f  rft  if  the  line  AB  D  do  palfe  by  the  centre,  draw 
the  right  line  CE .  And  (by  the  6,  -of the  fecond) 
that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and 
AB  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  line  EB,  that 
js,with  the  fquareofthe  line  EC{  for  the  lines 
£B  and  EC  are  equall)  isequall  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  oA E  .  But  that  which  is  contained  vnder 
the  lines  nA  D  and  AB/is  fuppofed  to  be  equall 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  tAC  :  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  (A  C  together  with  the  fquare 
©f  the  line  CE,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
A  B.  Wherefore  (by  the  laft  of  the  firft)  the  angle 
*t  the  point  Cis  a  right  angle.  Wherfore  fby  the 
^8, of  this  boke;  theline  A  Ctoueheth  the  circle. 


A 


v 


e Anwherth* 
monStratton 
afttr  teiit4n 

rim. 


7 he  third  eBoofy 

Btitifthe  line  ABD  dob  not  palfe  by  the  centre,  drawe  from  the  pointed  the  line 
A  2>,in  which  let  be  the  centre  £.And  f  orafmuch  as  that  which  is  contained  vnder  this 
whole  line  and  his  outward  part,  is  cquall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
lines  and  ex/ £  bythefirft  Corollary  before  put,  therefore  the  fame 
is  cquall  to  the  fquarc  of  the  line  «x/C,  wherefore  the  angle  EC  A  is  a 
right  angle  as  hath  before  bene  proued  in  the  firft  part  of  this 
Proportion. And  therfore  the  line  A  Ctoucheth  the  circle.* 

Which  was  required  to  be  prouedf 

(:,) 


The  ende  of  the  third  books 

of  Eudides  Elcmentes. 


*  ♦ 


HIS  fovuth  book®  inrreateth oftheinlcrip- 
tion  &circumfcription  ofrecHline  figures  :  how  one 
right  lined  figure  may  be  infcribed  within  an  other 
right  lined  figure, and  how  a  right  lined  figure  may 
be  circumfcribed  about  an  other  right  lined  figure, in 
fuchas  may  be  infcribed  and  circumfcribed  within 
or  about  the  other.For  all  right  lined  figures  cannot 
fo  be  infcribed  or  circumfcribed  within  or  about  the 
other.Alfo  it  teacheth  how  a  triangle,  a  fquare,  and 
certayne  other  reftiline  figures  being  regular  may  be 
infcribed  within  a  circle.  Alio  how  they  may  be  cir¬ 
cumfcribed  about  a  circle.Likewife  how  a  circle  may 
be  infcribed  within  them.  And  how  it  may  be  circumfcribed  about  them.  And  be- 
caufe  the  maner  of  entreatie  in  this  booke  is  diuer  s  from  the  entreaty  of  the  for¬ 
mer  bookes,he  vfeth  in  this  other  wordes  and  termes  then  he  vfed  in  them.  The 
definitions  of  which  in  order  here  after  follow. 

^Definitions. 

A  r i  Uiline figure  is  fayd  to  be  infcribed  inn  recUHne  figure, 
when  euery  one  of  the  angles  if  the  infcribed  figure  toucheth 
euery  one  ofthefides  ofthepgure  toherin  it  is  infcribed . 

As  the  triangle  A B  Cis  infcribedin  the  triangle  D  E  Fx  becaufe  that  euery  angle  of 
ityfcribed,na.mely,the  triangle  C  toucheth  euery  fide  of  the  triangle 
within  which  it  is  defcribed,namely,of  the  triangle  'DEE,  As  the  angle  CAB  toucheth 


It  *  i  -  * 


r.  - 

*+  « *  j 

cry 


F  G 


i  C  H 


ffiedldeSD  .*  the-angle  AB  (Toucheth  the  fide  trFfitid  the  angle  A  CT?  toucheth  the 
fide  £  F.So  likewife  the  fquare  A  B  CD  is  faid  to  be  infcribed  within  the  fquare'  MFC 
for  euery  atigleofit  toucheth  fome  one  fide  of  the  other.  So  alfo  the  Pentagon  or 
hue  angled  figure  cACBGDE  is. infcribed  within  the  Pentagon  or  fine  angled  figure 
J^o^/A.As^uifeeiiwhefigutey,  :  _  b  " 

Lfiemfi 


7 he  argument 
of  tins  boor^e. 


Fir  ft  define 
uorst 


Sc'xtddt- 


T he fourth^  ooke 

Lihgwifie  a  reBiline figure  is /aid  to  be  circumfcribed  about  a 
reBiline  figure,  when  euery  one  of  the  fide s  of the figure  cir~ 
cumjcribed toucheth  euery  one  oft  he  angles  of the figure  a - 
bout  which  it  is  circumf cribed. 


As  in  the  former  deferiptions  the  triangle  DEF is  faid  to  be  circumfcribed  about 
the  triangle  A  B  C,£ or  that  euery  fide  of  the  figure  eircumfcribed,namely,of  the  trian¬ 
gle'©  E  F  toucheth  euery  angle  of  the  figure  wherabout  it  is  circumfcribed.  As  the  fide 
DF  of  the  triangle  D  E  A  circumfcribed.toucherh  the  angled®  C  of  the  triangle  ABC 
about  which  it  is  circumfcribed:  and  the  fide  E  F  toucheth  the  angle  B  CA,znd  the  fide 
CD  toucheth  the  angle  C  A  B.  Like  wife  vnderftand  you  ofthcfquarc  Ai7  GH  which  is 
circumfcribed  about  the  fquare  ABC  D:  for  euery  fide  of  the  one  toucheth  fonie  one 
fide  ofthe  other. Euefo  by  the  fame  reafon  the  Pentagon  F  GEhIKis  circumfcribed  a- 
bout  the  Pentagon  A  BC'DE,  as  you  feein  the  figure  on  the  other  fide.  And  thus  may 
you  of  other  rediline  figures  confider. 


The  teferipti-  By  thefe  two  definitions  it  is  manifeft,that  the  infeription  and  circumjfcription 

non  andnr-  ojp re(%j}jne  figures  here  Ipoken  of,  pertayne  to  fuch  rediline  figures  onely,  which 
cT:ftftcn  haue  equal!  fides  and  equall  angles,which  are  commonly  called  regular.  It  is  alfo 
ponrcspertAi-  to  be  noted  that  rediline  figures  only  of  one  kinde  or  forme  can  be  inferibed  or 
t% ,h  only  to  circumfcribed  the  one  within  or  about  the  other.  As  a  triangle  within  or  about  a 

reguUrfi -  triangle:  A  fquare  within  or  about  a  fquare:  and  fo  a  Pentagon  within  or  about  a 

gum.  Pentago,  &  likewife  of  others  of  one  forme.But  a  triangle  can  not  be  inferibed  or 

circumfcribed  within  or  aboute  a  fquare :  nor  a  fquare  within  or  about  a  Penta¬ 
gon.  And  fo  of  others  of  diuers  kyndes.  For  euery  playne  rediline  figure  hath  Co 
many  angles  as  it  hath  fides.Wherfore  the  figure  inferided  muft  haue  fo  many  an¬ 
gles  as  the  figure  in  which  it  is  inferibed  hath  fides :  and  the  angles  ofthe  one  (as 
is  fay  d)  muft  touche  the  fides  of  the  other.  And  contrariwife  in  circumlcription  of 
figures, the  fides  of  the  figure  circumfcribed  muft  touch  the  angles  of  the  figure  a- 
bout  vvhichit  is  circumfcribed. 


r  he  third*'-  A  reBiline  figure  is  fay  d  to  be  inferibed  in  a  circle, when  eue~ 

fimtiotu  Qne  Qj:tyc  angles  0j' tfe  injertbed figure  toucheth  the  cir* 

cumfierence  ofthe  circle. 

'■  O.  {  \  ^  ^  „  S*. 

A  circle  by  reafon  of  his  vniforme  and  regular  diftance  which  it  hath  from  the 
centre  to  the  circumference  may  eafily  touche  all  the  angles  of  any  regular  redi¬ 
line  figure  within  it:  and  alfo  all  the  fides  of  any  figure  without  it.  And  therfore  a- 
ny  regular  rediline  figure  may  be  inferibed  within  it,and  alio  be  circumfcribed  a- 
bout  it.  And  agayne  a  circle  may  be  both  inferibed  within  any  regular  rediline  fi¬ 
gure, and  alfo  be  circumfcribed  about  it, 

As  the  triangle  A  B  Cis  inferibed  in  the  circle  A  B  C :  for  that  euery  angle  toucheth 
fome  one  pointe  of  the  circumference  of  the  circle.  As  the  angle  CAB  of  the  triangle 
AB  C  toucheth  the  point  a A  of  the  circumference  of  the  circle.  And  the  angle  A  C 

of 


ofSuclictes  Elementes « 

w 

of  the  triangle  toucheth  the  pointe  F  of  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  of  the  circle.  And  alfo  the  angle  AC  B  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  toucheth  the  pointe  C  of  the  circumference  of 
the  circle.  In  like  manner  the  fquare  A  D  E  F  is  inferi- 
bed  in  the  fame  circled  BC:  for  that  euery  angle  of 
the  fquare  infcribed5toucheth  fome  one  poynte  of  the 
circle  in  which  it  is  inferibed.  And  fo  imagine  you  of 
re&ilined  figures. 


Fa/.uu 


A 


The  fourth 
ieptiitfon* 


<tA circle  is fayd to  be  circumferibed 
about  a  reBiline  figure,  mte  the  cir~ 
cumference  of the  circle  toucheth  euery  one  of  the  angles  of 
the  figure  about  ’which  it  is  circumferibed . 

As  in  the  former  example  ofthc  third  definition.  The  circle  AD  EF  is  circumfcri- 
bed  about  the  triangle  A  B  C,becaufe  the  circumference  of  the  circle  which  is  circu  m- 
feribed  toucheth  euery  angle  of  the  triangle  about  which  it  i  s  circumferibed  .•  namely, 
the  angles  C  A  B,A  B  C,and  B  C  A.  Likewife  the  fame  circle  A  D  EF  is  circumferibed 
about  the  fquare  ACDEFby  the  fame  definition^ you  may  fee, 

A  circle  is  fay  d  to  be  infer i bed 'in  a  rettiline figure,  when  the  -tufifti*- 
circumference  of  the  circle  toucheth  euery  one  of  the  fide  $  of  finitioa* 
the  figure  within  which  it  is  inferibed . 


As  the  circle  A  B  CD  is inferibed  within  the  triangle 
2:  F  <7 ,  becaufe  the  circumference  of  the  circle  toucheth 
euery  fide  of  the  triangle  in  which  it  is  inferibed ;  namely 
the  fide  E  E  in  the  point  B ,  and  the  fide  G  F  in  the  pointe 
C,and  the  fide  G  E  in  the  point  D.  Likewife  by  the  fame 
reafon  the  fame  circle  is  inferibed  within  the  fquare  HI 
KL.  Andfomayyouiudge  of  other  re&iline  figures. 


E 


A reBilined figure  is [aid to  he  circum - 
Jcribed  about  a  circle,  when  euery  one  of  the  fides  of  the  fi* 
gure  circumferibed  toucheth  the  circumference  of  the  circle • 

As  in  the  former  figure  of  the  fift  definition,the  triangle  EFG  is  circumferibed  a- 
bout  the  circled  B  C  Dfov  that  euery  fide  of  the  fame  triangle  beyng  circumferibed 
toucheth  the  circumference  of  the  circle,about  which  it  is  circumferibed.  As  the  fide 
E  G  of  the  triangle  EFG  toucheth  the  circumference  of  the  circle  in  the  point  ‘Z>:  and 
the  fide  E  F  toucheth  it  in  the  point  B  :  and  the  fide  G  Fin  the  point  C.Likewife  alfo  the 
fquare  HIK  Lis  circumferibed  about  the  circle  A  B  CD,  for  euery  one  of  his  fides 
toucheth  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  namely,  in  the  pointes  A/B,CtT>,  And  thus 
confidcrof  all  other  regular  right  lined  figures  ffor  of  them  onely  are  vnderftanded 
thefedefinitionsjto  becircnmfcribedaboutacircle,  or  to  be  inferibed  within  a  cir¬ 
cle;  or  of  a  circle  to  be  circumferibed  or  inferibed  about  or  within  any  of  them. 


The  fixtde* 
nition* 


SeHtnth  de~ 
fmimn* 


'Conftmclhn. 


Two  caps  in 
this  Propo/I- 
von. 

Firfl  cafe • 
Second  cafe* 


Dewnftra- 

tion. 


ThefourthTooke 

A  right  lyne  is  fay  d  to  be  coapted  or  applied  in  a  circle,  when 
the  extremes  or  endes  thcroffallvppon  the  circumference  of 

the  circle . 

As  the  line  B  C  is  fayd  to  be  coaptcd  or  to  be  appli¬ 
ed  to  the  circle  JBCfov  that  both  his  extremes  fall 
vpon  the  circumference  of  the  circle  in  the  pointes  B 
and  C.  Likewife  the  line  'D  Et  This  definition  is  very 
neccfiary.and  isproperlytobetaken  ofanyjynege- 
nen  to  be  coapted  and  applied  into  a  circle,  fo  thatit 
exceede  not  the  diameter  of  the  circle  geuen. 

The  uTrobleme.  The  i.Tropofition* 

In  a  circle geuen ,to  apply  a  right  line  equall  ynto  a  right  line 
geuen  yp  huh  excedeth  not  the  diameter  of  a  circle . 


Vppofe  that  the  circle geuenhe  A  B  C,  and  let  the -right 
line  geuen  y  exceeding  not  the  diameter  of the  fame  circle , 
be  D.lSlow  it  is  required  in  the  circle  geuen  A  B  Cpo  ap* 
ply  a  right  line  equall  ynto  the  right  line  ID .  Draw  the 
diameter  of  the  circle  ABC?  and  let  the  fame  he  B  C. 
|  JSLoip  if  the  line  BCbe  equall  ynto  the  line  then  is 
that  done  Hehicb’tyas  required .  For  in  the  circle  geuen 


ABC  is  apply  ed  a  right  line 
B  C  equall  yntoj  right  line 
0 .  But  if  not then  is  the 
line  B  C greater  theny  line 
0 .  And( by  the  third  of  the 
frUjpnt  ynto  the  line  0  an 
equall  line  C  E.And  making 
the  centre  and  the  Space 
C,E}  deferibe  (  by  the  third 
p£tition)a  circle  E  G  Fxcut*. 
ring  the  circle  A  B  C  in  the 
point  Fytsr  drawn  line  from 
CtoF .  And  for  afmuch  as 
the  point  C  is y  centre  of  the 
circle  E  GFX  therefore  (  by 
the  definition  of  the firft)  the  line  CF  is  equall  ynto  the  line  CE  .  But  the 

line  C  E  is  equall  ynto  the  line  0.  Wherefore(by  the  firfi  common fentence)  the 

Urn 


\  VAC 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


Fol.uu 


line  C F  alfo  is  e quail Imto  the  line  D.  Wherefore  in  the  circle geuen  jlE  Cy  is 
apply  eda  right  line  C  A  equalllpnto  the  right  line  geuen  D:*$t>hich  leas  requip 
red  to  be  done * 

Tie  z.  Trohleme .  The  2.  Tropojition . 

In  a  circle geuen  Jo  defcribe  a  triangle  equiangle  ronto  atri' 
angle  geuen. 

o  o 

fppF'ppofe  that  the  circle  geuen  be  A  E  C:  and  let  the  triangle  geuen  be 
ID  EF.  Now  it  is  required  in  the  circle  geuen  A  EC  to  defcnbe  a  tri¬ 
angle  equiangle  pnito  the  triangle  geuen  ID  EF.  [Draw  (by  the  17. 
of  t he  t bird )  a  right  line  touching  the  circle  A  E  C^and  let  the  fame  be 
G  A  Fl^and  let  it  touch  in  the  point  A.  And  ( by  the  23*  of the  firf)  lentoy  right 
line  A  Hyand  Imto  the  point  in  it  A,  defcnbe  an  angle  H  A  C  equall  lento  the 
angle  DEE .  yfnd  (by  the felfe fame )  Imto  the  right  line  A  G?  and  Imto  the 
point  in  it  A}  make  an  an* 
gleG  A  E  equall  lento  the 
angle  DEE.  jfnd draw 
a  right  line  from  E  to  C. 
yfnd for  afmuch  as  a  cer* 
taine  right  line  GAEL 
touchethy  circle  A  EC 
and  from  the  point  Cohere 
it  touchethy  namely  x A )  is 
drawen  into  the  circle  a 
right  line  AC3  therefore 
(  by  the  ^1.  of  the  third) 

the  angle  HJC  is  equall 'Imto  the  angle  ji EC  Dibich  is  in  the  alternate  feg* 
ment  of  the  ciy  cle.  Eut  the  angle  FI  A  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  ID  E  F.  JE her  fore 
the  angle  A  EC  is  equall  to  the  angle  D  E  F.  And  by  the fame  reafon }  the  an* 
gle  A  C  Eis  equall  to  the  angle  D  EE.  wherefore  the  angle  remayningfE  A  Cy 
is  equall  lento  the  angle  remayningfE  D  F.  Wherefore  the  triangle  AE  C  is  e* 
quiangle  'Dnto  the  triangle  D  E  F.Jnd  it  is  defcribed  in  the  circle  geuen  A  EC. 
Wherefore  in  a  circle  geuen }  is  defcribed  a  triangle  equiangle  'Imto  a  triangle ge* 
lien :  "which  fas  required  to  be  done.  , 


5 -bfThe  3,  Trohleme . 

<iAbout  a  circle  geuen  fo  de\ 
triangle  geuen. 


The  3.  Tropofition. 

'■be  a  triangle  e quiangle  ynto  a 


H 


Suppofe 


Conffruftiont 


toemonJlrA- 

Sion, 


CmftmBm, 


Vemonttrx- 

tiott* 


jin  other  way 
after  Pelha- 
nus . 

ConflruBion. 


The fourth  Tiooke  f 

rPP°h  Ctr  tie  geuen  be  AB  Cyand  let  the  triangle  geuen  be  D  E  F* 

fjglp  It  is  required  about  the  circle  AB  C  to  defcribe  a  triangle  eqmangle  J>n * 
'  '  '  to  the  triangle  ID  E  F .  Extend  the  line  EFon  ech  fide  to  the  poyntes 
G  and  H » And  (by  the  frfc  of  the  third )  take  the  centre  of  the  circle  A  B  C,and 
let  the fame  be  the  point  If  And  then  draw  a  right  line  If  jB.  And  (by  the  23. 
of  the f  rf)  lento  the  right  line  IfB,andjnito  the  point  in  it  If,  make  an  angle 
B  If  A  equal l  Imto  the  angle  D  E  Gyand  likewife  make  the  angle  B  hfC  equal l 
A>nto  the  angle  D  F  FI.  And  ( by  the  if*  of the  third)draw  right  lines  touching 
the  circle  A}  B}C}  in  thepointes  A,  B,  C.  And  lety fame  he  LA  M}  M  B  hi, 
and  NCL.  And  for  afmuch  as  the  right  lines  L  M}  A Cldy  <w  FI  Ly  do  touch 
the  circle  ABC  in  the  pointes  AfBf,  and  from  the  centre  If  'imto  the  pointes 
AfBfj  are  drawen  right  lines  If  A,  JfBy  and  JfC (therefore  the  angles  lehich 
are  at  the  pointes  A/ByCy 
are  right  angles  (  byy  18. 
of  the  third  ) .  And  for  af 
much  as  the  fower  angles 
of  the  fower  ft ded  figure 
A  M B  If  jUreie quail  Imto 
fower  right  angles :  lehofe 
'angles  \ lfA\1}  &  KBM, 
are  two  right  angles:  ther * 
fore  the  angles  remayning 
A  If  By  and  AM  By  are 
equall  to  two  right  angles. 

And  the  angles  DE  G gs  ID  E  Fy  are(by  the  1  of  the  firflfje  quail  to  two  right 
angles .  Wherefore  the  angles  A  IfBy  and  AM B}are  equall  Imto  the  angles 
ID  E  G}  and  D  E  F:  of  lehich  two  angles  the  angle  A  If  B  is  equall  'imto  the 
angle  DEG :  Wherefore  the  angle  remayning,  A  M  B}  is  equall  Imto  the  an* 
gle  remayning y  D  E  F.  In  like  fort  may  it  be prouedy  that  the  angle  L  M  My  is 
equall  to  the  angle  D  FE.Wherfore  the  angle  remayning  M L  NyV  equall  lm* 
to  the  angle  remayning  EDF.  Wherefore  the  triangle  L  MTSLy  is  equi angle 
Imto  the  triangle  D  E  F:  and  it  is  defcribed  about  the  circle  ABC .  Wherefore 
about  a  circle  geuen  is  defcribed  a  triangle  equi  angle  lento  a  triangle  geuen: 
lehich  leas  required  to  be  done . 

y  An  other  leay  after  Teh  tar  ins. 

In  the  circle  ABC  inferibe  a  triangle  GHK  cquiangle  to  the  triangle  EDFfby 
the  former  Propofition)  :  fo  that  let  the  angle  at  the  poynt  G  be  equall  to  the  angle  D, 
and  let  the  angle  at  the  point  H  be  equall  to  the  angle  E:  andletalfothe  angle  at  the 
poynt  K  be  equall  to  the  angle  F  .  Then  drawe  the  line  LM  parallel  to  the  line  GH, 
which  let  touch  the  circle  in  the  poynt  A  (  which  may  be  done  by  the  Propofition  ad¬ 
ded  of  the  fayd  Pelitariu  s  after  the  17.  Propofition)  .  Drawlikewyfe  the  line  MN  pa¬ 
rallel  vnto  the  line  H  K  and  touching  the  circle  in  the  poynt  B ;  And  alfo  draw  the  line 
'  L  N 


cfSuclidet  Elementes. 


Fol.nu 


T>emonBr4< 

tion. 


IN  parallel  vnto  the  line 
G K  and  couching  the  cir¬ 
cle  in  the  poynt  G .  And 
thefe  three  lines  (hall  vn- 
doubtedly  concurre,as  in 
thepoyntes  L,M,andN, 
which  may  eaiily  be  pro- 
wed,  if  you  produce  on  ei¬ 
ther  fide  the  lines  GH, 

GK,  and  HK,  vntill  they  ^Y  /  \  \\ 

cut  the  lines  LM,LN,and  j  J  \  \ 

MN,inthepoyntes  0,Pj  /  /  \  j  \ 

QJp,S,T.  Now  I  fay,  that  /  \  /  '  \  /  \ 

feribed  about  the  circle  j  j\  '  ~7\- — - -A.  Tv 

A  B  C,  is  equiangle  to  the  /  /  \  \ 

triangle  DEF  ,  For  it  is  - - A  \ 

snanifeftjthatitisequian-  B  ^  H 

gle  vnto  the  triagle  GHK, 

by  the  proprietie  of  parallel  lines  .  For  the  angle  M  T  Qjs  equall  to  the  angle  at  the 
poynt  G  of  the  triangle  GHK  (by  the  29 .  of  the  firft)  and  therefore  alfo  the  angle  at 
the  poynt  L,  is  equall  to  the  felfe  fame  angle  at  thepoynt  G  (for  the  angle  at  the  point 
Lyis  bythefame  ap.Propofition,  equall  totheangle  MTQ^) .  Andby  the  fame  rea¬ 
son  theangle  at  thepoynt  M,is  equall  to  the  angle  at  thepoyntH  of  the  felfe  fame  tri¬ 
angle  :  and  the  angle  at  the  poynt  N,  to  the  angle  at  the  poynt  K .  Wherfore  the  whole 
triangle  L  M  N,is  equiangle  to  the  whole  triangle  G  H  K :  Wherfore  alfo  it  is  equiangle 
to  the  triangle  DEF:  which  was  required  to  be  done0 

irbflhe  4..  Trobleme .  The  4.  Tropofition* 

In  a  triangle  geuenAo  deferibe  a  circle . 

V bpofe  that  the  triangle  geuen  be  AB  CJt  is  required  to  deferibe  a  cm 

in  the  triangle  AB  C.  Deuide(hy  the  9.  of  the  firH)the  angles  Add*  Confimtkn* 
C3and  AC  B  into  two  equall partes  by  two  r'ght  lines  BID  a?id  Cl Z). 

And  let  thefe  right  lines  meete  together  in  the  point  D.  And  (by  the  12.  of  the 
fir  ft ) from  the  point  ID  draw  1? nto  the  right  lines  A  B3  B  C  and  C  A  perpendi - 
cular  lines  jiamely ,D  E3D  E3and  D  G.And  forafmuch  as  the  angle  ABD  is 
equall  to  tho  angle  C B  D3  and  the  right  angle 
B  ED  is  equall Imto  the  right  angle  B  F D. 

Mow  then  there  are  two  triangles  EBD  and 
FDD  hauing  two  angles  equall  to  two  angles , 
and  one  fide  equall  to  one  fide3  namely  3  ftD 
y vbich  is  common  to  them  both3  and  fubtendeth 
one  of the  equall  angles  Wherfore(  by  the  2  6. of 
the first)  the  re  si  of'  the  fides  are  equall  Tmto 
the  reft  of the  fides.  Wherfore  the  line  D  E  is 
squall  Imto  the  line  DE 1  and  by  the fame  rea * 

Jin  alfo  the  line  DGis  equalhmtoj  line  D  F, 

Ff  iij,  .  When 


T>emonJlra» 
tion  leading 
to  an  impef- 


Wherfore  thefe  three  right  lines  (DE}hD  F3 <CT 
©  Gyre  equall  the  one  to  the  otherfby  the  frit 
common  fentence).  Wherefore  making  the  cen» 
tre  the  point  (Dynd  the J pace  ©  Ey  or  ©  Fyr 
IDGylefcribe  a  circle  and  it  will pafie  through 
the pointes  E ,F JG y  and  "Will  touchy  right  lines 
A  FfF  CyndC  A .  For  the  angles  made  at  the 
pointes  EyFfiyre  right  angles .  For  ify  circle 
cut  thofe  right  lines  y  hen  fro  the  end  of  the  di¬ 
ameter  of the  .circle full  he  drawen  a  right  line 
making  two  right  angles y<ts  falling  "Within  the 
circle :  'Which  is  impofiihle ,  as  it  "Was  manifeAfhy  the  16.  of  the  third ) .  Where* 
fore  the  circle  defended jF)  being  the  centre  therofandthe  fpace  therof  being  el* 
ther  ©  Eyr  ©  Fyr  ©  Gyutteth  not  thefe  right  lines  A  FfFCys  C  A .  IF  her* 
fore  (by  the  Corollary  of the  fame)  it  toucheth  themynd  the  circle  is  defended  in 
the  triangle  AFC.  Wherfore  in  the  triangle  geuen  AFCy  is  deferibeda  circle t 
EF  G :  "Which  Was  required  to  be  done . 


c&The  5.  fProbleme .  The  5.  Tr op  option, 
zjfbouta  triangle  geuen  Jo  defer  the  a  circle* 

f  npof  that  the  triangle  geuen  be  AFC.  It  is  required  about  the  trian* 

|  AFC  to  dejeribe  a  circle.  (Deuide  ( by  the  i°*  of the fir  fl)  the  right 

lmes  J  g  and  j  C  into  two  equall partes  in  the  pointes  ©  and  E.  jfnd 
from  the  pointes  ©  and  E(by  then- of the firflfayfe  hp  lento  the  lines  A  Fes 
TJjree  cdfes  in  f  C  two  perpendicular  lines  ©  F  and  E  F.Flow  thefe  perpendicular  lines  meets 
tins  Fropo/i-  together  either  within  the  triangle  A  F  Cyr  in  the  right  line  F  Cyr  els  Without 
mn‘  the  fight  line  F  C . 

t  ct  Fir  A  let  them  meete  together  within 

(1 J'' Cd>  e‘  the  triangle  in  the  point  F.yind  (  hyy  frjl 
peticion )  drawe  right  lines  from  F  to  Fy 
from  F to  Cynd from  F  to  A.  yfnd  foraf 
much  as  the  lyne  A  ©  is  equall  Wnto  the 
line  ©  Fynd  the  line  ©  F is  common  lvn* 
to  them  both }and  maketh  the  angles  onech 
fide  of  him  right  angles  }therfre(  by  the  4. 
of  the  firfi)tbe  hafe  A  F is  equall  'pinto  the 
hafe  F  F.  In  like  forte  may  We  prone  that 
the  line  C  F is  equall  Wnto  the  lyne  AF. 

Wherfore  the  line  F  F  is  equall  Imto  the 
line  C  F.  Wherfore  thefe  three  right  lines  F  A3F  Fynd F  C  are  equal! the  one 

'  ■'  '  ^  "  the 


A 


Fol.  i$ 


the  othcr.Wherfore  makingthe  centre  the  point  F,and  thefpace  F  A,orF F,  or 
FCdcfcrihea  circle  and  it  f  hallpafie  by  the  poyntes  A  F  C.And fo  there  is  a  cir& 


fecond  defer  iptioryand  draw  a  right  lyne 
from  A  to  F,  and  in  like  forte  may  "tie 
prone  that  the poynte  F  is  the  centre  of 
the  circle  defcribed  about e~  the  triangle  B 

AFC. 

(But  nowfuppofe  that  the  right  lines 
<D  F and  E  F  do  meete  together  Without  • 

■the  triangle  AFC  in  the poyntF.Againe 
as  it  is  in  the  third  defcnption  draw  right 
lines  from  F  to  A  from  F  to  F, and  from  F  to 
C.And forafmuch  as  the  line  A  F)  is  equall 
Isnto  the  line  F>F,  and  the  line  DF is  com * 
mon  Imto  them  both, and. maketh  a  right  an *  e 
gle  on  eche  fide  of  him  gcherforf by  the  4.  of 
the firsifhe  hafe  A  F  is  equall  Tniio  the  hafe 
F  F.  And  in  like  fort  may  ~tye proue  that  the 
line  CF  is  equal hnto  the  line  A F.Wherfore 
agayne  making  F  the  centre,  and  the  fpace  F 
A,orFF,  or  F  C,  defcribe  a  circle  and  it  fbal 
pafie  by  the pointes  AfB,C,and fo  is  there  a  circle  defcribed  about  the  triangle 
AF  C,asye  fee  it  is  in  the  third  defcription.Wherfore  about  a  triangle geuen  is 
defcribed  a  circle :  'Anch  nvas  required  to  be  done . 


de  defcribed  about  the  triangle  A  3  L,asyc fee  in  the prjt  dejcnption, 
Fut  nowfuppofe  that  the  right  lines 
hp  Fand  EF do  meete  together Wponthe 
right  line  F  C  in  the  point  F,as  it  is  in  the 


y^Corr  clary  > 


Hereby  it  is  manifef  that  when  the  centre  of  the  circle faU 
leth  within  the  triangle, the  angle  2>  AC  being  in  a  greater 
fegment  of  a  circle  ts  lefe  the  a  right  angle.  But  when  it fal<~ 
leth  ifon  the  right  line  B  C  the  angle  B  A  C  being  in  a femfi 
circle  is  a  right  angle .  But  when  the  centre  fillet  h  without 
the  right  line  B  Qthe  angle  B  A  C  being  in  a  life fegment  of 
a  circle, is  greater  then  a  right  angle \  Whey  fore  alfo  when  the 
nnglegeuen  is  lefje  then  anght angle the  right  lines  T>  F 

Ff.iiij .  and 


Thefemi 

safe* 


The  third  , 
cafe. 


*«'•  * 


The fourthTooke 

and E Emit meete  together  within  the  fayd  triangle .  Tut 
when  it  is  a  right  angle  they  will  meete  together  Vpon  the  line 
2>  CfBut  whe  it  is  greater  then  a  right  anglejhey  will  meete 
together  without  the  right  line  CB  C. 

'  i/ 

f&The  6 .  Trobleme ,  The  6 .  Tropofitm* 

fna  circle  geuenjto  dejcribe  a fquare . 


ConJlruUm. 


Demnftnt* 

twt* 


Vppo  fe  that  the  circle geuen  he  ABC  ID.  It  is  required  in  the  circle  A 
BCD  to  defer  ibe  a  fquare.  (Draw  in  the  circle  A B  C  !D  two  diameters 
making  right  angles  ^and  let  the  fame  be  ACandB  Ds  and  draws  right 
lines  from  A  to  B from  B  to  C. from  C  to  D? 
and  from  D  to  A.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line 
B  E  is  equall  lonto  the  line  ED  (by  the  i> 
definition  of the  firfi)  for  the  point  E  is  the 
centre.  And  the  line  E  A  is  common  to  them 
both ynakjng  on  eche  fide  a  right  angle:  ther*  5 
fore  ( by  the  4*  of  the  firfi)  the  baje  A  B  is  e* 
qualllmto  the  bafe  A  D.  And  by  the  fame 
reafon  aljo  either  of  thefe  lines  B  C  and  C  D 
is  equall  to  either  of  thefe  lines  A  B  and  A  D: 
therefore  AB  CD  is  a  figure  offoure  equal 
fdes.I Jay  alfo  that  it  is  a  re  hi  angle  figure.  For forafmuch  as  the  right  line  B  2) 
is  the  diameter  of  the  circle  ABC  Dptherfore  the  angle  BAD  beyng  in  the fe* 
mi  circle  is  a  right  angle  (by  the  3 1  •  of  the  third)  And  by  the fame  reafon  euerp 
me  of thefe  angles  ABCfiBCD  and  CD  A  is  a  right  angle. Wher fore  the  fours 
Jided  figure  ABC  D  is  a  reft  angle figure }and  it  is  proued  that  it  conjifieth  of 
equall  fides  .Wiser fore  (by  the  3°- definition  of the  firfi)  it  is  a fquare ,  and  it  is 
defcrihed  in  the  circle  ABC  D:  Ahich  ~$>as  required  to  be  done . 


€mftruUm» 


T  he  y. Trobleme.  The  yfPropoJitwn* 

siAhout  a  circle geuenjto  describe  a fquare. 

11  rppofe  that  the  circle  geuen  be  AB  C  D.It  is  required  about  the  dr* 
^  \de  A  BCD  to  defer  ibe  a fquare.  Draw  in  the  circle  AB  C  D  two 
I  diameters  making  right  angles  Cohere  theycut  the  one  the  other ^  and 
let  the  fame  be  AC  and  B  D.  And  by  the pointes  AfiBf?Dy  dram 

'■  lb 


o/Smlules  Elements 

(by  the  17*  of  the  third )  right  lines  touching 
the  circle  A  3  C  Dyand  let  the  fame  he  F  Gt  <? 

G  H?H  If  and  If  F.  How  forafmuch  as 
the  right  line  I G  toucheth  the  circle  A3  CD 
in  the  point  A>  and from  the  centre  E  to  the 
point  A  "i there  the  touch  is  as  drnwen  a  right 
line  E  A ptherfirefby  the  1 8 .  of  the  third )the  ® 
angles  at  the  point  A  are  right  angles }and  hy 
the  fame  re  aj on  the  angles  tv  hick  are  at  the 
pointes  3}C?D}  arc  alfo  right  angles .  And 
jorajmucb  as  the  angle  A  E  3  is  a  right  an* 
vie gsr  the  angle  E3G  is  alfo  a  right  angle y 


FoLujjp 


J> 


Bemenfir*- 

thru 


they  fire  (by  the  28  •  of  the  firffthe  line  GH 
is  a  parallel  AUq  the  line  A  C:  and  hy  the fame  reafon  the  lyne  A  C  is  a  parallel 
Iwto  the  lyne  F  If  In  like  forte  alfo  may  t>e  prone  that  either  of thefe  lines  G  F 
and  i  I  If  is  a  parallel  An  to  the  lyne  BED  Wherfore  thefe  figures  G  If  G  C, 
A  If  F  f  and  3  If  are  parade  logrames.  Wherfore  (by  the  34-  of thefirftfthe 
line  GF  is  eqmllAito  the  line  El  If  and  the  line  G  El  is  e  quail  Ait  0  jhe  line  F 
If  And forafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  is  equall  Aito  the  lyne  3  D,  but  the  line  A  C 
is  equally  nto  either  of  thefe  lines  G  Hand  Flf:  and  the  line  3D  is  equall  to 
either  of  thefe  lines  G  F  and  H  If.  Wherfore  either  of  thefe  lines  G  Hand  Flf 
is  equall  to  either  of thefe  lines  G  F  and  H  If.  Wherfore  the  figure  EG  H  If 
con  fill  eth  of  four  e  e  quail fides.  I fay  alfo  that  it  is  a  re  Bangle  figure.  For  forafi 
muc h  as  GBEAisa paralklogramme ,  and  the  angle  A  E  3  is  a  right  angle : 
t  before  (by  the  34*  of  the frit )  the  angle  AG  3  is  a  right  angle.  In  like  fort$ 
may  Tp e prone  that  the  angles  at  the  poyntes  H}  If  and  F  are  right  angles . 
Wherfore  FG  H  If  is  a  re  Bangle foure fided figure  ?and  it  is  proued  that  it  con * 
JiUethof equall  fides:  wherfore  it  is  afquare,and  it  is  defer  ibed  about  the  circle 

A  b  C  D.  Wherfore  about  a  circle geuen  is  deferibed  afquare :  lohich  K>as  requi¬ 
red  to  be  done . 


yW  The  8 .  P  rob  l erne.  TThe  8.  FProfiofition 6 

fn  a Jquare geuen  fio  deferibe  a  circle . 

*bat  tnefquare geuen  be  A3  CD.  It  is  required  in  the fquare 


fywbea-circle.  Deuide(bythei° .  of the firft)  either  of  Confh 
theje  lines  A3  and  AD  into  twoequmpartes  in  the  pointes  EandF 
Jndby  the  point  E  (by  the  31.  of  the frit)  draw  a  line  E  HparalleHnto  either 

JVi-Lnln  /f  (tS  J  ITS  n  1/1*  1  \  »  1  .  1  .  .  _ 


r#cthn* 


gures 


Cmfiruftion. 


Vemonftrd- 

twu 


£• 


ie fourth  'Boo,{e 

gures  AJf >  KJ&}  A  H,H(D,JGjGC}(BG,  andG  rD  is  a  parallelograme > 
and  the fides  which  are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other }  are  (by  the  34*  of the  fir  ft) 
equall  the  one  to  the  other.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  ID  is  equall  1 mto  the  line 
yPB,  and  the  halfe  of  the  line  A  l b  is  the  line 
A  Ey  and  the  halfe  of  the  line  jd  is  the  line 

AFy  therefore  the  line  A  E  is  equalhmto  the 
line  A  F :  "therefore  (by  the  fame )  the  fides 
"Which  are  oppofite  are  equall.  Wherefore  the 
line  F G  is  equallmto  the  line  E  G.In  like fort 
may  We  prone  that  either  of thefe  lines  G  H,  f 
and  G  Kjs  equall  to  either  of  thefe  lines  F  G 
and  G  E.  JVherfore  (by  the  firH  common  fen* 
tence )  thefe  foure  lines  G  EyGFy  G  H,  and 
G  If  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherfore 
making  the  centre  G,and  the fpace  either  GE} 
orG  F fd  HyOr  G  If,  defcribe  a  circle  and  it 
Will  pa  fie  by  the  point  es  E}  F,  Fly  and  will  touche  the  right  lines  AF}  SC, 

€  DyUnd  CD  A. For  the  angles  at  the pointes  EyFyHyJf^j  are  right  angles.  For  if 
the  circle  do  cut  the  right  lines  AFByF  C,C  Dyand  V  Ay  then  the  line  which  is 
drawen  by  the  ende  of  the  diameter  of  the  circle  making  right  angles  fhould  fall 
within  the  circle  yWhich  is  impofiiblefby  the  1 6.  of  the  third)Wherfore  the  ceil* 
tre  being  the  poynt  G  and  the Jpace  beyng  G  EPor  G  FyOr  G  Hy  or  G  If  if a  cir * 
cle  be  defer ibed  fit  fhall  not  cut  the  right  lines  fifBy  S  CjC  D}and  D  A.  Where* 
fore  it  fhall  touch  them.yfnd  it  is  dejeribed  in  the fquare  AFC  ID:  wherefore  m 
a  fquare geuen  is  deferibed  a  circle :  which  Was  required  to  be  done. 

'  *  .  »  *1  f  \  r  I  Y  -  -  •  '•*'  1 

....  i.  -  - 

G&  The  q.  Trobleme .  1  he  p.  Tropojition . 

About  a fquare  geuen  yto  defcribe  a  circle . 


of SitcMes.  Eiementes.  FoL  1 15* 

like fortmay  ^eproue  that  every  one  of  thefe- angles  AB  CfBCD,  and  CD  A 
is  deuided  into  tiweqmll partes  by  the  right  lines  A  C  and  DB.  And  forafi 
much- as  the  angle  D  Jj-B  is  equall  Imto  the  angle  A  <BC>and  of the  angle  DA 
B  the  angle  E  AB  is  the  halfegnd  of the  angle  ABC  the  angle  E  rB  A  is  the 
halfe:  1  herfore  the  angle  EAB  is  equall Irnto  the  angle  E  B  A' ~ivherfore  (by 
the  6.  of  the  firft )  the Jide  E  A  is  equall  Imto  the  fide  E  Bin  like forte  may  7ve 
prone  that  either  of  thefe  right  lines  EAand  E  B  isequalhmto  either  of  thefe 
lines  E  C  and  E  D. Wherf ore  thefe foure  lines  E  A,E  B>E  Cgnd  E  D  are  e*> 
quail  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherfore  making  the  centre  E}  and  the  fpace  any  of 
thefe  lines  E  A}  EB,  EC}  or  ED.  Defcribe  a  circle  and  it  'Will  pajje  by  the 
pointes  AfBf  fD,andjhallbe  defcribed  about  the  fquare  ABC  D,  as  it  is 
evident  in  the  figure  AB  CD.  V/herfore  about  a fquare  gene  is  defcribed  a  rip* 
cle:  H>bich  "Was  required  to  be  done . 

jf  ABropoftion  added  by '  Belitarius. 

tat faunre  cit  cumfiribed  about  a  circle,  is  double  to  the fauare  injcribed  in  the  fame  circle . 


Suppofe  that  the  fquare  syi 2  CD  be  cir- 
cumfcribedabout  the  circle  EFG H,  whofc 
centre  let  be  K.  And  let  the  poyntes  of  the 
touches  be  E,F,G,H.  And  drawing  thefe  two 
diameters  E  G, and  FH,  and  thefe  right  lines 
FT,  FG,G H, and  H B,  there  fliall  be  infcri- 
bed  i n  the. circle  a  fquare  EP  G  H  (by  the  fixt 
cf this  booke  )  .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  fquare 
tsfBCD,i$  double  to  the  fquare  EFG  H. 
For  forafmuch  as  the  (ideWiS  of  the  greater 
fquare, is.(:by  the  34.ofthefirft)equaIl  to  FH, 
which  is  the  diameter  of  the  Jeffe  fquare :  but 
the  fquare  of  F  H  is  double  to  the  fquare 
whofe  diameter  it  is,  namely,  to  the  fquare 
EFG  El  (by  the  47.  of  the  firft)  .  Wherefore 
alfo  the  fquare  of  <sAB  which  is  <t ABC  D,  is 
double  to  the  fquaie  EFG  Ft:  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  proued. 


.4 


B 


(A 

K  \ 

m 

Thys  rrtay  alfo  be  dcnionftrated 
contaynedin  the  greatiquares. 


by  the  equalite  of  the  triangles  and  fquare* 


1  a 


ie  to,  Trobleme ,  Fhe  10.  Tropojition. 

To  make  a  triangle  of  mo  equall /ides  called  Ifofceles&hicb 
Jhallhaueeytberof  the  angles  at  the  bafe  double  to  the  0 - 


e. 


T»h 


#w». 


The  fourth  ^Boo^e 

Ake  a  right  line  at  all aduentures  Tvbich  let  be  A  $,&  (hyy  ii.  of 
the fecond)  let  it  he fodeuided  iny  pointe  C,  y  the  reft  angle  figure 
t  comprehendedlender  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  he  equall  lento yj quare 
Htbich  is  made  of  the  line  AC,  And  making  the  centre  the  point  A, 
iy  the  fpace  A  B,  defcrihe 
(by  the  petition)  a  circle 
BID E,  and  (by  the  i .  of 
thefourth)into  the  circle  B 
IDE  apply  a  right  line  BID 
equall  to  the  right  lyne  A  C 
“tobich  is  not  greater  then 
the  diameter  of  the  circle  B 
ID  E.  And  draw  lines  from 
AtoD  and  from  D  to  C. 

And(by  the  5.  ofy  fourth ) 
about  the  trianyle  ACD 

o 

defcrihe  a  circle  A  CD  F, 

And  forafmuch  as  the  reel * 
angle figure  contained  len* 
der  the  lines  AB  and  B  C 

is  equall  to  the fijuare  ^chicle  is  made  of  the  line  A  C:(For  that  is  by  fuppofition) 
But  the  line  A  C is  equall  lento  the  line  B  D.  Wherfore  that  "tyhich  is  contayned 
Wilder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  is  equall  to  the  fquare  1 vhich  is  made  of  the  line  B 
ID.  And  forafmuch  as  without  the  circle  AC  !D  Fis  taken  apoynt  B,  and  front 
B  lento  the  circle  AC  DF  are  drawen  two  right  lines  B  C  A,a?id  B  CD,  in  Juch 
fort  that  the  one  of  them  cutteth  the  circle, and  the  other  endeth  at  the  circumfe * 
rence,and  that  Vehicle  is  contained  Tender  the  lines  A B  and  B  C  is  equall  to  the 
fquare  Vehicle  is  made  of the  line  B  Dfherfdre  ( by  the  17*  of the  third)  the  line 
B  ID  touche th  the  circle  AC  D  F.  And forafmuch  as  the  line  B  D  toucheth  in 
the  point  CD, and  from  D  Cohere  the  touche  is, is  drawen  a  right  line  D  C,  there * 
fore  ( by  the  32.  of  the fame)  the  angle  B  D  C  is  equauf lento  the  angle  D  AC, 
'tobich  is  in y  alternate figment  ofy  circle.  And  forafmuch  as y  angle  B  DC  is  e* 
quahnitoy  angle  D  A  C , put  the  angle  CD  A  common  lentothe  both.Wherfore 
y  Tehole  angle  B  DA  is  equal  to  theje  two  angles  C  D  A,<zy  D  A  C.But  lento y 
angles  C  D  Ays  D  AC  is  equall  the  outward  angle  B  C  D(  hy  the  32-of the  u) 
Wherforey  angle  BD  A  isequallentoy  angle  B  C  V. But y  angle  BD  A  is  (by 
y  q.of  thefirfi)  equall ynto  the  angle  C  B  D, for  (by  the  15*  definition  ofy  firH ) 
the  fide  A  V  is  equall  lento  the  fide  A  B:  wherfore  (by  the  1 .  common fentence ) 
the  angle  D  B  A  is  equalhmto  the  angle  B  C  D.  Wherefore  theje  three  angles 
BD  A, DB  A, and  BCD  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  And  forafmuch  as 
the  angle  D  B  C is  equall  lento  the  angle  B  C  D,the  fide  therfore  B  D  is  equall 
lento  the fide  D  C.  But  the  line  B  D  is  by  fuppofition  equall  lento  the  lyne  C  A, 
j  r.  Wher * 


of Bnclides  Elementesl 

« 


Fol.nj . 


Wherfore  the  line  A  C  alfo  is  equal!  Ion  to  the  lyne  C  D.  Wherfore  alfo  (by  the  5. 
of  the  firsi)  the  angle  CD  Ais  equall  Tmto  the  angle  D  J.  C .Wherfore  the  an* 
gles  CD  A  and  D  AC  are  double  to  the  angle  CAD.  'But  the  angle  BCD  is 
equall  Jmto  the  angles  C  D  A  and  ID  AC.  Wherfore  the  angle  BCD  is  double 
to  the  angle  C  A  D.But  the  angle  BCD  is  equall  to  either  of thefe  angles  B  D 
AerDB  A  Wherfore  either  of  thefe  angles  BD  A  isrDB  Ais  double  to  the 
angle  D  A  B  Wherfore  there  is  made  a  triangle  of  two  equall  fids  ABD  hauing 
either  off  angles  at  the  bafe  D  B .double  to  the  angle  remayninu:  "tyhich.ypas  re* 
quire d  to  be  clone.  .  ;  ^  J 


Here  Cam  fane  addeth,that  the  two  circles  ACD  and  BDE,d o  cut  the  one  the  o- 
ther  :  and  that  the  circle  C  D  cuttcth  of  from  the  circle  B  D  E  an  arke  equall  to  the 
arke  B  D,  and  that  the  circle  BDE  cnttethoffromthecircle  <iACD  an  arke  equall 
to  the  arke  D  C. 


The  firft  part  is  manifeft .  For  if  the  lefle  do  not  cut  the  greater  but  touch  it  as  in 
thepoynt  D  .  Then  (by  the  1 1.  of  the  third)  the  centre  of  either  of  them  fhall  be  in  one 
line,namely,  in  the  line  AD :  for  that  in  itis  the  centre  of  the  greater  circle,and  in  the 
felfefame  is  thepoynt  of  the  touch  .  Wherefore  (by  the  31.  of  the  third)  the  angle 
zACD  isaright  angle.  Andtherfore(by  the  13.  of  the  firft)  the  angle  DCB  isaright 
angle  :  and  fo  (hall  the  angle  A  B  D be  a  right  angle(for  it  is  equal!  tojhe  angle  DCBy 
as  it  hath  beneproued)  which  (by  the  3  z.  of  the  firft)  is  impofllble ,  Wherefore  they 
fhall  cut  tne  one  the  other  as  in 

the  poyntesD HcE. Nowlfay,  T 

that  the  arke  ED  of  the  greater 
circle, is  equall  to  the  arke  DB% 
and  that  the  arke  ED  of  the 
leifife  circle,  is  equall  to  the  arke 
DC. 

Draw  thefe  tight  lines  E  A» 

EC, & E D.Nowthe(by  the  27 
of  the  thfrd)  the  foure  angles 
D  E  C,C E  A,  D  A  C,  He  AD  C, 
are  equall :  for  that  the  ark'es 
C  csf  and  C  D  are  equall  (  by 
the  2  8. of  the  fame).  Wherfore 
the  whole  angle  A  ED  is  dou- 
*ble  to  the  angle  B  AD, He  ther- 
fore  is  equall  to  either  of  the 
angles  yl B  D  and  A  D  A.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  angle  A  ED 
is  equall  to  the  angle  <sADE 
f  by  the  5.  efthefirft  )  forthat 
the  lines  A  D  and  <sA  E  arc 
drawen  from  the  centre,  therefore  the  two  angles  at  the  pointes  E  and  D  of  the  trian¬ 
gle  AED,ff\fd  be  equall  to  the  two  angles  at  the  poyntes  D  and  B  of  the  triangle 
ADBi  and  therefore  the  angle  remayning  of  the  one at  the  poynt  lA,  (hall  be  equal! 
to  the  angle  remayning  of  the  other  at  the  fame  points  (by  the  3  2  .of  the  firft)  .Wher- 
fore(by  the  2<?.of  the  third)  the  arke  ED  of  the  greater  circle,  is  equal  to  the  arke  D  B: 
And  .by  the  faille  the  at  ke  ED  of  the  lelfe  circle,is  equal!  to  the  arke  D  C :  which  was 
required  to  be  proued.  .  } 

Here  T#^Tnoteth,thatineueiyfuch  Ifofcelestriangie  asmthysplaceis 
the  triangle  A  B  D  (namely,ey  ther  of  whole  angle  at  the  bafe,is  double  to  the  an- 
gle.at  the  toppe)  the  angle  at  the  toppe,  as  in  thys  cxample,the  angle  at  the  poynt 
A  is  one  third  part  of  a  right  angle,  and  moreouer  one  fift  part  of  a  third  ofa  right 
angle :  that  is,  two  fift  partes  of  one  right  angle :  and  to  be  briefe,  one  fift  part  of 

Gg.j,  two 


Certaine  act* 
ditiom  of 
Campane* 

The  firft  part 
demonstrated. 


The  fecrnd 
part  demon* 
(hated. 


two  right  angles. And  either  ofthe  angles  at  the  bafe,is  two  fift  partes  oftwo  right 
angles,  or  foure  fift  partes  of  one  right  angle.  Which  fhall  manifeftly  appcare,  if 
we  deuide  two  right  angles  into  hue  partes .  For  then  in  thys  kinde  oftriangle,the 
angle  at  the  toppe  fliall  be  one  fift  part,  and  eyther  of  the  two  angles  at  the  .bale 
fliall  be  two  fift  partes. 

Thys  alfo  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  line  *AC  is  thefideofanequilater  Pentagon  to 
beinferibed  in  the  circle  AC D .  For  by  the  latter  conflru&ion  it  is  manifefl,that  the 
three  arkes  AC,C  D,andD  E,  ofthe  leffe  circle,are  equall .  And  forafmuch  as  by  the 
fame  it  is  manifeft  that  the  two  lines  zA  D  and  A  E  are  equalfthe  arke  alfo  A  E  fliall 
be  equall  to  the  arke  AD  (by  the  20. of  the  third) .  Wherefore  their  halfes  alfo  are  e- 
quall  .Iftherefore  the  arke  AE  be(bythe  30.  ofthe  third)  deuided  into  two  equall 
partes,  the  whole  circuference  ACDEA  fhall  be  deuidedinto  Hue  equall  arkes.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  lines  fubtending  the  fayd  equall  arkes  are  (by  the  29. of  the  fame)  c- 
qualfitherefore  eucry  one  of  the  fayd  fides  fhall  be  the  fide  of  art  equilater  Pentagon : 
which  was  required  to  be  proued .  And  the  fame  line  A  C  fhall  be  the  fide  of  an  equila¬ 
ter  ten  angled  figure  to  be  inferibed  in  the  circle  ^  T>  £  :  the  demonftration  wherof 
I  omitte,  for  that  it  is  demonflrated  byPropofitions  following. 


A  Proportion  #  A Tropojition  added  by  Telitarim, 

added  by  Pe-  '  \  '  ' 

Urilm,  right  linegeuen  being  finite,  to  defer ihe  an  equilater  and  equiangle  Pentagon  figure* 

Sup  pofe  that  the  right  line  geuen  be  A  B,  vpon  which  it  is  required  to  deferibe  a U 
equihter  and  equiangle  Pentagon  .  Vpon  the  line  AJB  deferibe ( by  the  23.  and  32. 
of  the  firfl)  an  Ifofceles  triangle  ABC  equiangle  to  the  Ifofceles  triangle  deferibed  by 
the  former  Proposition  :  namely,  let  the  angles  CAB  and  CBA, at  the  bafe  AB,  be 
equall  to  the  two  angles  ABD  and  ADB  in  the  former  eonfiru&ion  .:  fo  that  eyther 
of  them  fliall  be  two  fift  partes  of  two  right  angles,and  the  angle  at  the  toppe,  namely, 
the  angle  C,  fhall.be  one  fift  part  .Then  deuide  the  angle  C  into  two  equall  partes  by 
drawing  the  right  line  C‘. Z).  And  vpon  the  line  A  C,  and  vnto  the poynt  ^deferibe  the 
angle  CA  D  equall  to  the  angle  zA  CD,  by  drawing  the  line  A  D,  which  line  AD  let 
conciirre  with  the  line  CD,  in  the  poynt  Z> ;  and  that  within  the  triangle  zA B  C,for 
the  line  C  D  being  produced, fliall  fall  vpon  the  bafe  A  B, 
and  the  line  A  D  vpon  the  fide  B  C .  And  draw  a  line  from 
the  poynt  D  to  the  poynt  B  ,  And  for  afmuch  as  in  the 
triangle  zA  CD  the  two  angles  A  and  C  are  equalfither- 
fore  (by  the  6.  of  the  firfl)  the  two  fides  zA  D  and  C  D  are 
equall !  Againe  forafmuch  as  the  two  fides  CB  and  CD 
ofthe  triangle  CB  D,  are  equall  to  the  two  fides  CA  and 
CD  ofthe  triangle  zA  CD,andthe  angle  C  of  the  one, 
is  equall  to  the  angle  C  of  the  other  (  by  conflru&ion) 
therefore  (by  the  4.  of  the  firfl)  the  bafe  D  B  is  equall  to 

the  bafe  D  A,  and  fo  is  equall  to  the  line  D  C .  Wherefore  Y  % 

(by  the  9 ■  ofthethird)  the  poynt  D  fliall  be  the  centre  of 
the  circle  deferibed  about  the  triangle  zABC.  Deferibe 
the  fayd  circle  and  let  it  be  AB  E  CF  .  Now  then  the  an¬ 
gle  ADB  is  double  to  the  angle  A  CD  (by  the  20.  of 
the  third)  .Wherefore  the  angle  AD  B  maketh  two  fift  partes  oftwo  rightangles,that 
is,  one  fift  part  of  foil  re  right  angles .  And  for  afmuch  as  the  fpace  about  the  centre  D 
is  equall  to  foure  right  angles, then  if  the  fayd  fpace  be  deuided  into  fiue  angles  equall 
to  the  angle  A  D  B,  namely, into  fiue  fift  partes,by  drawing  the  right  lines  D  E  Sc  D  Fj, 
which  with  the  lines  D  A,D  B,  and  D  C,  will  caufe  the  fayd  fpace  to  be.  deuided  into 
fiue  equall  partes,  and  if  alfo  there  be  drawen  thefe  right  lines  zA  F,F  C,CE,and  EB: 
there  fhall  be  deferibed  a  re&iline  Pentagon  figure  zAB  E  CF,  which  fhall  be  equila- 
tcr,by  therule  of  a  circle  and  of  a  circumference, and  helpe  ofthe  4,Propofition  ofthe 


ofSuclides  Element es*  FoL  n  8* 

firft :  and  fliall  alfo  beequiangie(by  the  4.  and  j.  of  the  fame)  .  For  the  fine  angles 
kA,B,E}C,  F,  are  deuided  cch  into  ten  equall  partes  :which  was  required  to  be  done. 

If  we  confider  well  thys  demonftration  ofPelitarius,it  will  not  be  hard  for  vs, 
vpon  a  right  line  geuen  to  deferibe  the  reft  of  the  figures  whole  inferiptions  here-  Jslotc. 
after  folio  we. 


^7  he  n.  Trehleme .  Tfhe  u.  Fripofilion. 

In  a  circle  geuen  to  ieferihe  a  pentagon  figure  cecguilater  and 
equiangle . 

Tppofe  that  the  circle  geuen  be  ABC  DE.  It  is  required  in  the  circle 


jL fBCD  Eto  infenbe  a  figure  of  fine  angles  of  equall  fides  and  of  e* 
Squall  angles. Take  (  hy  the  proposition  going  before )  an  Ifofceles  trian* 
gleEtG‘B.ha*  ,  •'■■■ 

uing  eyther  of 
the  angles  aty 
bafe  GEIdou* 
hie  to  the  other 
angle, namely , 

1 onto  the  angle  $ 

F.And(by  the 
2.  of y fourth) 
in  the  circle  A 
BODE  in* 
feribe  a  trian* 
gk  ACID  e* 

quiangle  lonto 
the  triangle  E 

G  H.  So  that  let  the  angle  CAD  be  equaU  to  the  angle  F,ty  the  angle  AC  D 
^nto  the  angle  G,and  likewife  the  angle  CD  A  to  the  angle  H.  therefore  ey* 
ther  of thefe  angles  ACD,  andCDAis  double  to  the  angle  CAD .  Deuide 
( by  the  9.  of  the firU)  either  of  thefe  angles  A  C  D,and  C  DA  into  Wo  equall 
partes  by  the  right  lines  C  E  and  D  B :  and  draw  right  lines  from  A  to  B,from 
B  to  C  from  C  to  D,from  D  to  E,and from  E  to  A.  And  forafmuch  as  ’either 
of thefe  angles  ACD,  and  CD  A  is  double  to  the  angle  C  A  D:  and  they  are 
deuided  into  two  equall  partes  by  the  right  lines  C  E  and  D  B,  therfore  the  fine 
angles  D  AC,  AC  E,  EC  D,C  D  B,  and  BD  A  are  equall  the  one  to  the  d* 
ther. But  eq uall angles  (by  the  26.  of  the  third)  fubtend  equall  circumferences . 
W before  the  flue  circumferences  A  B,B  C,C  D,DE,  andEAare  equall  the 
one  toy  other. And  (by y  29 •  ofy fame )  lento  equall  circumferences  are  fubteded 
equal  right  lines  rtoherforej fine  right  lines  AB,BQ(JD  ,DE,{y  EAare  equal 
y  one  to  the  other. W  herforey  figure  ABC  D  Ehautng  fue  angles  is  equilater. 
l\,ow  alfo  I  fay  that  tt  is  e  quiangle. For forafmuch  as  the  circumference  A  B 

Gg.q.  u 


ConttmtHm 


DrnmHra- 

thru 


is  t  quail  to  the  circumference  DE3put  thedrcumference  BCD  common  fytt* 
to  them  both. Wherf ore  the  lohole  circumference  A  l B  C  D  is  equall  to  ineJWme 
circumference  EDCB: and ypon the  circumference  A 'BCD  conjifteth  the 

angle  AE  D3  4  _ 

andleppon  the 
circumference 
EDCBfon* 

Jifteth  the  an* 
gle  BAE. 

Wherefore  the  B 
angle  fBAE  is 
equall  toy  an* 
gle  A  E  ID  (by 
the  27.  of  the 
third )  and  by 
the  fame  re  a* 
fin  euery  one 
of  thefi  angles 

A  B  C}and  B  C  ID  3and  C  ID  Efts  equall  to  euery  one  of thefe  angles  B  A  E  and 
A  ED.  wherf  ore  the  fine  angled  figure  A  BCD  Efts  equiangle 3  and  it  is  pro * 
ued.thatis  alfio  equi  later.  Wherfore  in  a  circle geuen  is  defcribed  a  figure  of  fine 
angles  eqmlater  and  equiangle:  lohich  Teas  required  to  be  done. 


f  jfn  other  Tcqy  to  do  the  fame  after  Belitarius . 


Suppofe  that  the  Ifofceles  triangle  defcribed  by  the  former  Propofition,be  D  B  F, 
An  otler  way  p0  that  let  ey  ther  of  the  angles  E  and  F  be  double  to  the  angle  D :  And  let  the  circle  ge» 

tn  do  tht>  fame  Uen  bc  AB  C:  thece- 


to  do  the  fame 
after  Edit  a - 

nut. 


tre  wherof  let  be  K . 
And  vpon  the  centre 
K  deferibe  the  angle 
B  KC equall  to  one  of 
the  angles  E  or  F  of 
the  triangle  JDEF . 
And  draw  a  right  line 
from  B  to  C .  Then  I 
fay, that  the  line  BC 
is  the  fide  of  the  Pen¬ 
tagon  figure  to  be  in¬ 
scribed  in  the  circle 
AB  C.Deuide  the  an¬ 
gle  2?  .ATCinto  two  e- 
quall  partes  by  draw¬ 
ing  the  diameter  iA  - 
K  L  .  And  draw  thefe 
right  lines  BA  &  AC. 
Now  the  it  is  manifeft 
(  by  the  20.  of  the 
third)  that  the  angle 


H 


0L 


Fcidt p* 


SKCh  double  to  the  whole  angle  B  <tA  C. Wherefore  the  whole  angle  B  AC  is  equal! 
to  the  angle  vnto  which  angle,  the  angle  BKC  alfo  is  double  .  And  forafmuyh 
as  in  the  triangle  ABIC the  two  angles  Jan&B  arc  (by  the  5 .  ofthe  firft)  equall  (for 
thelines  K  A  and  KB  afedtawen  from  the  centre)  therefore  (by  the  32.0!'  the  fame) 
the  outward  angle  B  KL  is  double  to  eyther  ofthe  inward  angle's  KAB  and  KB  A* 
And  by  the  fame  reaft>n,the angle  C  KL  is  double  to  eyther  ot  the  angles  KAC  and 
K  C  Wherfore  forafmuch  as  the  two  angles  at  the  poynt  Aare  equall,  the  two  an¬ 
gles  Aand  i>  ofthe  triangle  AB  K,  are  equall  to  the  two  angles  A  and  C  ofthe  trian¬ 
gle  A  C  K,  the  one  to  the  other:  and  therefore  (bythe  26. ofthe  firft)  the  two  bales 
a A B  and  A  C  are  equal! .  Wherefore  AB  C  is  an  Jfofceles  triangle  .  And  forafuuieh 
as  the  whole  angle  B  AC  is  equall  to  the  angle  D,  the  two  angles  remayning  'fA  B  C 
and  AC B,  (hall  (by  the  3  2  .of  the  firft)  be  equall  to  the  two  angles  remayning  £  &  F. 
Wherefore  the  triangle  ABC  isequiangle'  to  the  triangle  D  EF . And  now  you  may 
precede  in  the  demonftration  as  you  did  in  the  former,  imagining  firft  the  lines  Bcj 
an &CH  tobedrawen. 


Here  it  is  a  plealarit  thing  to  beholde  the  varietie  of  triangles :  for  in  the  trian¬ 
gle  A  B  C  either  of  the  angles  at-  the  point  A  is  one  lift  part  of  a  right  angle.  Wher- 
by  is  produced  the  fide  ofa  ten  angled  figure  to  be  inferibed  in  the  felffame  circle: 
Which  is  manifeft  if  we  imagine  the  lines  BL  and  LC  to  be  drawen.  For  the 
arke  B  C  is  deiiided  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  poynt  L  (by  the  26-of  the  third). 
So  then  by  the  infeription  of  an  equilater  triangle,  is  knowen  how  to  inferibean 
Hexagon  figure,  namely,  by  deuidingech  ofthe  arkes  fubtended  vnderthefides 
ofthe  triangle  into  two  equall  partes .  Andfoalwayes  by  the  fimple  number  of 
the  fide,is  knovven  the  double  thereof  :  as  by  a  fquare  is  knowen  an  eight  angled 
figure :  and  by  an  eight  angled  figure  a  fixtene  angled  figure  Arid  fo  continually 
in  the  reft . 


‘ Tdit arm  teacheth  yet  an  other  way  how  to  inferibe  a  Pentagon. Take  the  fame  cm* 
cle  that  was  before, namely,  <±AB  C,  and  the  fame  triangle  alfo  D  E  F.  And  (  by  the  1 7. 
ofthe  third)  draw,  the  line  tAl  touching  the  circle  in’ the  poynt  A .  And  vpon 

the  line  ±A  M  and  to  the  poynt  ./A  deferibe  (  by  th^  2  3.  of  the  firft)  the  angle  MAB 
equall  to  one  of  the  fe two  angles  For  F  (  eyther  of  Which,  as  it  is  manifeft, is  leffe  then 
aright  angle)  by  drawing  the  right  line  *A  B  :  which  let  cut  the  circumf'erenceinthc 
poynt  B ,  Agaytfe ,  vpon  the  line  A  and  to  the  poynt  in  it  A,  deferibe  the  angle 
C  equall  to  the  angle  M  A<3,  bydrawing  the  right  line  AC:  which  let  cut  the 
circumference  in  the  poynt  C,  And  draw  a  right  line  from  5toC.  Then  I  fay,  that  B  C 
is  the  fide  of  a  Pentagon  figure  to  be  inferibed  in  the  circle  ABC  „•  Which  is  manifeft, 
if Wc  detiideth e  arke  ^Finco  twd-equall  partes  in  the  poynt  H,  and  drawthefe  right 
lines  A  Hand £7Aandifalfowedeuide  the  arke  AC  into  two  equal!  partes  in  the 
poynt  G,  and  drawthefe  right  lines  AG  and  CG .  For  talcing  the  quadrangle  figure 
A  B  CG,  it  is  manifeft  (by  the  3  2.  of  the  third)  that  the  angle  AB  C  is  equall  to  the  al¬ 
ternate  angle  N  A  C, and  therfore  is  equall  to  the  angle  F.tikewife  taking  the  quadran¬ 
gle  figure  ACEH',  the  angle  ACB  fhall.be  equallto  the  alternate  angle  MAB,  and 
therefore  is  equall  to  the  angle  F .  Wherefore(by  the  3  2 .  of  the  firft)as  before,  the  tri- 
angle  AB  C  is  cq  triangle  to  the  triangle  D  E  F :  And  now  may  you  procede  in  the  de- 
jnonftration  as  you  did  in  the  former, 

trr>.‘X ,  r  .w  . *  a,  •  v  ; 

\  *  s  /  1  ~  ^  ”  ‘ 

i&The  ii.Trcbleme.  Fie  iz.  Tropofition* 

Fjfhout  a  circle  genetic  to  deferibe  an  equilater  and  aquim^ 


Aft  other  iraj 
elfo  after 
FeEtarmte 


Cox  ft  ruction* 


Dmonttra* 

tmu 


<ThefourthcBooke 

iVppofe  that  the  circle geuen  be  ABCDF.lt  is  required  about  the  tir* 

5  j  cleAB  CDEto  defer  i  be  a  figure  of  fine  angles  cotififiing  of equal fides 

and  of equall  angles .  Take  the  point  es  of  the  angles  of  a  fiue  angled 
figure  deferibed  (by  the  ii.  of  the  fourth')  fo  that  by  the  propofition  goyng  be* 
fore  Jet y  circumfereces  A  BjB  CyC  DfD  Ey  and  EAbe  equal!  the  one  to  the  o* 
ther.  And  by  the pointes  Af&^QfDfi,  draw(by  the  17*  of  the  third)right  lines 
touchmg  the  circle ,  and 
let  the  fame  be  G  H 

J^j  IfL,  L  My  and M 
G.  And(by  the  r  of  the 
third)take  the  centre  of 
the  circle  zsr  let  the  fame  ^ 
be  F.  And  drawe  right 

o 

lines  from  F  to  B,  from 
F  to  If ,  from  F  to  Q> 
from  F  to  E}  and  from 
Fto  ID.  jfnd forafnuch 
as  the  right  lyne  FfE) 
toucheth  the  circle  A  B 
C  D  Fin  the  pointe  C> 
and  from  the  cen  tre  F 
lonto  the  point  f  lohere 
the  touche  is  Js  drawen  a 

right  lineF.Q  therefore  (by  the of  the  third)F(f  is  a perpendicular  line  lorn 
to  ifL.Wherfore  either  of  the  angles  lohich  are  at  the  point  Qis  aright  angle , 
and  by  the  fame  reafon  the  angles  lohich  are  at  the  pointes  D  and  B  are  right 
angles.  And forafnuch  as  the  angle  F  f  If  is  a  right  angle >  therfore  the  fquare 
lohich  is  made  ofF  If  is  ( by  the  47-  of  the firU)  equall  to  thefquares  lohich  are 
made  off  f  and  Q If  find  by  the fame  reafon  alj 0  the fquare  lohich  is  made  of 
F  If  is  equall  to  the fquares  lohich  are  made  of  F  B  and  B  if.  Wherefore  the 
fquares  lobicbare  made  ofF  (f  and  Q If  arc  equall  to  the  fquares  lohich  are 
made  ofFB  and  B  if}  of lohich  the  fquare  lohich  is  made  ofF  (fits  equal!  to  the 
Jquare  lohich  is  made  of  F  B.  Wherfore  the  fquare  lohich  is  made  of  f  If  is  e* 
quail  to  the  fquare  lohich  is  made  of  'B  lfwherfore  the  line  B  If  is  equall  lonto 
the  line  C  If  And  forafnuch  as  F  B  is  equall  Imta  F  CyindF  if  is  common  tft 
them  both  fther fore  thefe  two  B  F  and  F  if  are  equall  to  thefe  two  CFtsr  F  If  * 
ylnd  the  hafe  B  if  is  equall  lento  the  bafe  C  If  Wherfore(by  the  S.of the firH) 
the  angle  B  F  If  is  equall  lento  the  angle  JfF  C :  and  the  angle  B  JfF  to  the 
angle  F  if  Cl  Wherefore  the  angle  BFC  is  double  to  the  angle  JfF  C.  And  the 
angle  B  IfC  is  double  to  the  angle  F  if  C.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  angle  C 
F  ID  is  double  to  the  angle  C  FE^and  the  angle  ID  E  C  is  double  to  the  angle  F 
L  Q  And forafnuch  as  the  circumference  B  Q  is  equall  lonto  the  circumference 


ofSuclidesElementes,  FoLlio* 

(fD  fee  fore  (by  the  27.  of the  third)  the  angle  BF  Q  is  e quail  to  the  angle  C 
FID.  And  the  angle-B  FC  ts  double  to  the  angle  If  FCPand  the  angle  D  FC  is 
double  to  the  angle  L>  F  C,  upherfiore  the  angle  If  FC  is  e  quail  lento  the  angle  F 
FC.  IS.  gw  then  there  are  two  triangles  F  JfCyctfid  F  Lr  Lfauing  two  angles  e* 
quail  to  two  angles }and  one fide  equall  to  one  fide  gnamely  }F  Cgfhich  is  common 
to  them  botb.Wherforefby  the  26.  of  the  third ghe  other fides  remayning  are  e* 
quad  lento  the  fides  remayning (and  the  angle  remayning  lento  the  angle  remay * 
iiing.W  before  the  right  line  IfCis  equall  to  the  right  line  CJL}  and  the  angle 
F  jfC  to  the  angle  F  L  C .  yfndforufinuch  as  If  C  is  equall  to  C  L :  therefore 
dfjd  is  double  to  KjC,and  by  the  fame ‘reqfon  alfo  may  it  be proued  that  Fi If 
is  double  to  B  Jf.  And forafmuch  as  it  is  proued  that  IB  If  is  equall  lento  IfC f 
and  K  L  is  double  to  K  C}  and  FI  K  double  to  B  K,  therfore  Fi  K  is  equall 
lento  K  L.  In  like fort  may  Tee  prouey  euery  one  of tbefe  lines  Fi  Gfi  fyffijr  M 
h  is  equall  lento  either  ofthefe  lines  Fi  K  and  K  L.  wherefore  thefiue  angled 
figure  G  HKLM  is  of equall  fides.  I fay  aljo  that  it  is  of equall  angles.  For 
forafmuch  as  the  angle  F  K  C  is  equall  lento  the  angle  FL  CP  and  it  is  proued 
that  the  angle  FFKF  is  double  to  the  angle  FKCy  and  the  angle  KFIF  is 
double  to  the  angle  F  DC,  therefore  the  angle  Fi  KD  is  equall  to  the  angle  K 
F  M.  In  like  fort  may  it  he  proued  that  euery  one  of tbefe  angles  K  FiG?  FiG 
Ff,and  G  MFfs  equall  to  either  ofthefe  angles  FFKF}  and  K  FM.  Where * 
fore  the  fine  angles  G  Frl  KyFi  K  FyK  F  Mf  MG}  and  MG  Fi  are  equall 
the  one  to  the  other. Wherfore  the fiue  angled  figure  G  FiKLMis  equiangle} 
and  it  is  alfo proued  that  it  is  equilater >and  it  is  deferibed  about  the  circle  AB 
CDF:  1 vhich  leas  required  to  be  done. 

An  other  leay  to  do  the  fame  after  Telitariusfiy  parallel  lines. 

.Suppofe  that  the  circle  ge- 
Itch  be  A  B  C,wBofe  c&tre  let 
bethepoynt  F:  and  in  it  (  by 
thefbrmcr  Proportion)  in- 
feribe  an  equilater  and  equi- 
"angle  Pentagon  AB CD E: 
by  whofe  fuie  angles  drawe 
■from  the  centre  beyond  the 
circuferencejhue  lynes,  F  G, 

F  H,F  K,FI.,andFM.  And  it 
is  manifeft,  that  the  due  an¬ 
gles  at  the  cetre  F,are  equall, 
when  as  the  fiue  fides  of  the 
triangles  within  are  eqUall, 
and  alfo  their  bafes.  It  is  ma- 
nifeft  alfo ,  that  the.  hue  an¬ 
gles  of  the  Pentagon  which 
are  at  the  circumference,  are 
deuided  into  ten  equall  an¬ 
gles  ( by  the  4.  of  the  firft)  t 
Now  then  betwene  the  two 
lines  F  G  and  F  H,  draw  the 

Gg.iiij, 


dn  ether  Tray 
to  do  the  fame 
af  ter  Petite- 
ms. 


line 


I5emnftrA' 

tim* 


ThefcurthTooke 


imc  G  H  parallel  to  the  fide  A  B,and  touching  the  circle  A  B  C  ( which  is  done  by  a  Pro- 
pofition  added  by  Tclitarius  after  the  1 7.of  the  third) .  And  To  likewyfe  draw  thefe  lines 
H  K,K  L,  and  L  M,  parallel  to  ech  of  thefe  fides  B  C,  C  D,  and  D(E,  and  touching  the 
circle .  And  for  afmuch  as  the  lines  F  Gand  F  H  fall  vpon  the  two  parallel  lines  A  B  and 
G  H,the  two  angles  FGH,&FH  G,are  equall  to  the  two  angles  FAB  and  F  B  A,  the 
one  to  the  other  (by  the  2  5^  of  the  firft),  Wherefore  (  by  thefixt  of  the  fame )  the  two 
lines  FGand  FH  are  equall .  And  by  the  fame  rcafon,  the  two  angles  FHK&FKH, 
are  equall  to  the  two  angles  FGH  and  FHG  the  one  to  the  other  ;  and  the  line  FK 
is  equall  to  the  line  F  H,  and  therefore  is  equall  to  the  line  F  G.  Andforafmuch  as  the 
angles  at  the  poynt  F  are  equall,  therefore(by  the  4. of  the  firft)the  bafe  H  K  is  equal! 
to  the  bafe  G  H .  In  like  fort  ai  ay  we  proue,  that  the  three  lines  F  K,  F  L,  and  F  M,  are 
equall  to  the  two  lines  FG  and  FH.  And  alfo  that  the  two  bafes  KL  and  LM,  are  e- 
quail  to  the  two  bafes  GH  and  HK :  and  that  the  angles  which  they  make  with  the 
lines  F  K,  F  L,  and  F  Id,  ate  equall  the  one  to  the  other  .  Now  then  draw  the  fift  line 
M  G :  which  {hall  be  equall  to 
fche  foure  former  lines  (  by 
the  4.  of  the  firft)  for  that  as 
we  haue  proired  ,  the  two 
lines  FG  &  FM,  ate  equall, 

&the  angle  GFM  is  equall 
to  euery  one  of  the  angles  at 
the  poynt  F .  Thys  line  alfo 
M  G  touchcth  the  circle,  ForH 
vnto  the  point  where  the  line 
L  M  toucheth  the  circle  whi- 
the  let  be  N,  drawee  the  lyne 
F'N.And  it  is  manifeft(by  the 
1 8. of  the  third )  that  either 
of  the  angles  at  the  poynt  N, 
is  a  right  angle  .  Wherefore 
forafmuch-asthe  angle  L  of 
the  triangle  F  L  N,  is  equall 
to  the  angle  M  of  the  trian¬ 
gle  FMN,&  the  angle  N  of 
the  one,is  equall  to  the  angle 

N  of  the  other :  and  the  lyne  ,  {  ,  _r, 

F  N  is  comon  to  the  both,  the  line  N  L  {hall  (by  the  i  tf.ofthe  firft)  be  equall  to  the  line 
N  M  .  And  fo  is  the  line  ML  deuided  equally  in  the  poynt  N.  And  forafmuch  as  the 
three  fides  of  the  triangle  F  G  P  arc  equall  to  the  three  fides  of the  triangle  F  M  P,the 
angle  P  of  the  one  fhal  be  equall  to  the  angle  P  of  the  other(by  the  §  .of  the  firft)  ,Wher- 
fore  either  of  the  is  a  right  ahglef  by  the  1 3  .of  the  fame).  And  forafmuch  as  the  two  an¬ 
gles  FMP  and  F  P  M  of  the  triangle  FMP,are  equall  to  the  two  angles  FMN  &FNM 
of  the  triangle  F  M  N,and  the  fide  F  M  is  common  to  them  both,  therefore  the  line  F  P 
is  equall  to  the  line  FN.  But  the  line  FN  isdrawen  from  the  centre, to  the  circumfe¬ 
rence.  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  F  P  is  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  MG  is  perpendicular  to  the  line  F  P,  therefore  (by  the  Corolla¬ 
ry  of  the  1 6.  of  the  third)  it  toucheth  the  circle.  Wherfore  the  Pentagon  GHKLM 
circumfcribed  about  the  circle  is  equilater :  it  isalfo  eq  triangle,  as  it  is  cafie  to  proue 
by  the  equalitie  of  the  halfcs :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

y'  \  .  ■  li  s 

§&  The  13.  Trohleme,  The  13. 5 Proportion. 


An  equilater  and equiangle pent agon  figure  bey  nggeuen,  to 
deferibe  in  it  a  circle . 


Fol.nu 


f'O'  tqum 
^j/V  required  in  ihejaidfeue  anc 


Jetago}  _ 

yireAB  C  D  E,  to  deferibe  a  circle. 


^Deuulef  by  the  the  cy.of the ferlt)either  of  thefe  angles  B  C  Dymd  C  ID 
two  equall  paries' ’fey  thefe  right  lines  C  F  and  F  D}andfrom  the  point  F 


Inhere  thefe  right  lines  C  Fand  D  F  meet e. Draw  thefe  right  lines  F  BfiAfts 
F  E.  And  forafmuch  as  B  C  is  equal  tint o  CD  and  CF  is  common  to  them  both . 
Wherefore  thefe  two 
lines  B  C  and  C  F  are 
equal  to  thefe  two  lines 
ID  C  and  C  F:  and  the 
angle  B  C  F  is  equal l  to 
the  angle  D  C  F.Wher  § 
fore  (by  the  4.  of  the 
ferfl)the  bafeB  F  is  e* 
quail  to  the  hafe  D  Fy 
and  the  triangle  B  CF 
is  equallto  the  triangle 
DCF }  and  the  an * 
gles  remaining  <are  e* 
quad  lento  the  angles 
remaynjng  the  one 
to  the  other  , 


lohich  are fubt ended  e*  r 

quail fides .  Wherefore  the  angle  CBF  is  equal l  to  the  angle  CDF.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  angle  C  D  Eis  double  to  the  angle  CDF.  But  the  angle  C 
S)  E is  equallto  the  angle  AB  Cyand the  angle  CD  F  is  equall  to  the  angle  C 
B  F.  Wherefore  the  angle  C  B  A  is  double  to  the  angle  C  B  F.  Wherefore  the 
angle i  AB  F  is  equall  to  the  angle  FB  C.  Wherefore  the  angle  ABC  is  deui* 
fed  into  two  equall  partes  by  the  right  line  BF.  In  lyke  forte  alfo  may  it  be 
grdiiedjthat  either  of  thefe  angles  B  A  F,  and  AB  Dare  deuided  into  two  e» 
■qua}}  partes  by  either  of  thefe  lines  FA  and  EF.  Drawe  (by  the  ll-  of  the 
fir  ft  )from  the  pointe  E  to  the  right  lines  A  B,  B  C}  C  Dy  and  E  A  perpendi - 
cular  lines  F  Gfi  H3  F  Iff  L  yand  F  M.  And forafmuch  as  the  angle  H  CF 
is  equall  to  the  angle  If  C  Eg  and  the  right  angle  FHC  is  equall  to  the  right 
angle  F  If  C :  now  then  there  are  twit  triangles  F ’  HC,  and  F  JfC  hauyng 
two  angles  equall  to  two  angles  the  one  to  the  other }  and  one  fide  equall  to  one 
fide :  for  F  Cis  common  lento  them  hothyandis fubtended  lender  one  of  the  equal 
angles.  Wherfore(by  the  2,6.  of the  first)  the  fides  remayning  are  equal}  lento  the 
fides  remayningWherfore  the  perpendieulerFH  is  equalhmto  the  perpendicu* 
ler  I  A:  And  tn  like  fir  t  alfe  may  it  be  proued  that euery  one  of  thefe  lines  FF? 
F  M,and  F  G  is  equall  to  euery  one  of  thefe' lines  F If  and  F  fi.  Whetfon  thefe 
pup  right  lines  F  G}  t  Fly  Fife,  F Fy  and  F  Mare  equall  the  one  to  the  other . 

Wher* 


Bemnflra- 

irn* 


Demon ftra* 
tion  leading 
to  an  ab/ur- 
ditie. 


%/LCmVaty, 


'Ihefourtb'Bookg 


s\ 


Wberfore  making  the  centre  F  and  the  fpaceF  G,or  F H,or  FJf,or  F L,  or  F 
M.  /Defcribe  a  circle, and  it  'frill pajfe  by  the  poyntes  G,H,F(,L,M.And /ball 
touche  the  right  lines  A  BjB  C,C  ID  JD  E,and  E  A  (by  the  correllary  of  the  16. 
of  the  third) for  the  angles -frhich  are  at  the  pointes  G'fihl,  l^,L^£,  are  right 
angles. For  if  it  do  not  touche  them  but  cut ,then from  the  ende  of the  diameter  of 
the  circle  jhall  be  drawen  a  right  line  making  two  right  angles, and  falling  "fr  ith 
in  the  circle :  "frhiche  is 
(by  the  i6*ofj  third) 
proued  to  be  impofiible 
Wherefore  mahyng  F 
the  centre,  andjjpace 
one  of  thefe  lynes,  EG,  £ 

F H,F KJ?  L,FM, 
defcribe  a  circle  and  it 
jhall  not  cut  the  right 
lines  J[  \BjB  C,C  DJD 
E,and  E  A. wherefore 
(by  the  corollary  of  the 
1 6.  of  the  third )  it  jhall 
touche  them  as  it  is  ma* 
nifeft  in  the  circle  G  H. 

JfJL  M.  Wherefore  in 

the  equilater  and  eqiti*  '  '  .  4  ,  :  \  -  r 

angle  pentagon  figure  geuen, is  deferibed  a  arclerfrhich  "fras  required  to  be  done. 


By  this  proportion  and  the  Former, it  is  manifeft  that  perpendicular  lines  drawn 
from  the  middle  poyntes  ofthefides  of an  equilater  and  equiangle  Pentagon  fi¬ 
gure, and  produced,  fhall  paffe  by  the  centre  of  the  circle, in  which  the  %d  Penta¬ 
gon  figure  is  inferibed,  and  fhall  alfo  deuide  the  oppofite  angles  equally,  as  here, 
A  K  isone  right  line,and  deuideth  the  fide  C  D  and  the  angle  A  equally.  And  fo 
of  the  reft  which  is  thus  proued.  The  fpace  about  the  centre  F  is  equal!  to  foure 
right  angles,  which  are  dcuided  into  ten  equall  angles  by  ten  right  lines  metyng 
together  in  the  point  F.Wherfore  the  Hue  angles  A  F  M,  M  F  E,E  F  L,L  F  D,and 
D  F  K  are  equall  to  two  right  angles.Wherfore  (by  the  14-of  the  firft)  the  lynes  A 
F  and  F  K  make  one  right  lyne.  The  lyke  proofe  alfo  will  ferue  touching  the  reft 
of  the  lynes.  And  this  is  alwayes  true  in  all  equilater  figures  which  confift  of  vne- 
uenfides. 


t&Tbe  14..  Trobleme .  The  14.  Trofiofition . 

etAbout  a  pentagon  or  figure  of  fine  angles  geuen  beyng  equU 
later  and  equiangle  Jo  defcribe  a  circle . 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


Fol.  HZ, 


Vppofe  thaty  Pentagon  or  figure  of  fine  angles geuenjbeing  of equali 
fides  and  of  equali  angles  fie  AEQDE.lt  is  required  about  the  fay  d 
Pentagon  J  EC  ±)  Ey  to  defcribe  a  circle.  Deuide(  by  the 
~firH)  eyther  qfthefe  angles  ECD^  C!DE  into  two 
by  either  ofthefe  right  lines  C  F3and  ID  F.  And  from 
right  lines  meetefiraw  Jmto  the  pointes  EyAyEy  thefe 
And  in  like  fort  (  by  the  Fro* 
pofition  going  before  )  may  it 
be  proved  j  that  every  one  of 
thefe  angles  CEA,  EAE y 
and  JED  is  deuided  into 
two  equal l  partes  y  by  thefe 
right  lines  FE,F  A?&FE. 

Andfor  afmvch  as  the  angle 
EC D  is.  equali  to  the  angle 
C  D  E}&  the  halfe  of  the  an* 
gle  EC  D  is  the  angle  F  C  Dy 
and  likewife  the  halfe  of  the 
angle  CD  E  isj  angle  CDF. 

Wherfore  the  angle  F CD  is 
equali  to  the  angle  FDC . 

Wber ef  ore y  fide  FC  is  equali 
to  the  fide  F  D. In  like fort  al* 

fo  may  it  be  prove  fthat  every  one  of thefe  lines  F  EyFjyandF  E  is  equali  to  e* 
very  one  of thefe  lines  F  C  andF  D  .Wherefore  thefe  five  right  lines  F  A  FE 
FCyFD3md  E  E  are  equali  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  making  the  centre 
Fytnd  the  JfaceF  Ayor  FE,or  F  Cyor  FDyor  F  E.  Defcribe  a  circle  and  it  -will 
paffe  by  the  pointes  JfB£3D3E}  and  fhallbe  defcribed  about  the  five  angled 
figure  AEC  DE  -which,  is  equi  angle  and  equilater .  Let  this  circle  be  defcru 
bed  and  let  the fame  be  JE  CD  E.  Wherefore  about  the  Fentagongeuen  be* 
ingboth  equi  angle  and  equilater 3  is  defcribed  a  circle :  - which  ■ was  required  to  he 
done.  --s  V-  'V;  -v. ,  .■  s . 


fnn  circlegeuen  to  defcribe  an  hexagon  or  figure  of  fixe  an* 
gles  equilater  and efuiangle. 

,  ,  -  •  t  r~  ,  - 

■  •  ’  '  - 

ifppofi  that  the  circle  geuen  he  AEC  D  E  F.  It  is  required  in  the  cir* 
tie  geuen -A  E  C  DE  to  defcribe  a  figure  of  fixe  angles  of  equali  fides 
and  of  equali  angles  .Draw  the  diameter  of the  circle  A  EC  D  EF3and 

lei 


ConJlutRion* 

Vemonflra- 

lion* 


€mfimthn* 


Tkmcttftr^ 

Mon* 


erou, 


let  the fame  be  AS).  And  (  by  the firU  of the  thtrd)take  the  centre  of the  circle 
and  let  the  fame  be  G.  And  making  the  centre  3),  and  the  /pace  S)  G,  defcribe 
( by  the  third  petition)  a  circle  CGE  H:  and  drawing  right  lines  from  E  to  G, 
and  from  G  to  C, extend  them  to  the pointes  IB  a?id  F  of the  circumference  of the 
circle geuen.  And  draw  thefe 
right  lines  A  B,  B  CJC  (D> 

5)  E/E  F,  and  FA.  Then 
I fay, that  ABCS) EF  is 
an  Hexagon  figure  of  e* 
quail  fides  and  of  e quail  an * 
gles .  For  forafinuch  as  the 
point  G  is  the  centre  of  the 
circle  ABCS)EF,  there * 
fore  (by  the  definition  of 
the fir  A)  the  line  G  E  is  e* 
quail  Jmto  the  line  GAD.  A - 
game forafinuch  as  the  point 
S)  is  the  centre  of  the  circle 
C  G  E  H (theifore  (  by  the 
felfe  fame )the  line  3)  E  is  e* 
quail  Jmto  the  line  DG.And 
it  is proued  that  the  line  GE 
is  e quail  'Tnto  the  lyne  G* 

S).  V/herfore  the  line  GE  is 
eAiteJltynio  the  line  E  3)  (by 
the  fir  si  common  fentence)  ^oherfore  the  triangle  EG  S)  is  equildter,  and  hh 
three  Angles,  namely,  E  G  3),  G3)  E,  3)  EG,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  otheri 
And  forafinuch  as  (by  the  5*  of  the firEt)  in  triangles  of two  equal  fides  common* 
ty  called  fjofieles, the  angles  at  the  bafe  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  and  the 
three  angles  of  a  triangle  are  (by  the  32.  of the  fir  A)  equall  lanto  two  right  am 
gles, ther fort  the  angle  E  G  S)  is  the  third  part  of  two  right  angles.  And  in  lyke 
forte  may  it  be  proued, that  the  angle  3)  GC  is  the  third  parte  of two  right  am 
gles.  And  forafinuch  as  the  right  line  C  G /landing  lopon  the  right  line  E  B  doth 
(by  the  13.  of  the fir  H)  make  the  two  fide  angles  EGG, and  C  GB  equall  to  two 
right  angles ,therfore  the  angle  remayning  CG  Bis  the  third  part  of  two  right 
angles. Wh  erf  ore  the  angles  E  GSDfDG  C,andC  0  B  are  equall  the  one  to  the 
other.  Wher fore  their  hed  angles, that  is, S  G  A,A  G  F,and  F G  E aye  (by  the 
15.  of  the firll)equall  to  thefe  angles  E  GAD  JDG  C, arid  CGB.Wherf ore  thefe 
fixe  angles  EG  3), SAG  C,C  G  B,B  G  A, A  G  F,and  FGEare  equall  the  one 
tQ-theother.ButequaUAt^^^fiU’ypQn  equall  circumferences  %by /he  of 

the  third.  T  before  thefe  fixe  circumferences  A  BpSECyC  ID,  AD  By  E  F,  and 
F  A  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  Butynder  eqnallxircumferences  are fiubtem 


i 


Vi 


ofEuclides  Ekmenteh  Fol.itfy 

ded equadrlght  lines  (by  the  29.  of  the fame. )  Wherefore  thefefxe  right  lynes 
A  BjB  CfDjD  E}EF}and F  A  are  equall the  one  to  the  other. Wher fore  the 
flex  agon  ABC  DEE  is  equilater.  I fay  alfo  that  it  is  equiangle .  For  foraf 
much  as  the  circumference  A  F is  equall  lento  the  circumference  E  ID  adde  the 
circumference  ABC  D  common  to  them  both.  Wherefore  the  lehok  circutnfe* 
rence  FA  B  C  D  is  equal l  to  the  lehole  circumference  ED  C BA.  And  leppon 
the  circumference  E  A  BCD  confisteth  the  angle  EE  D :  andleppon  the  dr* 
conference  E  D  CB  A  confifieth  the  angle  A  FE.  Wherefore  the  angle  AFE 
is  equal!  to  the  angle  V  E  F.  In  like  fort  alfo  may  it  be  proued  that  the  reft  of 
the  angles  of the  Hexagon  ABC  D  E  F  ,  that  is  euery  one  of thefe  angles  E  A 
Bj.A  B  CjB  CD3and  C  I)  Bis  equal!  to  euery  one  of thefe  angler  A  BE,  and 
FE  D.Wherfore  the  Hexagon  figure  A  B  CD  E  Fis  equiangle,  and  it  is  pro* 
tted  that  it  is  alfo  equilater ?and  it  is  dtfcribedin  the  circle  A  BCD  EF<  Whcr* 
fore  in  the  circle  geuen  A  B  CD  E  F  is  defcribed  a  figure  of  fixe  angles  of equal 
fides  and  of  equal!  angles:  Which  leas  required  to  be  done' 


An  other  He  ay  to  do  the fame  after  Orontius, 

Su  ppofe  that  the  circle  geuen  be  AB  CD  E  F  in  which  firft  let  there  be  defcribed  t0 
an  equilater  and  equiangle  triangle  ACE  (  by  the  fecond  ofthys  booke) .  Wherefore  affey  Qyfoffla 
the  arkes  AB  C,C CD  E,EF  A  are  (by  the  2  8  .of  the  third)cquall  the  one  to  the  other* 

Deuide  euery  one  of  thofe  three  arkes  into  two  equall  partes  (by  the  30*of  the  &me)in 
the  pointes  B,D,&  Ft  And  draw  thefe  right 
lines  A  B,B  C,C  D,D  E,E  F,  and  F  A.  Now 
then-  by  the  5  .definition  of  this  booke  there 
fhallbe  defcribed  in  the  circle  geue  an  Hex¬ 
agon  figure  A  BCD  EF,  which  mult  nedes 
be  equilater:  for  that  euery  one  of  the  arkes 
which  fubtend  the  fides  thereof  are  equall 
the  one  to  the  other .  I  fay  alfo  that  it  is  c- 
quiangle.  For  euery  angle  of  the  Hexagon 
figure  is  fet  vpon  equall  arkes^amely^pon 
foure  fuch  partes  of  thecircuferetice  whef- 
of  the  whole  circumference  cotayneth  fixe. 

Wherfore  the  angles  of  the  Hexagon  figure 
are  equall  the  one  to  the  other  (by  the  2/. 
of  the  third)  .Wherefore  in  the  circle  geuen 
exf  BCD  EF  is  inferibed  an  equilater  and 
equiangle  Hexagon  figure  :  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  done.  ^  ' 


f  An  other  Kay  to  do  the  fame  after  Belitarius. 

Suppofe  that  the  circlein  which  is  to  be  inferibed  and  equilater  &  equiangle  Hexa-  An  other 
gon  figure  be  A  B  CD  E,  whofe  centre  let  be  F.  And  from  the  centre  draw  the  femidia-  afgep 

meter  F  A.  And  from  r he  poyn t apply  (by  the  firft  ofthy?  booke)theline^/FequaH  Ftlumns 
to  the  femidiameter.  Which  I  fay  is  tne  fide  ofan  equilater  and  equiangle  Hexagon  fi¬ 
gure  to  be  inferibed  in  the  circle  tAB  C  D  E.  Draw  a right  line  from  F  to  B.  Andfor 
afojuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  FA,  Sc  it  is  alfo  equall  to  the  line  F  B,  ther- 

Hh.j.  fore 


n 


urti 


e 


fore  the  triar^lc  s^jF'Fisequilaterj  arKl  by  the  y,of  the  firft  e<Juiangle.Nov  then  vp- 
on  the  centre  F  defcribe  the  angle  IS  FC  equall  to  the  angle  £i  FB>  or  to  the  angle 
FB  ^(which  is  all  one)  by  drawing  the  righ  t  line  F  Ct  And  draw  a  line  from  B  to  C,And 
for  afmuch  as  the  angle  tAF  B  is  the  third  part  of  two 
right  angles  bythe  5, and  3  2.  ofthe  firft,  the  angle  #FC 
alfo  fhall  be  the  third  part  of.  two  right  angles.  Where¬ 
fore  either  of  the  two  angles  remaining  F  BC  and  F  CB, 
for  afmuch  as  they  are  equall  by  the  ?  .of  the  firft,  fhall 
be  two  third  partes  of  two  right  angles  (by  the  3  a,  of 
the  fame).  Or  (bythe  4*of  the  firft)  forafmuch  as  the  an¬ 
gle  B  FCis  equaU  to  the  angle  FB  «A,  and  the  twofides  ^  j 
FB  and  FC  are  equall  to  the  two  fide!s  A  B  and  2?  P, the 
bafe  B  C  fhall  be  equal!  to  the  bafe  PfF ,  and  therefore 
i  s  equall  to  the  tine  F  C,  Wherefore  the  triangle  FBCis 
-equilater  and  Cquianglc  .  Laftly  make  the  angle  CF  D 
equal!  toeytherof  the  angles  at  the  poynt  F,  by  drawing 
the  line  F‘Z> .  And  draw-a  line  from  C-to  .  Now. then 
by  the  former  reafo.n  the  triangle  F  C2>  Hull  be  equilater  and  cquiangle .  And  foraf¬ 
much  asthc  three  angles  at  the  point  Fare  equall  to  two  right  angles  ( for  ech  of  them 
is  the  third  part  of  two  right  angles)  therefore  (by  the  14. of  the  firft)  *ACD  is  one  right 
line  :  aadfor  that  caufeis  the  diameter  pf  the  circle  .Wherefore  if the  other  femicircle 
zAFD  be  deuided  into  fo  many  equall  partes  as  the  femicircle  e^fFCZ>  is  deuided 
into,  it  fhall  comprehend  fo  many  equall  lines  fubtended  vnto  it .  Wherefore  the  line 
A  B  is  the  fide  ofan  equilater  Hexagon  figure  to  beinferibed  in  the  circle ;  which  Hex- 
agonfigure  alfo  ihall  be  equiangle  :  For  the  halfeofthe  whole  angle  B  is  equall  to  the 
halfe  of  the  whole  angle  C :  which  was  required  to  be  done . 

N  bw  then  if  we  draw  from  the  centre  F  a  perpendicular  line  vnto  A  D,  which  let 
be  F  I and  draw  alfo  thefe  right  lines  B  E  and  C  E :  there  fhall  be  deferibed  a  triangle 
whofe  angle  Fwhfoh  is- atthetoppe  fhall  be  the  6.  part  of  two  right  angles  by 
the  2o.ofthe  third  .For  the  angle#  FCis  double  vnto  it.  And  either  of  the  two  angles 
at  the  bafe,namely,the  angles  EBC,  and  EC  B  is  dupla  fefquialter  to  the  angle  Frthat 
is,eyther  of  them  contayneth  the  angle  E  twife  and  halfe  the  angle  E .  And  by  this  tea- 
fon  was  found  by  t  the  fide  of  an  Hexagon  figure. 


J -yCorrelary. 


Hereby  it  is  manU 
fettjhat  the  fide  of  \ 
an  Hexagon  figure 
deferibed  in  a  circle 
is  equall  to  a  right 
line  dramn  fro  the 
cetre  of  the fold  cir* 
cle  ynto  the  circum  w 
ference .  <nAnd  if  by 
the  pennies  A?  B, 


of Sudides  Ekmentes,  FoLiifc 

drawers  right  lines  touching  the  circle*  then  fhall  there  he 
defer ibed  about  the  circle  an  Hexagon  figure  e  quit ater  and 
equiangle ,  which  may  be  demonfirated  by  that  which  hath 
kene fifteen  of  the  deferibing  of  a  Tentagon  about  a  circle < 
And  moreouer  by  thofethinges  which  haue  ben Jfioke  of Ten^ 
tagons  We  may  in  a  Hexagon geuen  either  deferibe  orcimmu 
feribe  a  circle :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

The  16.  Trobleme •  The  1 6.  Tropofition, 


In  a  circle  geuen  to  defer ibe  a  quindecagon  or  figure  offiftene 
angles  yquilater  and  equiangle. 


|  Fppofe  that  the  circle  geuen  be  ABC  ID.lt  is  required  in  the  circle  A 
'BCD  to  deferibe  a  figure  of fiftene  angles  confining  of  equall  fides 
\and  of equall  angles. Deferibe  in  the  circle  AB  C  D  the  fides  of an  e* 
*  quilater  triangle >and  let  the  fame  be  A Cyand  inj  arke  A  C  deferibe 
the  fide  of an  equilater  pentagon  and  let  the fame  be  A  B.  Now  then  of  fuel?  e* 
quail partes  Vherofi the  ’Sohole  circle  ABC  D  contained  fiftene,  offuch  partes 
1 fay, the  circumference  ABC  being  the  third  parte  of  the  circle fhall  contayne 
fine.  And  the 
circumference 
A  B  being;  the 

rr  ^  r 

fift  part  of  a 
circle  fhall 
contain  thre , 

Cohere  fore  the 
refidue  B  C 
fhall  containe 
two.  Deuide 
(by  the  3°.  of 
the  firH)  the 
arke  B  C  into 
two  equall 
partes  in  the 
point  E.Wher 
fore  either  of 
thefe  circum* 

ferencesBE  _ 

<(?  E  C  is  the  fiftene  part  of the  circle  A  B  C  Dlftherfore  then  be  drawn  right 

Hh.ij  lines. 


€o.nUruUm0 


Dmonftrfc 

thru 


7  he  fourth  'Bool^e 

lines  from1!)  to  E}and  from  E  to  Cynd  then  beginning  at  the  point  <B  or  at  the 
point  C  there  be  applied  into  the  circle  yfE  C  ID  right  lines  equall  7> nto  EE  or 
E  Cynd fo  continuing  tillyecome  to  the  point  C.  if  you  began  at  or  to  y  point 
:B  if  you  began  at  C/ind  there Jhallbe defcribed  in  the  circle  A!  CD  a  figure  of 
fiftene  angles  equi later  and  equiangle :  1 vhicb  leas  required  to  be  done,  jfnd  in 
like  fort  as  in  a  pentagon  fif  by  thepointes  Inhere  the  circle  is  deuidedjbe  drawen 
right  lines  touching  the  circle  in  the  faid pointes ,there Jhull  he  defcribed  about y 
circle  a  figure  of  fftene  angles  equilateral  equiangle.  Jnd  in  like  fort  byy felfe 
fame  objeruations  that  leere  in  Eentagonsgtte  may  in  a  figure  of  fiftene  angles 
geuen  being  equi  later  and  equiangle  either  infcribeyr  cinumfcribe  a  circle , 


An  addition 
offiufates* 


fAn  addition  of  Fluffates  tofinde  out  infinite  figures  of 

many  angles. 


*  A  PoHgonan 
figure  is  a  fi¬ 
gure  con/i fling 
of  many  (ides. 


if  into  a  circle  from  one  poynt  be  apply  ed  the  files  of  two  *  P oligonon  figures :  the  ex¬ 
cel  je  of  the  greater  arke  aboue  the  leffe,  flail  comprehend  an  arke  containing  fo  many 
fides  ofthe  I  oligonon  figure  to  be  infcribed  hy  how  many  'Unities  the  denomination  of’ 
'the  P  oligonon  figure  of  the  lefife fide  excedeth  the  denomination  of  the  P  oligonon  figure 
of  the  greater  fide  and  the  number  of  the  fides  of  the  P  oligonon  figure  to  be  infcribed 
is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  denominations  of  the  forefay  d  P  oligonon figures 
■the  one  into  the  other.  - 


As  for  example ,  Suppofe  that  into  the  circle  APE  be  applyed  the  fide  of  an  equi- 
laterand  equiangle  Hexagon  figure  (by  the  1 5  .of  thys  booke)  which  let  be  *AB:  and 
likewife  the  fide  of  a  Pentagon  (by  the  1  i.oftbisbookejwhichletbe-^C:  andthefide 
of  a  fquare  (by  the  6.  of  thys  booke)  which  let  be  A  'D :  and  the  fide  of  an  equilater  tri¬ 
angle  (by  the  2  .of  this  booke)  which  let  be  E.  Then  I  fay,that  the  excefie  of  the  arke 

D  aboue  the  arke  A  B ,  which  excefie  is  the  arke  B  D,  contayneth  fo  many  fides  of 
the  Poligonon  figure  to  be  infcribed, of  how  many  vnities  the  denominator  ofthe  Hex¬ 
agon  A ' 3 ,  which  is  fixe,excedeth  the  denominator  of  the  fquare  A  ‘ V ,  which  is  foure, 
Andforafmuch  as  that  excefie  is  two  vni¬ 
ties,  therfore  in  BD  there  (ha  11  be  two  fides. 

And  the  denominator  of  the  Poligonon  fi¬ 
gure  which  is  to  be  infetibed  fiiall  be  pro¬ 
duced  ofthe  multiplication  of  the  deno¬ 
minators  of  the  forefayd  Poligonon  fi-  ■ 
gures,namely,  of  the  multiplication  of  6. 
into  4.  which  maketh  ->.4.  which  number  c 
is  the  denominator  of  the  Poligonon  fi- 
gure,whofe  two  fides  fiiall  fubtend  the  arke  p 
BP)  .  For  of  fuch  equall  partes  wherof  the 
whole  circumference  cotayneth  2  4, of  fuch 
partes  1  fay,  the  circumference  AB  con¬ 
tayneth  4,  and  the  circumference  zA  D  % 
contayneth  6  .  Wherefore  if  from  zA D 
which  fubtendeth  6.  partes  be  taken  away 
4.  which  zA3  fubtendeth, there  fiiall  re- 
mayne  vnto  'B  D  two  of  fuch  partes  of 
which  the  whole  contayneth  24.  Wherfore 
of  an  Hexagon  and  a  fquare  is  made  a  Poligonon  figure  of  24.  fides .  Like  wyfe  ofthe 
Hexagon  and  of  the  Pentagon  *AG  (hall.be  made  a  Poligonpn  figure  of  30. 

fides. 


t 

in 


fidesi  one  ofwhofe  fides  ftiall  mbtend  the  arke  BC.  For  the  denomination  of  AB 
which  is  6.  excedeth  the  denomination  of  C  which  is  5.  onely  by  vnitie .  So 
alfo  forafmuch  as  the  denomination  of  tA B  which  is  6.  excedeth  the  de¬ 
nomination  of  A  E  which  is  3 .  by  3 .  therefore  the  arke  B  E  {hall 
contayne  3 .  fides  of  a  Poligonon  figure  of  1 « .  fides .  And 
obferuing  thys  felfe  fame  methodc  and  order,  a  man 
may  finde  out  infinite  fides  of  a  Poligonon 
figure . 

(•••) 

i  ^  avwollol^ aafi'j  ms  .vfBonioi  anv/onji  £  v:  ■'  $ 


The  end  of  the  fourth  booke 

ofEuclides  Elementes. 


Hh. 


in. 


fThe 


s 


booke. 


The  first  au¬ 
thor  of  this 
boo!{e  Eu¬ 
doxus. 


The  fir (l  defi¬ 
nition. 


The  argument 
of  this  fift 


H I S;  f  i  ft  h  e  o  o  k  e  of  Euvlide Is  of  ver y  great 
commoditicand  vfe  in  all  Geometry-,  and  much  dili- 
\  gence  ought  to  be  bellowed  therin.lt  ought  of  all  o- 
ther  to  be  throughly  and  moft  perfectly  and  readily 
knowne.For  nothyng  in  the  bookes  followyng  can 
be  vnderftand  without  it:  the  knowledge  of  them 
all  depende  of  it.  And  not  onely  they  and  other  wri- 
tinges  of  Geometry,  but  all  other  Sciences  alfo  and 
lattes ;  as  Mufike, '^AJir6nomy,?erfyecliue>Arithmetique^ 
f  the  arte  ofaccomptes  and  reckoning,with  other  fuch 
‘  like.This  booke  therefore  is  as  it  were  a  chiefe  trea- 
fure,and  a  peculiar  iu ell  much  to  be  accompted  of. 
It  entreateth  of  proportion  and  Analogic,  or  proportionahtie,  which  peftayneth 
not  onely  veto  lines,  figures ,  and  bodies  in  Geometry :  but  alfo  vnto  foundcs  & 
voyces,  of  which  Mufike  entreateth,  as  witneifeth  Boetius  and  others  which  write 
of  Mufike.  Alfo  the  whole  arte  of  Aftronomy  teacheth  to  meafure  proportions 
of  tymes  andmouinges.  ^Archimides  and  Iordan  with  other, writing  of  waightes, 
affirme,  that  there  is  proportion  betwenewaight  and  waight,  and  alfo  betwene 
place  &  place.  Ye  fee  therefore  how  large  is  the  vfe  of  this  fift  booke.  Wherfore 
the  definitions  alfo  thereof are  common,although  hereof  Euclide  they  be  accom¬ 
modate  and  applied  onely  to  Geometry.  The  firft  author  of  this  booke  was  as  it 
is  affirmed  of  many, one  Eudoxus  who  was  Plates  fcholer,but  it  was  afterward  fra¬ 
med  and  put  in  order  by  Euclide.  " 

J-fc?  Definitions, 

<iA parte  is  a  lefe  magnitude  in  refpett  of  a  greater  magni¬ 
tude fwhen  the  lejfe  meafureth  the  greater. 


A  part  taken 
two  maner  of 
wayes. 

7 be  firfl  way. 


As  in  the  other  bookes  before,  fo  in  this,  the  author  firfl  fetteth  orderly  the 
definitions  and  declarations  of  fuch  termes  and  Worries  which  are  ncceffarily  re¬ 
quired  to  the  entreatie  of  the  fubied  and  matter  therof,  which  is  proportion  and 
comparifon  of  proportions  or  proportionahtie.  And  firfl  he  fheweth  what  a  parte 
is.Hcre  is  to  be  confidered  that  all  the  definitions  of  this  fifth  booke  be  general  to 
Geometry  and  Arithmetique,and are  true  in  both  artes,  euenas  proportion  and 
proportionahtie  are  common  to  them  both,  and  chiefly  appertayne  to  number,, 
neither  can  they  aptly  be  applied  to  matter  of  Geometry ,  but  in  refped  of number 
and  by  number  .Yet  in  this  booke, and  in  thefe  definitions  here  fet,  Eucltde  femeth 
to  fpeake  of  them  onely  Geometrically,  as  they  are  applied  to  quantitie  continu- 
all,as  to  lines,  fuperficieces,and  bodies:  for  that  he  yet  continueth  in  Geometry. 
I  wil  notwithffanding  for  facilitie  and  farther  helpe  of  the  reader,declare  the  both 
by  example  in  number, and  alfo  in  Iynes. 

For  the  clearer  vnderflandyng  of  a  parte, it  is  to  be  noted  ,that  a  part  is  taken  in 
the  Mathematical!  Sciences  wo  maner  of  wayes .  One  way  a  part  is  a  Idle  quan- 

tide 


of  Sue  tides  Ekmentes*  Fol.116 • 


titiein  refped  bfa  |Mter5wfeether  it  meafure  the  greater  ©r  m;  Thefecondway* 
a  part  is  onely  that  lelfe  quantitie  in  refpe'd  of  the  greater,  Which  meafureth  the 
greater.  A  lene  quantitie  is  fayd  to  meafure  or  number  a  greater  quantitie ,  when 
it,beyng  ortentymes  taken,  inaketh  precifely  the  greater  quantitie  without  more 
brleifefor  bey ng  as  oftentymes  taken  from  the  greater  as  it  may,there  remaynefh 
nothyng.  As  fuppofe  the  line  AB  to  contayne  3.  and  the  lyne  C  D  to  contayne 
9 .  the  doth  the  line  A  B  meafure  the  line 
C  D :fbr  that ifit  be  take  certayne  times, C  ,  •  > 
namely, 3.: tymes,it maketh precifely  the  f;-_  ,  B 

lyne  C  D,  that  is  9.  without  more  or 

lelfe.  Agayne  if  the  fayd  lelfe  lyne  A  B  be  taken  from  the  greater  C  D,  as  Often  as 
it  may  be,  namely  ,3.  tymes, there  lhall  remayne  nothing  of  the  greater.  So  the  iiu  - 
ber3-isfayde  to  meafure  12.  for  that  beyng  taken  certayhe  tymes,  namely,  foiire 
tymes, it  maketh  iuft  12. the  greater  quantitie:  and  alio  beyng  taken  from  i2.as  of¬ 
ten  as  it  may, namely, 4.  tymes, there  fhall  remayne  nothyng. And  in  this  meaning 
and  fignification  do  th  Euclide  vndoubtedly  here  in  this  define  a  part :  faying,  that 
ftis  a  leffe  magnitude  in  comparifon  of  a  greater,  when  the  lelfe  meafureth  the 
greater.As  the  lyne  A  B  before  fet,  contayning  3.  is  a  lelfe  quantitie  in  compa- 
rifon  of  the  lyne  C  D  which  containeth  9.  and  alfo  meafureth  it.Forife  beyng  cer¬ 
tayne  tymes  taken, namely, 3.  tymes, precifely  maketh  it,  or  taken  from  it  as  often 
as  it  may , there  remayneth  nothyng.  Wherfore  by  this  definition  the  lyne  A  B  is  a 
part  of  the  lyne  C  D.  Likewife  in  numbers,  the  number  5.  is  a  part  of  the  number 
15.  for  it  is  a  Idle  number  or  quantitie  compared  to  the  greater,  and  alfo  it  meafu¬ 
reth  the  greater :  for  beyng  taken  certayne  tymes,namely,  3.  tymes,  it  maketh  15. 
And  this  kynde  of  part  is  called  commonly  pars  metiens  or  menfuransfnat  is, a  mea 
furyngpart :  feme  call  it  pars  multiphcatiua--  and  of  the  barbarous  it  is  called  pars 
aliquot  a, thath  an  aliquote  part*  And  this  kynde  of  parte  is  commonly  vfed  in  A- 
nthmetique.  .  - 


The  other  kinde  of  a  part,is  any  leffe  quantitie  in  comparifbn  of a  greater,  whe¬ 
ther  it  be  in  number  or  magnitude, and  whether  it  meafure  or  no.  As  fuppofe  the 
line  A  B  to  be  i7*and  let  it  be  deuided  into  two  partes  in  the  poynt  C,  namelydn- 
to  the  line  A  C,  <Sc  the 

line  CB,  and  let  iheAl  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  (f~ ,  ,„a 
lyne  A  C  the  greater 

partcontaine  12.  and  let  the  line  B  C  the  lelfe  part  contayne  5.  Now  eyther  of 
thefe  lines  by  this  definition  is  a  part  of  the  whole  lyne  A  B.For  eyther  of  them  is 
a  lelfe  magnitude  or  quatity  in  coparifo  of  the  whole  lyne  A  B:  but  neither  of  the 
meafureth  the  whole  line  A  B:for  the  lelfe  lyne  C  B  contayning  5.  taken  as  ofte  as 
ye  lift,  will  neuer  make  precifely  A  B  which  contayneth  17.  If  ye  take  it  3*  tymes  it 
maketh  only  15X0  lacketh  it  2. of  17. which  is  to  litle.Ifye  take  it  4.times,fo  maketh 
It  2o.the  are  there  thre  to  much, lo  it  neuer  maketh  precifely  i7.but  either  to  much 
or  to  litie.Likewife  the  other  part  AC  meafureth  not  the  whole  lyne  AB:  for  take 
once, it  maketh  but  i2.which  is  lelfe  then  17.  and  taken  twife,  it  maketh  22.  which 
are  more  then  17.  by  5.  So  it  neuer  precifely  maketh  by  takyng  therof  the  whole 
A  B,but  either  more  or.  lelfe.  And  this  kynde  of  part  they  commonly  call  pars 
conttituens  >or  componens :  Becaufe  that  it  with  feme  other  part  or  partes, maketh  the 
whole.  As  the  lyne  C  B  together  with  the  line  A  C  maketh  the  whole  lyne  A  B. 
Ofthe  barbarous  it  is  called  pars  aliquant  a. In  this  fignification  it  is  taken  in  Sark- 
am  in  the  beginnyng  ofhis  booke,in  the  definition  of  a  part, when  he  faith r  Euerj 


Uh.  hi]. 


life 


The  feccnd 
way. 

Hole  a  hffe 
quantity  n 
J ay  d  to  mea - 
Jure  a  gratm»: 


In  what  fig- 
nificatie  ku- 
elide  here  u~ 
heth  apart* 


Pars  met  ten  j  er 
men  fur  an  s. 
Pun  multifile 
tat imt. 

Pars  aliquot  a. 
T  his  ftnde  of 
fart  comonlj  £» 
fediuArith - 
metique. 

The  other 
kjnde  of  part* 


Pars  tin  flits** 
ens^r  ccrtipfa 
nens* 

Pars  aliquan- 
ta. 


7 be fecond 
definition . 


Numbers  ye- 
rynecejptry 
for  they tider- 
Jlandin%  of 
this  boof^e  and 
the  other 
bookes  foVo- 
Tping, 

7be  third  de¬ 
finition. 


what  propor¬ 
tion  is, 

7hinges  com - 
paredtogetber 
this  wayes. 


Example  of 
this  definition 
in  magni¬ 
tudes. 


'Ihefiftb'Booke 

kp  number  c  rnpared  to  a  greater, is fayd  to  be  apart  of  the  greater, whether  the  lefie  mea- 
fare  the  greater, or  meafare  it  not.  f fee! ni  ibljn-f::1'  s  fi  ir. 'h  vi'jfio 

Multiplex  is  a  greater  magnitude  in  refyeB  of  the  lefefaehen 
the  lefie  meafureth  the  greater. 

As  the  line  C  D  before  fet  in  the  firfi:  example, is  multiplex  to  the  lyne  A  B.For 
that  CDalynecontayningp.is  the  greater  magnitude,  and  is  compared  to  the 
lefie, namely, to  the  lyne  A  B  contayning  3.  and  alfo  the  lefie  lyne  A  B  meafureth 
the  grea  ter  line  C  D :  for  taken  3 .  tymes,  '  C  . 

it  maketh it,  as  was  aboue  fayde  .  So  c  ,  ,  ,  J  9  .  3 

in  numbers  12.  is  multiplex  to  3:  for  12  is  ^ 

the  greater  number,  and  is  compared  to  A  *— — ♦ — « 2 

the  leffe,namelysto  3.which3.alfo  meafu¬ 
reth  it:  for  3  taken  4  tymes  maketh  12.  By  this  worde  multiplex  which  is  a  termc 
proper  to  Arithmetike  and  number, it  is  eafy  to  confider  that  there  can  be  no  ex- 
adl  knowledge  of  proportion  and  proportionalitie,and  fo  of  this  fifth  booke  wyth 
all  the  other  bookes  followyng,  without  the  ayde  and  knowledge  of  numbers. 


Proportion  is  a  certaine  reffieffe  of  Wo  magnitudes  of  one 
k^nde,  according  to  quant i tie. 


Buclide  as  in  the  firft  definition,fo  in  this  Sc  the  other  following, and  Iikewife  in 
all  his  Propofitions  of  this  booke,  mentioneth  onely  magnitudes,  and  geueth  his 
examples  and  demonftrations  of  lines :  for  that  hetherto  in  the  4.  bookes  before 
he  hath  entreated  of  lines  Sc  figures,  andfo  cotinueth  in  his  fixth  booke  following 
after  this, comparing  figure  to  figure,  and  fides  of  figures  to  fides  of  figures,  with¬ 
out  mention  of  number  at  all  .  Notwithstanding  as  it  is  fayd  they  are  general! 
to  all  kinde  of  quantitie ,  both  diferete  and  continual! ,  namely ,  number  and 
magnitude :  and  neede  for  the  young  reader  and  ftudient  in  thefe  artes  to  be  de¬ 
clared  in  both.  For,  the  opening  of  them  in  numbers  (in  which  they  are  firfi:  and 
naturally  founde)  geueth  a  great  and  marucilous  light  to  their  declaration  in 
magnitudes .  Proportion  (fayth  he)  is  a  certaine  behauiour,lh.il  is,  a  certaine  rejpetl 
or  compar if  on  of  two  quantities  of  one  kinde  :  as  of  one  line  to  an  other,  and 
one  figure  generally  to  an  other,  andone  number  to  an  other,  as  touching  quantitie , 
that  is  to  fay,  that  die  quantitie  compared,  is  to  that  wherunto  it  is  compared, 
eyther  equally  or  greater,  or  lefie  then  it .  For  after  thefe  three  maners  may 
thinges  be  compared  the  one  to  the  other.But  quantities  of  diuers  kindes  can  not 
be  compared  together .  A  fuperficies  can  not  be  compared  to  a  line :  nor  number 
to  a  body :  nor  a  body  to  a  line  or  number :  for  that  they  are  not  of  one  kinde.  For 
example  of  this  definition, take  two  quantities,  namely,  two  lines  A  B  and  CD, 
and  compare  the  one  to  the  other,  namely, A  B  to 

C  D  according  to  fome  certaine  refpeft  of  greatnes,  A  t — - , - -  3 

6r  leflenes,  or  equalitie, namely,  in  this  example,  let  r  n 

A  B  be  greater  then  C  D,  &  containe  it  twife.N ow  "  * 

thys  companion, relation,or  refpeft  of  A  B  to  C  D, 

and  generally  of  any  one  quantitie  to  any  other,is  called  proportion  •  Likewife  is 

it  of 


of Euclides  Elementes. 


FgLiij< 


- 

A , 

— 

- ,1 

it, if  A  B  be  equall  to  G  D,  as  in  the  fecond  example :  or  if  A  B  be  lefle  then  C  Ds 
as  in  the  third  example.The  like  is  it  alfo  in  numbers 
comparing  5. to  5. equall  to  equall, or  6. to  3.  the  grea¬ 
ter  to  the  lefie,  or  4.  to  8 .  the  lelfe  to  the  greater  .So  C 
to  the  accomplilhing  of  any  Proportion  there  are  re¬ 
quired  two  quantities, and  alfo  a  comparing  or  refpcd 
ofthe  one  to  the  other.  The  quantities  compared  to¬ 
gether  are  commonly  called  the  Termes  ofthe  Pro¬ 
portion.  And  in  this  booke  oxEucltdecmd  alfo  in  o-  ^ 
ther  writers  of  Geometriejho  ErdTerme,  namely,that 

which  is  compared  is  called  the  antecedent,  whether  it  be  equall,  greater,  or  leiTe 
then  the  other And  the  feeond  Terme ,  namely, that  wherun to  the  companion  is 
made,  is  called  the  confequent .  As  in  the  former  example,  the  line  AB  compa¬ 
red  to  the  line  C  D  is  antecedent :  and  the  line  C  D  is  confequent :  And  contra- 
riwifeiftheline  CD  be  compared  to  the  line  A  B,  then  is  the  line  CD  antece¬ 
dent,  and  the  line  AB  confequent  .  Albeit  in  Arithmeticke  Boetius  and  others 
call  the  terme  compared  Dux,  and  the  terme  to  whom  the  coparifon  is  made  they 
call  Comes.  This  booke  hath  bene  accompted  of  all  men  one  ofthe  hardeftand 
mod:  intricate  of  all  Euclides  bookes.  And  proportion  isagenerall  knowledge  to 
ail  learmnges, chiefly  to  the  Mathematicalls .  Wherefore  it  dial!  be  very  necellary 
fome  litle  briefe  inftru&ion  and  induCion  to  be  here  added  in  the  beginning  here¬ 
of:  ofthe  knowledge  and  nature  of  proportions  and  what  they  are,  and  of  how- 
many  kindes :  which  thinges  are  here  of  Euclid?  fuppofed  to  be  before  knowen, 
and  therefore  maketh  no  mention  fo  dilHn&ly  of  them. 

Ye  rnuftvnderftand  that  there  are  of  proportions  two  generall  kindes ,  the  one 
is  called  rational!,  certaine,  and  kno wen,  and  the  other  irrationall,  vneertaine  and 
vnknowen .  Such  magnitudes  or  quantities, which  may  be  exprelfed  by  numbre, 
are  called  rationall magnitudes  or  quantities  .  As  fuppofe  a  line,  namely,  the  line 
A  B  to  containe  5.inches,  &  compare  it  to  the  line  CD,  5- 

contayning  3.  inches  :  thefe  quantities  ye  fee  may  be  ex-  * — 1 — * — * — ♦ — 
prelied  by  numbers,  namely,  by  thefe  numbers  5.  and  3 :  C  ,  ,  3  ,  ,-n 

and  therefore  are  rationall,  and  haue  the  lame  proporti¬ 
on,  that  number  hath  to  number, namely,  that  thenumber  5.  hath  to  the  number 
3  :  and  therefore  the  proportion  of  the  one  to  the  other, is  a  rationaIl,certame,and 
knowen  proportion.  And  generally  when  foeuer  one  number  is  compared  to 
an  other, or  two  lines  or  other  magnitudes, both  which  may  be  expreffed  by  num- 
ber,the  proportion  betwene  them  is  euer  rationall,  and  onely  the  proportion  of 
fuch  quantities  is  rationall .  So  that  in  Arethmeticke  all  proportions  are  rational!, 
for  that  therein  euer  one  number  is  compared  to  an  other. 

There  are  certaine  lines  magnitudes  or  quantities  which  ca  not  be  named  and 
exprefeed  by  number,  and  therefore  commonly  are  called  Surd  lines  or  magni¬ 
tudes  .  As  fuppofe  the  fqtiare  A  B  C  D  to  containe  1  <5, then  the  fide  or  roote  ther- 
of,namely,the  line  A  B  contameth  4, and  the  diameter  ofthe 
fame  fquare,namely,  the  line  B  C  lhall  be  3^32,  which  is  a 
furd  number,  and  ean  not  be  exprelled  by  any  determinate 
and  certaine  number, butohely  by  this  maner  of  circumlocu¬ 
tion  Roote  Iquare  of  32 .  Now  ifye  compare  the  line  A  B  to 
the  line  B  C,  or  contrariwife  the  line  B  C  to  the  line  A  B,  for 
that  one  of  them  isa  furde  quantitie, neither  can  ech  of  them 
be  exprelfed  by  number  (and  therefore  cannot  haue  that 

proportion 


Example  ther 
of  in  numbers* 

Inf  roportiom 
wo  quanti¬ 
ties  required, 
which  are  cal¬ 
led  termes. 

The 

called  the  an¬ 
tecedent. 

The  if  terme 
called  the  c$tt~ 
fequent. 

Dux. 

Comes. 

This  booke 
countedthe 
hardeE  of  all 
Euclides 
bookes. 


Proportion  of 
two  kindes, 
rational  and 
irrational. 
Proportion 
rational » 


In  Arithme- 
tique  all  pro¬ 
portions  are 
rational . 
Proportion 
imtionah 


proportion  that  number  hath  to  number)  the  proportion  betwene  them  is  ifratio- 
nall, confufed,vnknowen,vncertaine,  and  Turd .  And  this  kinde  of  proportion  is 
found  onely  in  magnitudes,as  in  lines  and  figures  (and  not  in  numbers)  of  which 
he  of  purpofe  entreateth  in  his  tenth  booke.Wherfore  I  wil  here  omit  to  fpeake  of 
it,and  remit  it  to  his  due  place .  And  fomewhat  will  I  now  fay  for  the  elucidation 
ofithefirft  kinde. 

_  .  .  Proportion  rationall  is  deuided  into  two  kindes, into  proportion  of  equalitie* 

portion  deuided  and  in  to  proportion  of  inequalitie.  Proportion  of  equalme  is,  when  one  quanti- 
n  to  two  kinde,.  tie  is  referred  to  an  other  equall  vnto  it  felfe :  as  if ye  compare  5  to  5*  or  7  to  7,  & 
t'tLut10”  *'°  othcr.And  this  proportion  hath  great  vfe  in  the  rule  of  Cojfe.  For  in  it  all  the 
rules  of  equations  tende  to  none  other  ende  but  to  finde  out  and  bring  forth  a  nu- 
ber  equall  to  the  number  fuppofed,which  is  to  put  the  proportion  of  equalitie. 
proportion  of  Proportion  of  inequalitie  is,when  one  vnequall  quantity  is  comparedtoan  o- 

inejuaiitj. 1  ther,as  the  greater  to  the  leffe, as  8 .  to  4:  or  9. to  3 :  or  the  leffe  to  the  greater  as  4. 


Proportion  of 
the  greater  to 
the  iejfe. 

Multiplex . 

Duple  propor¬ 
tion. 

Triple ,  quadru¬ 
ple.  (Quintuple. 
Superperticu- 

lar. 

Sefquialtera . 
Sefqustcrtia. 
Sifquiquarta, 


Superparti'ens. 

Stiperbipartt- 

ens. 

Supertripart  i- 
ens. 

Superquadri- 
partiens. 
Superquinti - 
part  tens. 
lAulttplexfu- 
perper  titular, 
Dupla  Sefqui¬ 
altera. 

Dtlpla  fefqui - 
tertia. 

T rip  la  jefqtti- 
altera. 

Multiplex fu- 
perpartient . 

Dupla  fuperhi - 

partiens „ 
DupLfupertri- 
p art  tens, 

Tripla  fuperbi- 
parttens , 

Tripla fuper- 
quddi  ipartient . 


to  8: or  3.  to  9. 

Proportion  of  the  greater  to  the  leffe  hath  hue  kindes^namely^#/^/^,^^- 
p  articular, Superpartiens, Multiplex  fuperperticular, and  Multiplex  fuperpartiens. 

Multiplexes  when  the  antecedent  containeth  in  it  felfe  the  confequent  cer- 
tayne  times  without  more  or  leffe:  as  twice,  thrice,  foure  tymes,  and  fo  farther. 
And  this  proportion  hath  wider  it  infinite  kindes.For  if  the  antecedent  contayne 
the  confequent  iuflly  twife,  it  is  called  dupla  proportion, as  4  to  2.  If  thrice  tripla, 
as  9, to  3.  If 4.  tymes  quadrupla  as  12.  to  3.  If  5. tymes  quintuplaas  15.  to  3.  And  fo 
infin  itely  after  the  fame  maner. 

Superpcrticular  is,whe  the  antecedet  containeth  the  confequent  only  once,& 
moreouer  fqme  oneparttherofasanhalfe,athird,orfourth,&c.  This  kinde  alio 
hath  vnder  it  infinite  kindes.For  if  the  antecedent  containe  the  confequent  once 
and  an  halfe,therofitis  called  Sefquialtera, as  6.  to  4:ifonce  and  a  third  part  Sefqui- 
tertia,zs>  4.  to  3 :  if  once  and  a  fourth  part  Sefquiquarta,  as  5.  to  4.  And  fo  in  like  ma¬ 
ner  infinitely. 

Superpartiens  is,whe  the  antecedent  cotaineth  the  confequent  onely  once,& 
moreouer  more  partes  then  one  of  the  fame, as  two  thirdes,  three  fourthes,  foure 
hfthes  and  fo  forth .  This  alfo  hath  infinite  kindes  vnder  it .  For  if  the  antecedent 
containe  aboue  theconfequent  two  partcs,it  is  called  Superbipartiens,  as  7.  to  J.  If 
3. partes Supertripartiens as 7.104.  If 4. partes  Super quadripartiens ,  asp.  to 5.  If  5. 
partes  Super quintipartiens  as  1 1  .to  6.  And  fo  forth  infinitely. 

Multiplex  Superpcrticular  is  when  the  antecedent  containeth  the  confequent 
more  then  once,  and  moreouer  onely  one  parte  of  the  fame.  This  kinde  likewife 
hath  infinite  kindes  vnder  it.For  if  the  antecedent  containe  the  confequent  twife 
and  halfe  therofyit  is  called  dupla  Sefquialtera,  as  5,  to  2. If  twife  and  a  third  Dupla. 
Sefqujtertia  as  7.10  3. If  thrice  and  an  halfe  Tripla fefquialtera  as  7.to  2.Iffoure  times 
and  an  halfe  J Tuadrufla  Sefquialtera,  as  9  .to  2.  And  fo  goyng  on  infinitely. 

;  Multiplex  Superpartient,is  when  the  antecedent  contayneth  the  confequent 
more  then  once, and  alfo  more  partes  then  one  of  the  confequent.  And  thislande 
alfo  hath  infinite  kindes  vnder  it.  For  if  the  antecedent  containe  the  confequent 
twife, and  two  partes  ouer,  it  is  called  dupla  Superbipartiens  as  8 .  to  3 .If  twice  and 
three  partes, dupla  Supertripartiens  as  1.1  .to  4*  If  thrice  and  tw o  partes,  it  is  named 
Tripla  SuperbipaHiens  as  11. 103.  If  three  tymes  and  foure  partes^  T  reble  S  uper- 
quadripartiens  as  31.  to  9- And  fo  forth  infinitely. 

Here  is  to  be  noted  that  the  denomination  of  the  proportion  betwene  any 
two  numbers,  is  had  bvdeuiding  of  the  greater  by  the  leffe.  For  the  quotient  or 

number 


cfSttclidei  Eknmtes.  Fol.liS* 

number  producecj  oftbat  diuifion  is  euer  the  denomination  of  the  proportion. 
Which  in  the  firft  kinde  of  prbpoftion,namely,muitiplex,is  euer  a  whole  number, 
and  in  all  other  kindes  of  proportion  it  isa  broken  number. 

Asifye  wdlknow  the  denomination.  of  the  proportion  betwene  9  and  3.  De- 
uide  p.by  3.  fo  hall  ye  haue  in  the  quotient  3. which  is  a  whole-number,  andis  the 
denomination  of  the  proportion  :  and  foeweth  that  the  proportion  betwene 
3,  is  Tripla.  So  the  proportion  betwene  12. and  3.  is  quadrupIa,for  that  12.  beyng 
dcuided  by  j^the  quotient, is  4.  and  fo  of  others  in  the  kinde  of  multiplex.  And  al¬ 
though  in  this  kinde  the  quotient  be  euer  a  whole  number, yet  properly  it  is  refer¬ 
red  to  vnitie,and  fo  is  reprefen  ted  in  maner  of a  broken  number  as -Land  -L  for  v- 

mtie  is  the  denominaton  to  a  whole  number, . 

Like  wife  the  denomination  of  the  proportion  betwene  4  and  3  is  i._L  for  that 

4  deuided  by  3  .  hath  in  the  quotient  1  one  and  a  third  part,of  which  third  part, 
it  is  called  fefquitercia:  fo  the  proportion  betwene  7  and  6.is  1  -L.  one  and  a  fixt,  of 

which  fixtpartitis  called fefquifexta,  audio  ofother  of  that  kinde.  Alfo  betwene 
7and5  the  denomination  ofthe  proportion  is- 1 J-  one  and  two  fifthes, which  de¬ 
nomination  cofifteth  of  two*  parts,naincly,of  the  munerator  and  denominator  of 
the  quo  tient  of  2  .and  5 :  of which  two  fifthes  it  is  called  fuperbipartiens  quintas '.-for  % 
the  numerator  foeweth  the  denomination  of  the  number  of  the  partes,and  5.  the 
denominator, foeweth  the  denominatio,  what  parts  they  are,&  fo  of  others.  Alfo 
the  denomination  betwene  %  and  2,  is  2  ~  two  and  a  halfe,  which  confifteth  of  a 

whole  number  and  a  broken,  of  2.the  whole  number  it  is  dupla, and  ofthe  halfe,  it 
is  called  fefquiaitera,  fo  is  the  proportion  dupla fefquiaitera. 

Agayne  the  denomination  ofthe  proportion  betwene  11.  and  3.  is  3  —  three 
and  two  thirdcs,confifting  alfo  of  a- whole  number  and  a  broken,  of  3.  the  whole 
numbre  it  is. called  tripla,andof-L.  the  broken  number,  it  is  called  Superbipartiens 

-  tertias, Co  the  proportion  is  t riplafuperbipartiens  tertias .  Thus  much  hetherto  tou¬ 
ching  proportion  of  the  greater  quantitie  to  the  Ieffe. 

Proportion  ofthe  Ieffe  quantitie  to  the  greater  hath  as  many  kindes,  as  that  of 
the  greater  to  the  leffe,which  kindes  are  in  the  fame  order  :  and  haue  alfo  the  fclfe 
fame  names,but  that  to  the  names  afore  put  ye  rnuft  adde  here  this  word  fub.  As 
comparing  the  greater  to  the  Ieffe,  it  was  called  multiplex  ,fuperparticular,fnperpar- 
tient,  multiplex  fuperparticular ,  and  multiplex  fuperpartient ,  now  comparing  the  Ieffe 
quantitie  to  the  greatest  is  called  fubmultiplex,  fub  fuperparticular,  fubfuperpartient, 
fdmultiplex [uper particular,  and  fubmultiplex fuperpartient .  And  fo  in  like  maner  to 
ail  the  inferior  kindes  of  all  fortes  of  proportion  yefoalladde  that  worde  fub.  The 
examples  ofthe  former  ferue  alfo  here,  onely  tranfpofing  the  termes  ofthe  pro¬ 
portionmaking  the  antecedent  confoquent,  and  the  confequent  the  antecedent. 
As  4-to  2. is  dupla  proportion  1  fo  2.  to  4*  is  fobdupla .  As  9. to  3. is  tripla:  fois3.to 
9  .fob  tripla .  And  as  p.to  6.  is  fefquiaitera,  fo  6.  to  9.  is  fobfofquialtera.  As  7.  to  5. 
isfoperbipartiens  quintas, fo  is  5x0  7.fobfoperbipartiens  quintas. As  j.to  2.is  dupla 
fefquiaitera,  fo  is  2.to  5.  fobdupla  fefquiaitera.  And  alfo  as  8. to  3«is  dupla  foperbi- 
partiens  tertias,  fo  is  3.10  8 .  fobdupla  fuperbipartiens  tertias .  And  fo  may  ye  pre¬ 
cede  infinitely  in  all  others.Thus  much  thought  I  good  in  this  place  for  the  eafe  of 
the  beginner  to  be  added  touching  proportion. 

Fro* 


Howtohpolr 
tbt  denomi¬ 
nation  of  any 
proportion . 


Proportion  of 
the  leJSe  in  the 
greater . 

Submulti¬ 

plex, 

Subfuperp  ar¬ 
ticular, 
Subfuperptr- 
tient.&e » 


"tie  fourth 
definition . 


Example  of 
this  definition 
in  magni¬ 
tudes. 


Example 
thereof  in 
numbers. 
Note. 

The  fifth  defi¬ 
nition. 


jin  example 
of  this  defini¬ 
tion  in  mag¬ 
nitudes. 


ffhy  Eudide 
in  defining  of 
Proportion 
yjedmuiii  • 
plication. 


*  S  *1  be  fifth  \ 

^Proportionalities  isafimilitude  of  proportions. 

As  in  proportion  are  compared  together  two  quantities, and  proportion  is  nq» 
thing  els  but  the  relpeft  and  companion  of  the  one  to  the  other,  and  thefe  quanti¬ 
ties  are  the  termes  of  the  proportion : To  In  proportionallitie  are  compared  toge¬ 
ther  two  proportions.  And  proportionallitie  is  nothing  els, but  the  refpe&&  Com¬ 
parifon  or  the  one  of  them  to  the  other.And  thefe  two  proportions  are  the  termes 
of  this  proportionallitie.  He  caliethir the  limilitude,that  is  ,the  likenes  or  idemp  ti¬ 
tle  of  proporti¬ 
ons  :  As,  if ye  wil  c 

copare  the  pro-  ^  i*  * — "*■ — T — 

portion  of  the 
line  A  contay- 
nyng  -z.  to  the 

line  B  contayning  i, to  the  proportion  of  the  line  C  contayning  6.  to  the  line  D 
contayning  ^either  proportion  is  dupla.  This  likenes,  idemptitie, or  equallitie  of 
proportion  is  called  proportionallitie.  So  in  number  p.to  3«and  21. to  7.  either  pro¬ 
portion  is  tripla .  Where  note  that  proportions  compared  together,  are  layd  to  be 
like  the  one  to  the  other:  but  magnitudes  compared  together,  are  laid  to  be  equall 
die  one  to  the  other. 


B 


CT hofe  magnitudes  arejayd to  bane  proportion  the  one  to  the 
other  ffthich  being  multiplied  may  exceede  the  one  the  other . 

Before  he  fliewed  and  defined,what  proportion  was, now  by  this  definition  he 
declareth  betwene  what  magnitudes  proportion  falleth,fay  ing : T hat  thole  quanti¬ 
ties  are  laid  to  haue  proportion  the  one  to  the  othcr,which  being  multiplycd,may 
exccdc  the  one  the  other. As  for  that  the 
line  A  being  multiplied  bywhatfoeuef 
multiplication  or  nuber,  as  taken  twile, 

thrifty©?  foure,  fiuc,  or  more  times,  or  r  ; ^  * 
once  and  halfe,or  onCe  and  a  third,  &  lo  A  $ 

of  any  other  part,  or  partes,  may  excede  ^ 

and  become  greater  then  the  line  B  :  or 

contrari  wile,then  thefe  two  lines  are  faid  to  haiie  proportion  the  one  to  die  other. 
And  fo  ye  may  fee  that  betwene  any  two  quatities  of  one  kinde,  there  is  a  propor¬ 
tion  .  For  the  one  remayning  vnmultiplied,&  the  other  being  Certaine  times  mul¬ 
tiplied, fhall  be  greater  then  it.  As  3. to  24.hath  a  proportion,for  leauing  24.vnmul- 
tiplied,and  multiplying  3 .by  ?rye  floa.ll  produce  27 :  which  is  greater  then  24, and 
excedeth  it.  Here  is  to  be  noted, that  Euclid?  in  defining  what  quantities  haue  pro- 
portion,was  compelled  to  vfe  multiplication,  or  .els  Ihould  not  his  definition  be 
generail  to  either  kinde  of  proportion :  namely,to  rationall  and  irrationall:to  liich 
proportion  I  fay  which  may  be  exprellcd  by  number, and  to  fuch  as  cannot  be  ex- 
prefled  by  any  determinate  numbeybut  remained!  furd  and  innominable .  In  rati¬ 
onal!  quantities  which  haue  one  common  mealure,theexcdTe  of  the  one  aboue 
the  other  is  knowen,and  by  it  is  knowen  the  proportion,  which  may  be  exprelfcd 
by  fome  determinate  number.  Butin  irrationall  quantities  which  haue  no  comori 
meafure,it  is  not  fo .  For  in  them  the  excelle  of  the  onetotheotheriseuervn- 

knowen? 


‘J 


Fol.np. 


the  diameter  therofjthere  is  yndoubtedly  a  proportion  ,  for.  that  the  fide  cernine 
times  multiplied'may  excede^ediameter  iLikewHe  betwene  the  diameter  ©f* 
circle  and  the  circumference  therof  there  is  certaihiic,by  this  definition,  a  proper* 
tjon/or  that  the  diameter  certaine  times  muMRhed  may  excejde  die  circumference 
4f  the  circle although  neither  of  thefe  proportions  can  be  named  &  expreffed  by 
pumber .  f  6V  dhs  caufe  diereforevfed£«c/^diis.maner  ofde|iiung  by  multiph- 


cation. 

i 


'W. 


S  viOOiL’ilI  ,  •'  -V 

•  C  "•  r  '  .  r'  • 

31 'H  3L  ’ 


1  ! 

-jni  < 


_  jefelfepi. 

has  /  VI 


iJi JiU 

rifllij 


\  v 


< '^Magnitudes  are  fa 
tionfoe firft  to  thefcpnd,  ahdthet. 

.  r  -  e.  -  / 

red  with  the  equimultiplices  cfthefcond  dad  pfthe fourth 
according  to  an^muhiplicatmM;^ther  together  exceede  the 
one  the  other,  or  together  are  equall the  one  to  the  other,  or 
together  are  lejfe  tbeone  then  other* 

”V  — <1  ii 


'Ihj/ixthdt* 


when 


3D.n 


In  the  definition  Iaft  going  before,  he  fhewcd  what  magnitudes  haue  propor¬ 
tion  the  one  to  the  other,. <3c  now  this  dilfinition  flieweth  what  magnitudes  are  in 


vii  v  avxx  uvuitio  jauuuc  UtiU.  CUCiy  jJIUjJvlUU  AiAln  IVYU  LCIU*L5j  VJ +9J** 

fo  that  when  ye  compare  proportion  to  proportion,  ye  rnufi  ofnecefiitie  haue  4.  tminmtgni* 
termes,that  is, an  antecedent  and  a  confcquent, to  either  of  the  proportios.As  fup-  ****** 
pofe  A,B,C,D,  to  be  foure  magnitudes,  A  die  fiffi,B  the  fecond,C  the  third,  and 


bffc 

]W 

rm, 


c 


.  i  Ll  iv 


•  E 


G 


i.iJ>  X 

» 

T 

-t*Hb 


:  10  ! 


C  3TE-R3U3: 

— 1  m 


;  <}f\] 


rr4- 


i>  l 


F 

H 


D  the  fourth :  now  if  ye  take  the  equimultiplices  of  A  and  C  the  firfi  &  the  third, 
that  is, if  ye  multiply  A  and  C  by  one  and  thefclfe  fame  number,  as  let  the  multi¬ 
plex  of  A  be  E,and  let  the  equimultiplex  of  C  be  F.  Likewife  alio  if  ye  take  the 
equimultiplices  of  B  and  D,  the  fecond  and  the  fourth, that  is  ifye  multiply  them 
by  any  one  mimber,whether  it  be  by  that  number  wherby  ye  multiplied  A&  C, 
or  by  any  other  number  greater  or  leffe,  as  let  the  multiplex  of  B  be  G,  and  the  e- 
quimultipjex  ofD  beH:  now  it  the  equimultiplices  of  A  and  C  be  both  greatet 
hen  the  eqnimultiplices  of  B  and  D,  thatisif  themultiplex  of  A  be  greater  then 
the  multiplex  of  B,  and  the  multiplex  of  C  be  greater  then  the  multiplex  of  D,  or 
if  they  be  both  leffe  then  they :  or  both  equall  to  them,  then  are  the  magnitudes 
A,B  and  C,D  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  proportion.  in  numbers* 

Likewife  in  numbers  8 .  to  6.  hath  a  proportion, alfo  4.  to  3.  hath  a  proportion: 

li.j.  now 


£y  be  In one  and  the lelfofL  —  _ _ 

$n  Order  as  iii  the  example  here  written, 8  the  fihft,:  6  thefecond,  4  foe?foifd,and  "z. 

'KTii&W'ratei'  4-Ujm.  J  ;  .1.  .  r  n  ....  x.t  .1  -  V 


FirJi  S 

...  v.  n  • 

Second  6 


pie  of  8  is  24.  &  the  triple  of qPis  ii:  like- 
'W|fo  take  the' equimhteplices*6F  &  ahflvg.-  >, 
thefecond  and  the  fourth ,  multiplyeng 
them  likewife  by  one  and  the  felfe  lame 
,  _  VT>  oumberduppofe  it  be  alfo  by  3  before 
ye  did, the  triple  of <5.  is  18.  and  the  triple 
■ofy  is  9  ,No#ye  fee  that  the  triple  of  8  the  firft,namely,24.excedeth  the  triple  of 
6i  the.fccond,na.mely,i 8  :  likewife  the  triple  0*4  the  third  number,  namely,  12. 


f.vY 
rt 


it 


bcea  ufe  that  the  equimultiplices  of  8  and  4.  foeiirft  &  the  foird,do  both  cxccede 
the  equimultiplices  of  6  and  3.  the  fecond  and  the  fourth. 
oiler  ex -  ^  tAgaine,take  the  lame  numbers  ‘and  try  the  fame  after  this  maner.  Take  the 

■ample i„  *  equimultiplices  of  8.  and  4,  thefirft  and  the  third,mu|tiplieng  eche  byy.asbefore 
numbers.  ye  did,  fo  ihall  ye  haue  24  for  the  tri¬ 
ple  of  8  .and  12  for  the  triple  of q.as  ye  r 
had'before.  Then  fake  the  equimufti- 
plicCs  of  6  and  3.  the  fecond  and  the 


^  number, but  not  by  3  as  before  ye  did: 

but  by  4.  fo  for  the  quadruple  or  6  the 
fecond  number,  finall  ye  hauc  24.  and 


Zd":'  ; 

*■ 

r  'iiin 

Fir's -l  $ 

' 

Third  ... 

r  Kih'} 

Second  6 

Fourth 

'[  c.i  ::  *  -  -i— — 

\ 

0  mof ",  a 

proo  3^  n:. 

:rosbnfiinobco 

yjiiS  j 

•••  4-  I 


■JK 

151 

cq 


fohhe  quadruple  of  3  the  fourth  number, ye  fhallhaue  12.  Andnow  ye  fee  that 
the  equimultiplices  of  8  and  q.the  firft  and  the  third, namely,  24  and  12.  are  both 
equal]  to  theimiltiplices  of  6  and  3.  the  fecond  and  the  fourth,  namely,  to  24  and 
12.  Wherfore  the  numbers  geuen,are  by  the  fecond  part  of  this  definition  inoge 
and  the  felfe  fame  proportion, becaufe  the  equimultiplices  of  8  and  4  the  firftand 
the  third, are  both  equall  to  the  equimultiplices  of  6  and  3.  the  feconde  and  the 
fourth. 


.An  ether' 
'example  in 
numbers. 


i  _  A- 


Agayne  to  lhevv  the  fame, and  for  the  fulnes  of  the  diffinition,  take  the  lame 
numbers  8, 6, 4, 3.  and  take  the  equimultiplices  of  8  and  4.  the  firft  and  the  thirde, 
iiiiiltiplieng  eche  by  2.  fo  haue  ye  i5for  the  duple  of  8,  the  firft  number,and  8  for 
the  duple  of4  the  third  number :  then  takealfo  the  equimultiplices  of  6  and  3, the 
fecond  and  the  fourth, multipliyng  eche  by  3.  fo  haue  ye  18  for  the  triple  of  6  the 
fecond,  and  p  for  the  triple  of  3.  the 
fourth  number.  And  now  ye  fee  that  r 
the  equimultiplices  of  8  and  4.  the 
ind  the  third,  namely,  16.  and  8 


gfyboth  lelfo  then  the,  equimultipli¬ 
ces  of  6  and  3  the  fecond  &  the  fourth 
namely  1 8  and  9 .  For  1 6  are  lefle  then 
ph  ?nd  8  arc  Me  tlicn  9.  Wherefore 


16  1  .  t 

..... 


FirJi 


Second 


S 

a 


Third  4 


it 


Fourth 


P 


> 


■  ■ 


both  lefle  then  the  equimultiplices  of qrand  3  fob  fecond  and  foe  fourth. 

Further 


Firfl 

Second 


Third 

Fourth 


1 


f . 

J  Fir  si 

12 

n 

10 

d 

Third 

f* 

5 

|  Second 

4 

Fourth 

£ 

3 

! 

e. 

12 

J 

*  - 

An  example 
where  the 
tqmmui.ti pU- 
tes  of the  fir fl 
andtbirdsx- 
ceedt  the  equi- 
mtutipliees  of 
the  fecond  an  d 
fourth^andyet 
the  quantities 
geuenarenot 
in  one  and  the 
felfe fame  pro¬ 
portion* 


FoL^o* 

Farther  in  this  diffinition,  this  particle  (according  to  any  multiplication)  is  ^Qtetys *arz 
moft  diligendy  to  be  confidered,  which  fignifieth  by  any  multiplication  indiffe-  ticie  according 
rently  whatfoeuer.  For  whenfoeuer  the  quantities  be  in  One  and  the  felfe  fame  to  any  multi- 
proportion, then  by  any  multiplication  whatfoeuer,the  equimultiples  of  the  firft  plication. 
and  the  third, (hall  exceede  the  equimultiplices  of  the  fecond  and  the  fourth,  or 
fhall  be  equallvnto  them,  or  leffe  then  them.  Yet  it  may  fo  happen  by  fome  one 
multiplication,that  the  equimultiplices  of  the  firftand  the  third, do  exceede  the  e- 
quimultipliccs  of  the  fecond  and  the  fourth,and  yet  the  quantities  geuen  dial  not 
be  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  proportion.  As  in  this  example  here  fet,  where  the  e- 
quirhultiplices  of  6  and  5,  the  firft  and  the  thirde,  namely,  18.  and  15.  dooboth 
exceede  the  equimultiplices  of  4  and  f  18  ~\  t$ 

3.  the  fecond  and  the  fourth,  namely, 

8  and  6.  yet  are  not  the  number^  ge-'  « 
uen  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  propor¬ 
tion.  For  6  hath  not  that  proportion 
to  4.  which  5.  hath  to  3 .  In  this  exam¬ 
ple  6  and  5  the  firft  and  the  third  were  multiplied  by  3.  which  made  their  equimul¬ 
tiplices  18  and  15.  which  exceede  the  equimultiplices  of  4  and  3,  the  fecond  and 
the  fourth  beyng  multiplied  by  2.  namely,  8  and  6:  bur  if ye  fhall  multiply  6  and  5 
the  firft  and  the  thirde  by  2.  ye  fhall  produce  12  and  10  for  their  equimultipli¬ 
ces  ,  and  then  if  ye  multiply  4  and 
3.  the  fecond  and  the  fourth  by  3.  fo 
fhall  ye  produce  for  their  equimulti¬ 
plices  12  and  9.  Now  ye  fee  that  by 
this  multiplication  the  equimultipli¬ 
ces  of  the  firft  and  the  thirde  doo  not 

both  exceede  the  equimultiplices  of  the  fecond  and  fourth  .*  for  12  the  multiplex 
of  6  doth  not  exceede  12  the  multiplex  of  4.  and  therfore  the  numbers  or  quanti¬ 
ties  are  not  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  proportion,for  that  it  holdeth  not  in  all  mul¬ 
tiplications  whatfoeuer. 

And  becaufe  this  diffinition  requireth  all  mailer  of  multiplicands  to  bring  forth 
the  exceffes, equalities, and  wantes  of  the  antecedents  aboue,to,or  vnder  the  con- 
fequents,to  auoide  the  tedioufnes  and  infinitelabour  therof,I  haue  fet  forth  a  rule 
much  to  be  made  of  and  eftemed.wherbv  ye  may  in  any  rational!  proportion  pro- 
ducc  equimultiplices  of  the  firft  and  the  third  equal!  totheequimnltiplices  of  the 
fecond  and  the  fourth .  The  rule  is  this,  take  two  numbers  whatfoeuer  in  that  pro 
portion  in  which  your  quantities  are,&  by  the  number  which  is  antecedent  mul¬ 
tiply  the  confequents  ofyour  proportions, namely,the  fecond  and  the  fourth  rand 
by  the  numberwhich  is  the  confequent  multiply  the  antecedentes  of  your  pro¬ 
portions,  namely, the  firft  and  the  third:  then  neeeftarily  flialbe  produced  the  equi¬ 
multiplices  of  the  firft  and  the  third  equall  to  the  equimultipfiees  of  the  fecond  & 
the  fourth.  As  by  exampie,take  6  to  2.  and  3  to  1. which  are  in  one  &  the  felfe  fame 
proportio,  &  taking  thefe  two  n  fibers  9  &  3. which  are  in  the  fame  proportio,  now 
by  9  the  antecedent  multiply  the  confequets  2  &  1.  and  fo  fhal  ye  haue  1 8  &  9  for 
the  equimultiplices  of  the  fecond  &  the  fourth, then  by  3  the  confequent  multiply 
the  antedets  6  &  3/0  fhal  ye  haue  1 8  &  9  for  the  equimultiplices  of  the  firft  &  the 
third, which  are  equal  to  the  former  equimultiplices  of  the  fecod  &fourth.Wher- 
ofitfoloweththatifye  multiply  1 8  &  9  the  equimultiplices  of  the  firft  and  the 
third  by  any  n  fiber  greater  the  3/wherby  they  were  now  m.ultipHed,they  fhal  both 
euer  exceede  the  equimultiplices  of  the  fecond  &  the  fourth:&  if  ye  multiply  the 

Ii.ij»  by 


A  rule  to  pro¬ 
duce  equimul¬ 
tiplices  of  the 
fail  and  third 
equall  to  the 
equimultiple 
ces  of  the  fe- 
condeand. 
fourth. 

Example 

thereof. 


v  The  fifth  Poo^e 

by  any  number  ieflc  then  3.  they  lhall  euer  both  want  of  them.  So  that  whatfoe- 
uer  multiplication  it  be, they  fliall  euer  both  exceede,be  equaI,or  want  aboue,  to, 
or  from  1 8 .  and  9.  the  equimultiplices  of  the  fecond  and  fourth. 


The  fentnth 
definition 


9  ™ 

3  4 

Proportiona¬ 
lity  of  two 
fortes,conti - 
nuall  and  dif- 
tontmuaU. 

\An  example 
of  continual! 
proportionali¬ 
ties  num¬ 
bers* 


Jr.  couiinnaU 
proportionali - 
tie  the  quan¬ 
tities  cannot 
be  of  one 
finds. 

f)  if  continual! 
proportiona¬ 
lities 

Example  of 
difcontinual 
proportiondli- 
ty  in  numbers. 
In  difcotinnal 
proportionali¬ 
ty  the  propor¬ 
tions  may  be 
of  diners 
Strides, 


Magnitudes  which  are  in  one  and  the  felfe fame  proportion , 
are  called  Proportionali. 

As  if  the  lyne  A,haue  the  fame  proportion  to  the  line  B,  that  the  lyne  C  hath 
to  the  lyne  D,  then  are  the 
faidfoure  magnitudes  A,B, 

G,D,  called  proportionali.  ai  * - — -■ - — -  c  - > — - — 

Alio  in  numbers  for  that  9.  R 

to  3. hath  that  fame  proportio  ‘  '  p  - — • 

than  2  hath  to  4:  therefore 
thefefoure  nubers  9.3.12.4. 

are  laid  to  be  proportionali.  Here  is  to  be  noted  that  this  likenes  or  idemptitie  of 
proportio  which  is  called,as  before  was  faid  proportionalities  of  two  fortes :  the 
one  is  continuall,the  other  is  difeontinuall.  Continuall  proportionalitie  is,  when 
the  magnitudes  fet  in  lyke  proportion,  are  fo  ioyned  together,  that  the  fecond 
which  is  confequent  to  the  firft,is  antecedent  to  the  third,and  the  fourth  which  is 
confequent  to  the  third, is  antecedent  to  the  fift,and  fo  continually  forth.  So  eue- 
ry  quantitie  or  terme  in  this  proportionalitie,is  both  antecedent  and  confequent 
(confequent  in,  relped  ofthat  which  went  before,  &antecedent  in  refped  of  that 
which  followcth)  except  the  firfl:,which  is  onely  antecedent  to  that  which  follow- 
eth,and  the  lafl:  which  is  onely  confequent  to  that  which  went  before.Take  an  ex¬ 
ample  in  thcfe  numbers, 16.8.4,2.1.  In  what  proportion  i6.isto  8,  in  the  lame  is 
8 .  to  4,  in  the  fame  alfo  is  4.  to  2,  and  likewife  2.  to  1.  For  they  all  are  in  duple  pro¬ 
portion:^.  the  firlt  is  antecedentto  8, and  8.  is  confequent  vnto  it :  and  the  lelfe 
fame  8.  is  antecedent  to 4  .-  which  4  beyng confequent  to  8.  is  antecedent  to  2, 
which  2  likewife  is  confequent  to  4.  and  antecedent  to  1 :  which  becaufe  he  is  the 
laft, is  onely  confequent, and  antecedent  to  nonets  16.  becaufe  itwas  thefirft,was 
antecedent  onely, and  confequent  to  none.  Alfo  in  this  proportionalitie  all  the 
magnitudes  muft  of  neceflitie  be  of  one  kynde,  by  reafon  of  the  continuation  of 
the  proportions  in  this  proportionalitie,  becaufe  there  is  no  proportion  betwene 
quantities  of  diuers  kyndes.  Difcontinuall  proportionalitie  is,  when  the  magni¬ 
tudes  which  are  fet  in  lyke  proportion,are  not  continually  fet, as  before  they  were, 
hauyng  one  terme  referred  both  to  that  which  went  before, and  to  that  which  fo- 
lowcth,but  haue  their  tennes  diftind  and  feuered  afonder :  as  the  firft  is  antece¬ 
dent  to  the  fecond,fo  is  the  third  antecedent  to  the  fourth.  Example  in  numbers, 
as  8  is  to  4.  fo  is  6.to  3.  for  either  proportion  is  duple. Where  ye  fee, how  ech  pro¬ 
portion  hath  hys  owne  antecedentand  confequent  diftind  from  the  antecedent 
and  confequent  of  the  other, and  no  one  number  is  antecedentand  confequent  iti 
diuers  refpedes.  And  by  reafon  of  the  difcontinuaunce  of  the  proportions  in  this 
proportionalitie, the  quantities  compared,may  be  of diuers  kyndes ,  becaufe  the 
confequent  in  the  firife  proportion  is  not  the  antecedent  in  the  fecond  proportion. 
So  that  ye  may  compare  fuperficies  to  fuperficies,or  body  to  body  in  the  felfe  fame 
proportion  that  ye  do  lyne  to  lyne. 


Whm 


ofSuclides  Elementes.  FoLryi. 

IVben  the  equemultiplices  being  taken.  the  multiplex  of  the  The  eight 
firfl  excedeth  the  multiplex  oft  he  fecond.  &  the  multiplex  of  d$mhon> 
the  third  .excedeth  not  the  multiplex  of  the fourth ;  then  hath 
the  firfl  to  the fecond  a  greater  proportion  .then  hath  the  third 
to  the  fourth. 


In  the  fixt,  definition  was  declared  what  magnitudes  are  laid  to  be  in  one  and 
the  lame  proportion  :  now  he  fheweth  in  this  definition  what  magnitudes  are  laid 
to  be  in  a  greater  proportion .  And  here  is  fuppofed  the  fame  order  of  multiplicati¬ 
on, that  there  in  that  definition  was  vied :  namely,  that  the  firfl:  and  the  third  be  e- 
qually  multiplicd,that  is,by  one  &  the  felfe  fame  nuber  :  and  alfo  that  the  fecond 
and  the  fourth  be  equally  multiplied  by 
the  fame  or  fome  other  number :  and 
then  if  the  multiplex  of  the  firfl,  excede 
the  multiplex  of  the  fecond:  &  the  mul¬ 
tiplex  of  the  third  ,  cxcede  not  the  mul¬ 
tiplex  of  the  fourth, the  firfl  hath  a  grea¬ 
ter  proportion  to  the  fecond,  then  hath 
the  third  to  the  fourth .  As  fuppofe  that 
there  be  foure  quantities, A, B,C,D :  of 
which  let  A  be  the  firfl,B  the  fecond,  C  ^ 
the  third, &  D  the  fourth.  And  let  A  the 
firfl  cotainetf.  and  let  B  the  fecond  con 
taine  2. Sc  C  the  third  4.  &  D  the  fourth 
3:  Now  take  the  equimultiples  of  A 
and  C,the  firfl  &  the  third, which  let  be 
E  and  F,fo  that  how  multiplex  E  is  to 
A  fo  multiplex  let  F  be  to  C  :  name- 
ly,for  example  fake  let  either  of  them  £ 
be  triple  :  fo  haue  you  18.  for  the 
multiplex  of  A,  and  12. for  the  mul¬ 
tiplex  of  C *  Likewife  take  the  equimultiplices  of  B  &  D,the  fecond  &  the  fourth, 
multiplying  them  alfo  by  one  and  the  felf fame  number, as  by  4 :  fo  haue  ye  for  the 
multiplex  ofB  the  fecond  8,  namely,  the  line  G,  and  for  the  multiplex  of  D  the 
fourth  i2,namely,the  line  H »  Now  becaufe  the  line  E  multiplex  to  the  firfl,  name¬ 
ly,!  8 , excedeth  the  line  G  multiplex  to  the  fecond, namely, 8  :  And  the  line  F  mul¬ 
tiplex  to  the  third, namely, 12,  excedeth  not  the  line  H  multiplex  to  the  fourth, 
namely, 12  (for  that  they  are  equall)the  proportio  of  A  to  B  the  firfl  to  the  fecond, 
is  greater  then  the  proportion  of  C  to  D  the  third  to  thefouith.So  likewife  in  nu- 
Bers;take  n.toi.  &y.  to  3.  and  mul¬ 
tiply  11.&  7.  ( the  firfl,  and  the  third) 
by  2,  fo  fhall  ye  haue  22 .  for  the  multi¬ 
plex  of  the  firfl,  and  14.  for  the  multi¬ 
plex  of  the  third :  and  multiply  2.and 
3. the  fecond  and  the  fourth  by  6:  fo 
fhall the  multiplex  of  the  fecond  be  12. 
and  the  multiplex  of  the  fourth  be  18 : 


* 

- 

• 

■r 

* 

. 

- 

’ 

r  A 

n v.. 

* 

r  -4 

■ 

c 

3 

-  ► 

$ 

:*i  : 

r 

;  f 

A  £ 


d  K 


1 — 

** 

**  1 

Firtt  11 

Third  7  | 

Second  2 

1 

n, 

K. _ . 

12 

/#  j 

liiij. 


Now 


A ft  example 

eftbis  definU 
tion  in  mag^ 
nit  ft  ties* 


An  exnmple 
in  numbers. 


Note, 


Its 

Third 

► 

18  ^ 
11,  | 

FirB 

■< 

~7~ 

-> 

Second 

li 

4 

20 . 

Fourth 

P 

45  j 

Now  ye  fee  22.  the  multiples  of  the  firft,excedeth  12,  the  multiplex  of  thefecond. 
But  14.  the  multiplex  ofthe  third,  excedeth  not  18.  the  multiplex  of  the  fourth: 
Wherefore  the  proportion  of: ir.to  2.the  firfl  to  the  fecond, is  greater  then  the  pro¬ 
portion  0f7.ro  3,the  third  to  the  fourth .  And  fo  of  all  other  quantities  and  num- 
bers,which  are  notin  one  and  the  felfe  fame  proportion,  ye  may  know  when  the 
fir  ft  to  the  fecond  hath  a  greater  proportion  then  the  third  to  the  fourth* 

fdfn  other  example. 

This  example  haue  I  let  to  declare 
that  although  the  proportion  of  the 
firfl  to  the  fecond  be  greater  then  the 
proportion  of  the  third  to  the  fourth, 
yet  the  multiplex  of  the  firfl  excedeth 
not  the  multiplex  of  thefecod.  Wher- 
fore  it  is  diligently  to  be  noted,  that  it 
isfufficienttofhewthat  the  proporti¬ 
on  of  the  firfl:  to  the  fecond  is  greater  the  the  proportion  of the  thii  d  to  the  fourth, 
if  the  want  or  lacke  of  the  multiplex  of  the  firfl  from  the  multiplex  of  the  fecond, 
belelfethenthewantorlackeof  the  multiplex  of  the  third  to  the  multiplex  of 
the  fourth .  As  in  this  example  16.  the  multiplex  of  8.  the  firfl,  wanteth  of  20. the 
multiplex  ofq-the  fecond, f cure:  wheras  1  S.the  multiplex  of  9, the  third, wateth  of 
45, the  multiplex  of  9  the  fourthly .  And  fo  ofall  others  wheras(the  proportions 
being  diuers)  the  equimultipliccs  of  the  firfl:  and  the  third  are  both  Idle ,  then  the 
equimultiples  of  the  fecond  and  the  fourth .  Likewife  if  the  equimultiplices  of 
the  firfl:  and  the  third  do  both  excede  the  equimultiplices  of  the  fecond  &  the  firfl,. 
the  fhall  the  excelfe  of  the  multiplex  of  the  firfl  aboue  the  multiplex  of  the  fecond, 
be  greater  the  the  exedfe  of  the  multiplex  of  thethird,aboue  the  multiplex  of  the 
fourth  .As  in  thefe  numbers  here  fet,  the  equimultiplices  of  6.  and  4.  the  firfl  and 
the  third, namely, 12, and  8.do  both  excede  the  equimultiplices  of  2.  and  3.  thefe¬ 
cond  and  the  fourth,  nameiy,4.and  6.  But  i2.the  multiplex  of  the  firfl  excedeth  4.. 
the  multiplex  of  the  fecond  by  4, and  8  .the  multiplex  of the  thyrd  excedeth  ti.the 
multiplex  of  the  fourth  by  2.  but  8. is 
more  then  2.  Howheit  this  is  general¬ 
ly  certaine.  that  when  foeuer  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  firfl  to  the  fecod  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the.proportion  of  the  third  to 
the  fourth,  there  may  be  found  fome 
mill tipiication,that  whe  the  equimul¬ 
tiplices  of  the  firfl  and  the  third  fliall 
be  compared  to 


f 

12 

$  " 

i  FirB 

6 

Third 

4 

[  Second  . 

2 

Fourth 

- 

1 

A  , 

6 

xbf 

the  firfl  fliall  excede  the  multiplex  of  the  fecond,&  the  multiplex  of  the  third  fliall 
not  excede  the  multiplex  of  the  fourth,according  to  the  plaine  wordes  of  the  de¬ 
finition.  - 

In  like  maner  when  you  haue  taken  the  equimultiplices  of  the  firfl  &  the  third, 
and  alfo  the  equimultiplices  of  the  fecond  and  the  fourth,  if  the  multiplex  of  the 
firfl  excede  not  the  multiplex  of  the  fecond, and  the  multiplex  of  the  third  excede 
the  multiplex  of  the  fourth :  then  hath  the  firfl  to  thefecond  a  leflc  proportion, 
then  hath  the  third  to  the  fourth.  As  in  the  example  before,  if  ye  chaungethe 
termcs,and  make  C  the  firft,D  the  fecond, A  the  third,and  B  the  fourth: then  fliall 
■  F,namely, 


ofSuclidesElementes .  Fohqz . 

F5  namely,  i2.the  multiplex  of  the  fitft  notexcede  H,  namely,  12.  the  multiplex  of 
the  fecond:  but  E,namely,i  8  .the  multiplex  of  the  third  excedeth  G, namely, 8  .the 
multiplex  of  the  fourth.  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  C  to  D,  the  firft  to  the  fe¬ 
cond, is  lefTe  then  the  proportion  of  A  to  B,the  third  to  the  fourth. 

Euen  fo  in  numbers.  As  in  this  ex¬ 
ample,  j.to  4-and  7  .to  .j.Ifye  multiply 
5 .and  y.the  firft  and  the  third  eche.by 
3,  ye  fhall  for  the  multiplex  of  5.  the 
firft  haue  15.  and  for  the  multiplexof 
7.the  third fhaM  ye  haue  21 :  againeif 
ye  multiply  4-and  3.  the  fecond  &  the 
fourth  by  6, for  the  multiplex  of  zj-.the 
fecond  ye  fhall  haue  24, and  for  the  multiplex  of 3  .the  fourth ,  ye  fhall  haue  1 8  .  So 
ye  fee  that  i5.the  multiplex  of  the  firft,is  leffe  then  24,the  multiplex  of  the  fecond: 
and  2i.the  multiplex  of  the  third  is  greater  then  18. the  multiplex  of  the  fourth. 
Wherefore  the  proportion  of  ).to  4.  the  firff  to the  fecond  is  leffe  then  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  y.to  3 .the  third  to  the  fourth. 


Froportionallitie  conjiftetb  at  the  left  in  three  termed 

Before  it  was  fayd,that  proportionality  is  a  likeneffe  or  an  idemptitie  of  pro- 
portions.Wherfore  of  neceffitie  in  proportionalitie,  there  muff  be  two  proporti¬ 
ons,  and  euery  proportion  hath  two  termes,  namely,  his  antecedent  and  confe- 
qucnt.Therfore  in  euery  proportionalitie  there  are  foure  termes.But  for  that  fom- 
tyme,onc  termefupplieth  by  diuers  relations,  the  roume  of  two,  for  in  refped  to 
the  firft  iris  confequent,and  in  refped  to  that  which  followeth,  it  is  antecedent: 
therfore  three  termes  at  leaft  and  not  vnder  may  fuffice  in  proportionalitie,which 
three  are  in  power  foure,and  Occupy  the  rome  of  foure, as  is  fayd.Asfuppofe  that 
A  hath  to  B  that  proportion,  that  B  { 

hath  to  C:  then  are  thefe  thre  quan-  1  “  - *-* 

tides  A,  B,  C,  fet  in  the  left  number  3  *- — — — « - — 

of  proportionality. Likewife  in  num-  '  r 

bers,as8.4.2.and5?.  6.4.  ^  ' 


i 

j  First 
^  Second' 


l 


IS 

5 

4 

24 


Third 

Fourth 


21 


7 


J 


rS 


When  there  are  three  magnitudes  in  proportion  ,the  firjl fhall 
he  ynto  the  third  in  double  proportion  that  it  is  to  the  fecond. 
"But  when  there  are  foure  magnitudes  in  proportion  the  firH 
fhall  be  ynto  the fourth  in  treble  proportion  that  it  is  to  the fe~- 
cond.And fo  alrnies  in  order  one  morels  the  proportion Jhall 
he  extended. 

This  definition  is  alfb  vnderftand  in  condnuall  proportionalitie.  As  if  the  thre 
magnitudes  A,  B,  C5  bee  propordonall :  then  fhall  the  proportion  of  A  the 

Ihiiij.  firft 


The  ninth  de* 
finition. 


An  example 
of  this  defini¬ 
tion  in  mag¬ 
nitudes. 

Example  in 
numbers. 


The  tenth 
definition . 


Example  of 
this  definition 
in  magni- 
fades. 


OQRe 


A  rule  to 
adde  vraborti - 
omjojpro^or~ 
ttons. 

Example 

thereof* 


27,^3, 

P 

3  —  3 


8,4.2-  1. 

3  2  2 

5  I  2 


firft  to  G  the  thirde,  bee  .>■_> 

double  to  the  proportion  4  . _  t 

'which  is  betwene  A&  B  ■“ 

the  fxrfh  and  the  feconde,  ®  - - — •* 

that  is  the  proportio  of  A  q  r 

to  B  taken  twife,  or  added  ”  * 

to  itfelf  (which  is  all  one) 

lhali  make  the  proportio  of  A  to  C.For  the  eafier  vndcrftadyng  of  this  &  the  pra« 
<aife  thero£,it  lhall  be  much  necei&iy  fomwhat  to  inftrudt  the  rude  beginner  how- 
proportions  may  be  added  one  to  an  other.  Which  is  done  by  this  rule. 

Mukipk  the  antecedent  of  the  oneproporrion  hy  the  antecedfr-  nfthT  ^her 
andtkg  immher  producedjliallbgiheintecedent  of  the  proportion  ™hirh  ^ 
tayngd^hemliQ^  of  the  o^.pmpnrn^n  Uy 

thecon&quen^^  th^jmmber-producedihall  be  ronfequepr  Gf  the 

prop  ortioirw  hichflialjj^mtaymeal^^ 

^CdnexampTe.  Ifyewill  adde  the  proportion  which  is  betwene  4  and  2.  (which 
is  dupla)  to  the  proportion  which  is  betwene  9  and  3.  (which  is  tripla)  multiply 
9*  die  antecedent  of  the  firft  proportion  by  4.  the  antecedent  of  the 
fecond  proportion, and  ye  (hall  produce  3 6.  which  referue  and  kepe  3 6 

for  the  antecedent  of  the  proportion  which  ye  feeke  for .  Likewife  9  4 

multiply  3  the  confequent  of  the  firft  proportion, by  2  the  confe-  3  2 

quenr  ofthe  fecond,fo  frail  ye  haue  tf.which  6.  lhall  be  confequent  6 

to  die  former  antecedet,  namely,  to  3 <5:  fo  fhal  the  proportio  which 
as  betwene  36  and  6.  namely ,fextupla,contayne in  it  the  two  proportions  geuen, 
namely, tripla,and  dupla.And  by  this  meanes  are  they  added  together, &  brought 
into  one.  And  by  this  may  ye  adde  all  other  kyndes  of  proportions  whatfoeuer 
they  b  e. Now  for  that  the  definition  fayth,thatif  there  be  three  quantities  in  pro* 
portio,that  is, what  proportio  the  firft  hath  to  the  fecod, the  fame  hath  thefecond 
to  th  e  third,which  for  example  let  be  triplets  in  thefe  nubers,27. 9*  3.  adde  triple 
to  triple  by  the  rule  abouefaid.  And  forafmuch  as  it  is  eafier  to  worke  in  final!  nu- 
bers  then  in  great, reduce  thefe  proportios  to  theyrleaft  denomination: So  27,  to 
^.reduced  to  the  left  termes  in  that  proportion's  as  much  as  3.  to  1.  Likewife  9  to 
3  reduced  to  they r  left  termes  are  alfo  as  much  as  3  to  1 .  now  adde  together  thefe 
two  triple  proportions  thus  reduced,  multipliyrig  3  by  3.  theofte  antecedent  by. 
the  other, fo  frail  ye  produce  9  for  a  new  antecedent,  then  multiply  1  by  i.the  one 
confequent  by  the  other,  fofliallyou  produce  1.  which  let  be  confequent  to  9, 
your  antecedent,!©  theproportion  betwene  9  and  1.  which  is  noncuple  contay- 
neth  both  the  two  triple  proportions.  And  becaufe  they  were  equal  the  one  to  the 
other, it  is  duple  to  eche  of  them.  Ye  fee  alfo  that  the  proportion  of  27  to  3. the  firft: 
to  the  third ,1s  alfo  noncuple. Wherfore  accordingto  the  definition,  the  proporti¬ 
on  ofthe  firft  to  the  third,is  double  to  theproportion  ofthe  firft  to  thefecond,  as 
9  to  1.  beyng  noncuple,  is  double  3  to  1.  which  is  triple,  becaufe  it  contayneth  it 
twife.- 

So  if there  beq.  quantities  in  Continual! proportion, the  proportion  of  the  firft 
to  the  fourth,fliall  be  triple  to  the  proportion  which  is  betwene  the  firft  and  the 
fecond, thatis, it  (hall  contayne  it  three  tymes.  As  for  example,  Take4.numbers  in 
continual  proportion  8. 4. 2. 1.  Ye  fee  that  the  proporti5  of  8  to  1.  the  firft  to  the 
fourth, is  o&upla:  theproportion  of  8  to  4.  the  firft  to  the  fecond  is  dupla,  now- 
treble  dupla  proportion, that  is,  adde  3.  dupla  proportions  together,  by  the  rule 
before  geuen, as. ye  fee  in  the  example.  Multiply  all  the  antecedences  together*, 

the 


< 


ofSuclides  Element es .  Fol  ij  j# 

the  antecedent  of  the  firft  proportion,  by  2.  the  antecedent  of  the  fecond,fo  haue 
ye  4:  which  4.multiply  by  2  the  antecedent  of  the  third  proportio,  fb  fhal  ye  haue 
8  for  a  new  antecedent*  In  lyke  maner  multiply  all  the  confequentes  together,  1. 
the  confequent  of  the  firft  proportion  by  t.  the  confequent  of  thefecond  propor¬ 
tio, fo  fhal  ye  haue  i,which  1. multiply  agayne  by  1.  the  cofequent  of  the  third  pro¬ 
portion, fo  fliall  ye  haue  agayne  1 :  which  1.  let  be  confequent  to  your  former  ante¬ 
cedent  8:  fo  haue  ye  8  to  1. which  is  odupla,  which  was  alfo  the  proportion  of  the 
firft  to  the  fourth, which  o&upla  is  alfo  brought  fourth  of  the  addition  of  thre  du- 
pla  proportions  together,  and  contayneth  it  three  tymes,wherefore  odupla  is  tri- 
pla  to  dupla,and  therforeas  the  definition  fayth:  the  proportion  of  the  firft  to  the 
fourth  is  tripla  to  the  proportion  of  the  firft  to  the  fecond.  And  fo  confequently 
forth  as  long  as  the  proportionalitie  continueth  accordyng  to  the  fentence  of  the 
diffinition,  the  termes  of  the  proportions  exceeding  the  number  of  proportions  by 
one. As  if  ye  haue  5.  termes  in  proportion, the  proportid  of  thefirft  to  the  fifth  fhal 
be  quadrupla  to  the  proportion  of  the  firft  to  the  fecond,and  if  there  be  d.termes, 
it  fhall  be  quintupla  and  fo  in  order. 

fffyfagnitudes  of  like  proportion,  are  fayd  to  be  antecedents 
to  antecedentes, and  confequentes  to  confequentes . 

For  that  before  it  was  fayd,  that  proportion  was  a  relation  orarefped  of  one 
quantitie  to  an  other, now  flieweth  he  what  magnitudes  are  fayd  to  be  of  like  pro- 
portion,namely,thefe  whofe  antecedents  haue  like  refped  to  their  confequentes,, 
and  whofe  confequents  receyue 
like  refpedes  of  their  antecedets.  . 

As  putting  4.magnitudes  A, B,C  '  '  ’  '  *  " 

D.  If  A  antecedent  to  B,  be  dou-  0  _ ,  D  , _ _ 

ble  to  B,and  C  antecedent  to  D, 
be  double  alfo  to  D,thehaue  the 

two  antecedentes  like  refpedes  to  their  confcquents.Likewife  ifB  the  confequent 
be  halfe  of  A,and  alfo  D  the  confequent  be  halfe  of  C,then  the  two  confequentes 
B  and  D  receiue  of  their  antecedentes  like  rcfpe&es  and  relations.And  by  this  dif¬ 
finition, are  thefe  magnitudes  A,B,C,D,  of  like  proportion. 

Alfo  in  numbers,^.  3. 6. 2  rbecaufep  the  antecedent  is  triple  to  3.  his  confe¬ 
quent, and  the  antecedent  6. is  alfo  triple  to  2  his  confequent :  the 
two  antecedets  9  and  6  haue  like  refpedes  to  their  confequentes,  9 .  6. 
and  becaufe  that  3  theconfequentis  the  fubtriple  or  third  part  of  3.2. 

9.  his  antecedent,and  likewife  2  the  confequent  is  the  fubtriple  or 

third  pair  of  d.his  antecedent, the  two  confequentes  3  and  2  reeeiue  alfo  lyke  re- 

fpedes  of  their  antecedentes,  and  therfore  are  numbers  oflike  proportion. 

‘Proportion  alternate,  or  proportion  by  permutation  is,  'token 
the  antecedent  is  compared  to  the  antecedent,  and  the  confe¬ 
quent  to  the  confequent . 

The  vnderftanding  of  this  definition  &  of all  the  definitions  following,  depen- 
deth  of  the  definition  going  before,and  vfe  it  for  a  generall  fuppofition,namely,  to 
‘  ‘  haue 


The  eleuenth 
definition. 


Example  of 
this  definition 
in  magmtnds. 


Example  in 
numbers • 


The  twelfth 
definition . 


Example  of 
this  definition 
m  magnituds. 


Example  in 
numbers . 


The  thirtenth 
definition. 


Example  of 
■this  definition 
tn  maonetudt. 

O 


Example  in 
numbers . 


T he fourt  filth 
definition. 


Example  of 
t  his  definition 
in  magnitudst 


The  JifthPookp 

haue  foure  quantities  in  proportion.Suppofe  foure  magnitudes  A,B,C,D,to  be  m 
proportion,namely,as  Ais  to  B,  fo  let  C  be  to  D.  Now  if  ye  compare  A  the  ante- 
cedent  of  the  firft  proportion  to  C  the  antecedent  of  the  fecond  as  to  his  confe¬ 
quent,  &  likewife  if  ye  compare 

B  the  cofequent  of  the  firft  pro-  A  - - — - - *  c  * . , 

portion  as  an  antecedent  to  D  % _ _ _ _  p  ,  .  _ 

the  confequent  of  the  fecond  as 

to  his  confequent :  then  fliall  ye  haue  the  magnitudes  in  this  fort :  as  A  to  C,ante- 
cedent  to  antecedent, fo  B  to  D,confequent  to  confequent,&  this  is  called  permu- 

tate  proportion  or  alternate .  In  numbers  as  12.  to  6fib  t . .  1  * — - — ^ 

8  .to  4.  either  is  dupla .  Wherefore  by  permutation  of  Duple  Duple 

proportion,  as  i2.to  8. antecedent  to  antecedent^)  is  6.  ***  *** 

to  4.confequent  to  confequent, for  either  is  fefquialtera,  12 ' 6  :  f  +- 

Sef quia  Iter. 

%  *  •  ’  •  •  •-  ..  .  ...  IV  '  _■  * 

Conuerfe proportion,  or  proportion  by  comer f on  isfiwhen  the 
confequent  is  taken  as  the  antecedent ,  and Jo  is  compared  to 
the  antecedent  as  to  the  confequent. 


Suppofe  as  before  foure  magnitudesin  proportion, A, B,C,D,as  A  to  B',To  C 
to  D  :  if  ye  rercrre  B  the  confequent  of  the  firft  proportion^  antecedent, to  A  the 
antecedent  of  the  firft, as  to  his  confequent :  and  likewife  if ye  referre  D  the  confc* 

quet  of  the  fecond  proportion  as  an-  &  . - — . - ,  c  , 

tecedet  to  C  the  antecedet  of  the  fe-  _  r  ^ 

cond  proportio,  as  to  his  cofequent:  s 

the  fliall  ye  haue  the  magnitudes  in  thys  order.  As  B  to  A  cofequent  to  antecedet: 
fo  D  to  C  confequent  to  antecedet. And  thys  is  called  couerfeproportion.So  alfo 

in  numbers,  <?.to  3,  as  6. to  2,  eyther  is  tripla,wher-  t — - -  A.——  ..  ■  ^ 

fore  comparing  3.10  p, die  confequent  ofthe  firft  to  Triple  Triple 

hys  antecedent^,  and  alfo  2. the  confequent  of  the 

fecond  to  hys  antecedent  6,  by  conuerfe  proporti-  -9-3  •  f  .  2 

on  it  commeth  to  pafte  as  3  .to  s>,  fo  2 .to  6 :  For  ei-  V“Y  J .  .  . 

theris  fubtripla.  Suo  triple.  Subtriple. 


‘Proportion  compofed,  or  compojition  of  proportion  is,  when 
the  antecedent  and  the  confequent  are  both  as  one  compared 
Unto  the  confequent. 

Suppofethatin  the  former  foure  A  ^ 

magnituds  in  proportio, A, B,C,D,  *  ~  '  1  * 

as  AistoB,foisCtoD:ifyeadde^  * - 1  - * 

A  and  B  the  antecedent  and  the  confequent 

of  the  firft  proportion  together,and  compare  A  3  <c  t  *  . 

them  fo  added  as  one  antecedent  to  B  the  A ^  r 

confequent  ofthe  firft  proportion  as  to  hys  ’  9 

confequent:  and  likewife  if  ye  adde  together 

C  and  jDf, 


o;  cupmes  memntes,  FoL 

fo  ad* 

ded,compare  them  as  one  antecedent  to  D  the.cpnrequent  pf  jhteiecond  propor¬ 
tionals  to  his  confequent:then  (hall  ye  haue'm^m^mturdbt  IhltKis  order. ^As  A  B 
to  B,fo  C  D  to  D,  for  either  of  them  is  tripla.And  this  is  called  compofed  propor- 


:portion  addedtPgethcrjhTAe  12 :  which  12. as  antecedent  co¬ 
pare  to  4.iAe  cordequerrcdf^h efirft  proportion  as  to  his  con¬ 
sequent  :  fo  adde  together ;  £.and  j,  the  antecedent andcoh- 
fequent  of  the  fecond  proportion, they  make  9  :  which  5?.  as*' 


Example  in 
numbers ,, 


8' 

,12 


4:  frfy 
,  - 

4  •  9  •  3 


*  - 

. « A  *4 
V 


.  iV*v 


bei 

-rr;:. 


1 'imfimpf proportio  n ,  IfrhentbFex* 
cejJeMhtmn  the  antecedent  excedeth  the  confeauentfs  com 
the  confequent* 


■J 


1 3q  .  •  1 


:  b 


Thys  definition  is  the  cpnuerfe  ofthe  dpHnitiongoitig  nejft  hefore :  in  it  was 
vied  compofi tioh,and  in  thys  is  vfed  diuifion .  As  before  i>  now  fuppofe  fdure 
magnitudes  in  proportion  A  B  the  fuff,  B  the  fecond,  C  D  the. third ,  and  D  the 
.fourth  .*  as  ABtoB :  fo  CD  toD;  A 

A  B,  the  antecedent  of  the  £  rft  pro-  * — - — - - — 4 — - * 

.'portion  excedeth.  B  thecotifequent  c  A  j> 


mon 


magni- 


4- 


Thefiftcve 

definition. 


V  •:  '  m  IjSj 

*  .1  .  ui 

This  is  the  so-* 
uerje  of  the 
former  defini¬ 
tion. 

Example  in 
magnitudes. 


.  .a  JliLl- 


tude  A,  wherfore  A  is  the  exceffe  of  the  antecedent  A  B  aboue  the  confequent  B: 
fo  likewife  C  D  the  antecedent  of  the  fecond  proportion,  excedeth  D  the  confe¬ 
quent  of  the  fame  proportion,  by  the  quantide  C ,  wherefore  C  is  the  exceffe  of 
:  the  antecedent  C  D  aboue  the  confequent  D  *  Now  if  ye  compare  A  the  exceffe 
of  A  B  fhdfitft  antecedent,  aboue  the  confequent  B,as  antecedent  to  B  the  con¬ 
fequent,  as  to  his  confequent :  alfo  if ye  compare  D  the  exceffe  of  the  fecond  an¬ 
tecedent  C  D,  aboue  the  confequent  D,  as  antecedent  to  D  the  confequent,as  to 
his  confequent :  then  fliall  your  magnitudes  be  in  this  order.  As  A  to  B,  fb  is  C  to 
D  :  which  A  called  diuifib,n  of  proportioned*  proportion  deuided. 

'  And  fo  in  numbers,  as  9. to  6fo  i2.to  8 ,either  proportion 
is  fefquialtera  :  the  exceffe  of  p.  the  antecedent  of  the  f  rft  9.6:  12  .  8 

proportion  aboue  d.thc  confequent  ofthe  fame  is  3  :  the.ex-  $  .  o 

ceffc  of  1 2. the  antecedent  of  the  fecond  proportion  aboue  8  7  ^  4  • 

,xthe  confequent  Gfthefame,is4i  then  if  ye  compare^.the  ex¬ 
ceffe  ofp.thefirft  antecedentaboue  the  confequent,  as  antecedent  to  <5, the  confe¬ 
quent, as  to  hys  confequent:  and  alfo  if  ye  compare  .4  the  exceffe  of  12.  the  fecond 
antecedentaboue  the  confequent,  as  antecedent,  to  8.  the  confequent,as  to  hys 
cpnfequent^e  fhall  hauc  your  numbers  after  this  maner  by  diuifion  of  proporti¬ 
on, as  3. to  6 :  fo  4.10  8  :  for  either  proportion  is fubdupfa. 


Example  its 
numbers. 


ns  commoniycai' 
(egrofwttmfr  euerfi o  offroportionj  is  fit  he  the  m* 

tecedent 


7  he  fix  fen* 

definition. 


Antxamplt 
of  this  defini¬ 
tion  in  mag¬ 
nitudes. 


• An  example 
in  numbers. 


The  fine  tenth 
definition. 


An  example 
of  this  define • 
xion  in  mag* 
mtudet. 


,\ :  \ 


:  tecedent  is  compared  to  the  exceife,  therein  the  antecedent 
excedetbtfiiconfeftent . 


-•foqoK 
Ol.v> 


)j  hoik ;  it  eidt  bnAudqi 

!  •  I  T  | 

TXJ.;  V":  ill  OMJgi 


xenr 


UKO  Kill  03  ",  .no* 

XI 03  Cl :  >  .'Uio 

HloOffK 


t<  .  \  ,  ijA  WA^  •  noinoQQX.,  *..»  ^.*-**^  *1.*^^ 

Foure magnitudes;  liippofed  as  before,  AB  thcfirll,B  the  Ifcond, C D  the 
third,and  D  the  fourth.  As  A  B  to  A,  foCDtoC:  AB  the  antecedent  of  the  firft 
proportion  cxccdethB  the  confequent  of  the  fame  by  |the  magnitude  A  >  where¬ 
fore  A  is  theexcefle  of  the  an  tece-  a  ,  B 

dent  A  B  aboue  the  confequqntB:  X  '  '  r 


V  > 


foalfo  the  magnitude  C  is  the  ex-  \  t~ 


-t 


:ao3Jfi 


nil 

m 


dentjto  A  the  exceife  therof  aboue  the  confequent  B,  as  to  his  confequent :  if  ye 
compare  alfo  CD  the  antecedent  '.q£  the  fecond  proportion  as  antecedent  to  C 
the  excefle  therof  aboue  the  confequent  D ,  as tonis  confequent then  fhallyour 
magnitudes  come  to  thys  order .  As  A  B  to  A,  fo  C  D  to  C,  and.  thys  is  called 
conuerfion  of  proportion,  and  offome  euerfion  of  proportion.Likewyfe  in  num¬ 
bers,  as  p.to  6,  fo  ia.to  8.  eyther  proportion  is  fcfquialtera: 
the  exceife  ofp.the  antecedent  of  the  firlit  proportion  aboue  p  .  6  :f  12 .8 
6.  the  confequent  of- She  fame  is  3:  the  excelfe  of  12.  the  ante-  Q  .  J.  n  *  . 
cedent  of  the  fecond  proportion  aboue  8  .the  confequent  of  *  a  ’  *  • 

thefame,is4i  now  copare  the  antecedent  of  thefirft  propor-  ‘  f  * :  : ; 

tion  p.  as  antecedet  to  3.  the  exceife  therof  aboue  the  confequet,  as  to  his  cori- 
fequent ,  likewife  compare  12.  the  antecedent  ofthe  fecond  proportion  as  antece¬ 
dent  to  4-the  exceife  therof  aboue  8.the  confequerit,as  to  his  confequent:  lolhall 


your  numbers  be  in  thys  order  by  conuerfion  of  proportion :  as  y.topio  12.104*: 
for  either  proportion  is  triple. 


of 


■5fl  3 


'Proportion  ofequalitie  i  s,when  there  are  taken  a  number  of 
magnitudes  in  one  order?and  alfo  as  many  other  magnitudes 
in  an  other  order  ^comparing  two  to  two  beyngin  thefamepro 
portion  ft  commeth  topajje^that  as  in  thefirsl  order  of  magg 
nitudesjhe  firU  is  to  the  lajlfo  in  the  fecond  order  ofmagnu 
tudes  is  the  firfl  to  the  lajl .  Or  other  wife  it  is  a  compart* 
fon  of  extremes  together  Jthe  middle  magnitudes  being  ta^en 
away . 


ji . 


To  the  declaration  ofthys  definition  are  required  two  orders  of  magnitudes 
squall  in  number,  and  in  lyke  proportion  :  As  if  there  be  taken  in  &me  ”Ste.r" 
ninate  number  ccrtayne  magnitudes,  namely,  foure,  A,B,C,D  •  And  alio  m 
the  fame  number  be  taken  other  quantities,  namely,  foure,  E,F,  G,H  :  then 
take  the  equal!  proportions  by  two  and  two :  as  A  to  B,fo  Eto  F  :as  B  toC, 


ofSutlides  Elementes, 


FoL  i$f. 


■^rb  v 


T 


Js  1 


k  - 

F 


•  ►  -t 


Cf  fi 


fb  E  to  G  :  and  as  C  to  D,  Co  G 
to  H  «  Now  according  to  the  iirffc 
definition  ,  if  A  the  firft  magnitude 
of  the  firft  order  be  to  D  the  laft  mag¬ 
nitude  of  the  fame  order,  as  E  the 
firft  magnitude  of  the  fecond  order  is 
to  H  the  laft  magnitude  the  fame, 
then  it  is  called  proportion  of  equa- 
Etle ,  or  ''equal!'  proportion  « 

By  the  feconddefinitipn,which 
h  nil  one  in' fubftance  with  the  firft, 
ye  leaue  the  meane  magnitudes  in 
eyther  order,  namely,  B,  C,  on  the 
one  fide ,  and  F,G  on  the  other  fide, 
and  onely  compare  the  extremes  of 
ech  fide  together ,  which  by  thys  de¬ 
finition  fliali  be  in  lyke  proportion ,  as  A  is  to  D ,  fo  is 
E  to  H.  - 

Euen  fo  in  numbers,  take  for  example  thefe  two  orders, 

27.9. 12. 24, 15.  and  9. 3.4.  8  .  5.  there  are  in  eche  order  as 
ye  fee,  fiue  numbers,  then  fee  that  all  the  proportions  taken 
by  two  &  two  belike :  betwene 
27.&9,  numbers  of  the  firft  or-  f  17 

der,and  betwene  9.and  3,num-  9 

bers  of  the  fecond  order ,  there  -  12 

is  oneandthefelf  fame  propor-  24, 

tio, namely ,tripla :  alfo  betwene  15 

9.  and  12,  numbers  of  the  firft  ^ 
qfder,and  3  ;*  and  4,  numbers  off  he  fecond  order,  is  Ukepro- 
pprtion,namely,  fubfefquitertia  proportion  rio  betwene  12. 
and  24,  numbers  of  the  firft  order,  and  4.  and  8,  numbers  of 
tfie  fecond  order,  is  alfo  lyke  proportion,  namely,  fubdupla: 

Laft  ofall,  betwene  24*and  i5,numbers  of  the  firft  rowe,  and 
betwene  8  .and  5,  numbers  of  the  fecond  rowe,the  proportion  is  one,  namely,  jfii- 
<?§rffimrtiens crtiilitas .  Wherefore  bv  this defihirirtn 


9 

3 

4 
8 

5 


v:h: 


r 

A. 


. 


V  E  M 


a An  exawtfe 
in  numbers*. 


T:  m 


inmwm  may  compare  rogetner  onely  tne  extremes,and  conclude 

that  as  27.of  the  firft  row  is  to  15.  thelaftofthefamerow,fois9.  the  firft  of  the 

fecond  rowe  to  5>the  laft  of  the  famerowe :  forthe  proportion  of  ech  is  fuperciua- 
dripartiens quintas .  ot  .•  ■  •  r  • 

Here  is  tt>beconfidered',thatitis  not  of  neceflitie  that  all  the  proportions  in  Ncu 
eche  rowe  of  numbers  befet  inlike  order,  as  in  the  one  fo  in  the  other :  butif  Ihall 
Miumaent  that  the  proportions  be  the  fame  and  in  equal!  number  in  eche  rowe. 
Whethent  be  in  theiHfi:  lame  order,  or  in  contr;uy  orinuerted  order,  it  maketh 

noimatter.Asnnitliefe  numbers, is,  6. 2.  in  thefiritiw,and  24.8.4.  :s: 

inthefecon4.Ast2.isto«;the&fttothefecdnddfthefirftrbw,fo  n  24 

is  <5  40  4.  the  iecoftd  to  thethird  of  the  fecond  row :  either  is  duple  6  8 

proportion'.  And  as  6,  to  2.  the  fecond  to' the 'third  in  the  firft  * 

%  '  t£  m  x  j. 


*V<&. 

nVut 


^  j'. . 

«t 


»noii  io 


2  4 


The  tight- 
tenth  defini¬ 
tion. 


An  example 
of  this  defini¬ 
tion  in  mag* 
nitudes. 


Example  in 
numbers . 


The  nintenth 
definition. 


An  example 
of  this  defini¬ 
tion  in  magni¬ 
tudes. 


Example  in 
numbers. 


order  :  fb  is  24.  to  8.  the  firft  to  the  fecond  in  the  fecond  order*  Where  ye 
fee  that  the  proportions  are  not  placed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  order, and  courfe. 
and  yet  notwithftanding  ye  may  conclude  by  equalise  of  proportion, 
leauing  the meanes  6. and  8 :  as  12.  to  2. the  firft  to  the laft  ofthefirft  or-  12  24 
der,  fo  24.ro  4.  the  firft  and  laft  of  the  fecond  order .  And  fo  of  others  2  4 

whatfbeuer  and  how  fbeuer  they  be  placed , 

<Uln  ordinate  proportionality  isftohen  as  the  antecedent  is  to 
the  conjequent \ Jo  is  the  antecedent  to  the  conjequent 9  and  as 
the  conjequent  is  to  another Jots  theconfequent  to  another. 

Forthe  declaration  of  this  definition  are  alfo  required  two  orders  of  magni¬ 
tudes  .  Suppofe  in  the  firft  order, that  the  antecedent  A,to  his  confequent  B,haue 
the  fameproportion  that  the  antecedent  D,hath  to  his  cofequent  E  in  the  fecond 
order :  and  make  the  confequent  B 

antecedet  to  fome  other  quantitie,  A  . - - — — , - *  X»  _ , 

as  to  C .  Alfo  make  the  confequent  R  p 

E  antecedet  to  an  other  quatitie,  as  *  '  '  ' - ' - ' 

to  F,  fo  that  there  be  the  fame  pro-  C  _ _ ,  .  F 

portion  dfB  to  C,  which  is  ofEro 

to  F .  Arid  thys  difpofition  of  proportions  is  called  ordinate  proporti- 
onalitie  .  Likewifein  numbers,  18.9.3.  and  <5.3.1.  Asi8.to9.antece-  18  6 
dent  to  confequent,  fo  is  6.  to  3.  antecedent  to  confequent :  either  is  9  3 

dupla  proportion :  and  as  9.  the  Confequentis  to  an  other,  namely,  to  31 

the  number  3,fo  is  the  confequent  3.  to  an  other,  namely ,  to  vnity. 

And  this  ordinate  proportionalitie  may  be  exteded  as  farre  as  ye  lift,  as  ye  may  fee 
in  the  example  of  numbers  in  the  definition  next  before. 

(tAn  inordinate  proportionality  is,  when  as  the  antecedent  is 
to  the  confequent  Jo  is  the  antecedent  to  the  conjequent :  and 
as  the  conjequent  is  to  an  other ?fo  is  an  other  to  the  ante* 
cedent. 

This  definition  alfo  as  the  other  before,  requireth  two  orders  of  magnitudes* 
Suppofe  in  the  firft  order  that  the  antecedet  A  be  tq  the  cofequet  B,as  the  antece¬ 
det  C,  in  the  fecond 

order  is  to  the  confe-  ,  , ,  ,  ■  ,  ■ .  .  F.  .  :  .  . :  ■  ,  ■  -  ' - . 

querit  D,  &  let  B  the 

confequet  of  the  firft  ®  ^  .  ■  <*  .  * — — - - • 

proportio  be  to  fome  -p  dm 

othcr,namcly,  to  the  * 

magnitude  E, as  fome 

other,  namely,  the  magnitude  F,is  to  die  antecedent  C  of  the  fecond  proportio: 
this  kinde  of  proportionalitie  is  called  inordinate  or  perturbate . 

Take  alfo  an  example  in  numbers,  as  9  to  6.  the  antecedent  to  9  3 

the  confequent, fb  is  3  to  2  the  antecedent  to  the  confequent,  ei-  6  2 

ther  proportio  is  fefquialtera,and  as  6  the  confequent  of  the  firft  3  6 

/'  *v  proportion,, 


ofSuciides  Element cs. 


FoL\x6* 


aon. 


T  E  U 

t. 


An  extendedproportipfidfiffU^  antecedent  is  to 

the  confcqucntjo  is  the  antecedent  to  the  confcquent ,  and  as 
the  vonf eluent  is  to  mtyher3j&istbe-^fctiiierit  tom  h‘ 


,  '.TV.'  C;  Tv  ,  t 


VA  ?  V 


fitA per  tin  hate  propoftionalitic 

vig  compared  to  thr&fij^fifi^  Pajfti 

that  as  in  thcfirjl  magnitudes  the  antecedent  is  to  the  cOhfe^ 
quent,fointfsefiecondis^ 

.  as  in  the  firTt  magnitu  des  the  confequmt  is  to  an  other  mag' 
nitudefo  in  the  Jecond magnitudes  is  an  other  magnitude  to 
the  antecedent. 

,  Thefe  two  laft  definitions  here  put  by  ^amberte  feeme  all  one  with  the  other 
two  laft  before  fet.Wherfore  it  is  not  lyke  that  they  were  written  and-  let  here  by 
Eyclidc, for  that  they  feeme  not  necdlary 'but rather  fhperfluous,  neither  arc  they 
found  in  the  Greeke  examples  commonly  fet  forth  in  print,  nor  mentioned  of  a- 
•ny  that  hath  written  commentaries  vpon  Euclid^ olde  or  new :  N  ot  of  Cdwpane, 
SceubdiuSfPellitarius^Orontius,  nos  Flufates:  wherforeitis  not  of  neceffitie  toadde 
vnto  them  any  explanation  or  example,  either  in  magnitudes  or  in  numbers.  The 
examples  of  the  two  laft  definitions  fet  before,may  likewife  ferue  for  them  alio,. 

;  \  ■■  ^  ...  -  -  h 

he  i.  Theoreme*  The  i,  Tropofition . 

If  there  he  a  number  of  magnitudes  host  many  foeuer  eque^ 
multiplies  to  a  like  number  of  magnitudes  ech  to  ech :  host 
multiplex  on  magnitude  is  to  one  Jo  multiplies  are  all  the 
magnitudes  to  all. 

yppofe  that  there  he  a  number  of  magnitudes  yiamely., 
A  F  and  F)  C  equimultiples  to  a  like  number  of  mag* 
nitudes  E  and  F ech  to  ech .  T hen  I fay ,  that  hot)  multi * 
flex  A  F  is  to  Eyfo  multi  pikes  are  jfF  and  F)C  to  E 
1  and  F.  Forforafmuch  as  how  multiplex  A  F  is  to  E^fo 
\  multiplex  is  F)  C  toF ^therefore  how  many  magnitudes 
I  there  are  in  A  F  eqttaU  Mo  Efo  many  are  there  in  T>  C 

Kh.ij.  e  quail 


7 he  to. 
definition* 


TbeuMfiiiU 


7 be  fie  two  Up 
definitions 
not  found  in 
the  greeke  ex* 
am  filers* 


Qt/ijiraflion, 


Demnffra- 

Sion, 


Vevtonjl  ra¬ 
tion * 


,Vi,Y  .  ..  Theft jthHaoki; 

equall  'tinto  F;  fDeuide ABAnMpfowgwtititw 


*\S 


5  02  S.1.  i : ' 


■i  13  d 


1? 


.ft? 


Ul 


« J  •• 


,n 


.  H 


tV 

\  vi 


B  .  £ 


F 

U  i 


*tohi£h'  Ian toUjthat  is, into  AG  andG  B: 

and  likewije  B>  C  into  the  magnitudes  K>hicb  are  e~ 
qualMmto  F,that  is  .into  B)  H and  HC. Mow  then 
the  multitude  of  theje  B)H<zs  H  C,is  equalhanto 
the  Multitude  of theje  A  G-As&B.AAAf$tdfmitch- ' 
as. AG  k  equally  nto  EftandB)  Hhnto  Either  fore 
A G  and  B)  H,are  equauhanto  E  and  F:  and  by  the 
fame  reajmforafmuch  as  G  B  is  equaUlcmto  E,and 
HCGhtoF,  GB  alfo  and  HC  are  equallyntoE 
and  F.  Wherefore  how  many  magnitudes  there  are 
.  in  m  equalhnito  E  jo  many  are  there  in  AB  and  B)G  equall  *t>nto  &i?  F; 
Wherefore,  how  multiplex  A  BistoEfiFnwltiplices  are  AB  and B>  C  to  E  and 
F.  if  therefore  there  be  a  number  of  magnitudes  how  manyfoeuer  equemultipli* 
ces  to  alike  number  of  magnitudes  echto  echjrnv  multiplex  one  magnitude  is  to 
one  jo  multipikes  are  all  the  magnitudes  to.  all:  ‘fybich  leas  required  to  be  proued. 

J-Sar  The  1. Theoreme.  7 he  i.Tropojition. 

Ifthefbrftbe  ecjm  multiplex  to  the  fecond  as  the  third  is  to  the 
fourth, and  if  the  fifth  alfo  be  equemultiplex  to the fecond  as 


rta 


»-te 


fed  together  be  equemultiplex  to  the fecond ■-  as  the  third  and 
the  fix  t  compofed  together  is  to  the fourth . 

^  Vppofe  that  there  be fixe  quantities ,  of 11 inch  let  AB  be  tbefirUfi  the 
fecond, B)  E  the  third, F  the fourth, B  G  the  fifth, is  E  H  the fixt:and 
Jnppofe  that  the  firfi,  A  B,  be  equemultiplex  Tmto  the  fecond, C,  as  the 
third, B)  E,is  to  the  fourth, F:  and  let  the  fift ,  B  G,  be  equemultiplex  Jmto  the 
fecond, C, as  the  fixt,E  H,is  to  the  fourth, F.  T  hen  I fay,  that  thefirH  and  the 
fifth  Compofed  together, K>hkh  let  he  A  Gfis  equemultiplex  y nto  the  fecond, C, as 
the  third  andfixt  compofed  together,  Tohich  let  be  B>  H,  is  to  the  fourth, F. For 
forafmuchas  AB  is  equemultiplex  to  C,  as  B>  E  is 
to  F,  therefore  how  many  magnitudes  there  are  in 
A  B  e quail ynto  C,  fo  many  magnitudes  are  there  in 
B>  E  equall  mi  to  F:  and  by  the  fame  reafon  how  ma* 
ny  there  are  in  BG  equall  ynto  C,fomany  alfo  are 
there  in  E  M  equall  Imto  F.  Wherefore  how  many 
there  are  in  the  Svhole  A  G  equall  ynto  C  jo  Many  are 
there  in  the  'Whole  B>  M  equall  ynto  F.  Wherefore 
how  multiplex  AG  is  ynto  C ,fo  multiplex  is  B)  M 
Imto  F.  Wherefore  the  firfi  and  the  fifth  compofed 


A  T 


1 


B 


to 


gethet 


H 


k 

V 


ofSticlides  Elementes . 


Ebl.  ij7« 


together, namely,  AG  is  equemultiplex  lento  the  fecond  C,as  the  third  and 
the  Jlxte  compofed  together,  namely,  D  H,  is  to  the  fourth  F.  If  therfore 
the  firft  be  equemultiplex  to  the  fecond  as  the  third  is  to  the  fourth ,  and  if 
the  fifth  alfo  be  equemultiplex  to  the  fecond  as  the  fixt  is  to  the  fourth :  then 
jhall  the firft  <&r  the  fifth  copofed  together, be  equemultiplex  to  the fecond,  as  the 
third  and  the fixt  compofed  together, is  to  the  fourth  :  1 vhich  *i Vas  required  to  be 
proued. 

ykfTbe  3 .  T heoreme.  The  3.  Tropofition, 

If  the  firjl  be  equemultiplex  to  the fecond, as  the  third  is  to  the 
fourth, and  if  there  be  taken  ccjuemultiplices  to  the  firjl  &  to 
the  third:  they  Jhall  be  equemulti  pikes  to  them  which  were 
firjl  taken,  the  one  to  the  fecond >  the  other  to  the  fourth . 

fppofi  that  there  befoure  magnitudes,  of 'i thick  let  A  he  the fir  ft, B  the 
fecond, C  the  third, and  D  the fourth.  And let  the firft , A fie  equemulti* 

”  plex  to  the J'econd,B,asj  third, C,  is  to  the  fourth,  D.  Andlonto  A  and 
C  take  equemultiplices ,  1 xfhich  let  be  E  F  and  G  H  ,fio  that  how  multiplex  E  F 
is  to  A, Jo  multiplex  let  HGbetoC.T hen  I  fay, that  E  F  is  equemultiplex  Ion* 
to  ft, as  G  H is  lonto  D.For fiorafmuch  as  £  F is  equemultiplex  lonto  A^s  G  H 
is  lonto  C,  therefore  how  many  magnitudes 
there  are  in  E  F  equall  lonto  A,  jo  many 
magnitudes  alfo  are  there  in  G  H  equall 
lonto  C .  Let  EF  he  deuided  into  the  mag * 
nitudes  that  are  equall  lonto  A,  that  is,  into 
Elf  and  JfF .  And  likewtje  G  H  into 
the  magnitudes  equall  lonto  C,  that  is, into 
GL  and  LH.  Now  then  the  multitude 
oft thej'e  magnitudes  E  If  and  KjFjs  equall 
lonto y  multitude  of  the fe  magnitudes  GL 
and  L  FI.  And fiorafmuch  as  A  is  equemul* 
tiplex  to  B,as  C  is  to  D ;  but  E  If  is  equall 
lonto  A, and  G  L  lonto  C ,  therefore  E  £\js 
equemultiplex  lonto  B,as  GL  is  lonto  D. 

And  by  the  fame  reafion  IfF  is  equemulti * 
plex  lonto  B,as  LH  is  to  ID.  Now  then 

there  are  fixe  magnitudes  lohei  'eofE  Kfis  the firft:  B y fecond:  G  LJ  third:D y 
fourt  h:  1{F  t  he fifth:  L  H  the fixt.  And jrorajhuch  as  the  firft  E  If  is  equemul* 
tiplex  to  the  fecond  B,  as  the  third  G  L  is  to  the  fourth  D :  and  the fift  Fis 
equemultiplex  to  the  fecond  B,as  the  fixt  L  H  is  to  the fourth  D:  therefore(by 

Kfiifi  the 


H 


F 


h  . 


E  A  ’  3 


G  c  X» 


Ccnjlmftm* 


DemmSra- 

twu 


the fecond  of the fift )  the firft  iy  the fift  compofed  together , namely, E  F  is  eqtte* 
multiplex  1? nto  the  fecond  B,  as  the  third  and  the fixt  compofed  together, name* 
Ij>j  G  H  is  to  the  fourth  D .  If  therefore  the firft  be  equemultiplex  to  the fecond f 
as  the  tim’d  is  to  the  fourth ,  and  if  there  be  taken  the  equemultiplices  to  the  firft 
and  to  the  third  phey Jhall  be  equemultiplices  to  them  chicly  'Were firft  taken ,  the 
one  to  the  fecond, ther  other  to  the  fourth :  *SP hich  "Was  required  to  be proued. 

< The  Tbeoreme .  The  Tropofttion * 


fifths  fir  ft  be  ynto  thefecondin  the  fame  proportion  that  the 
third  is  to  the  fourth  :  then  alfo  the  equemultiplices  of  the 
firft  and  of  the  third,  vnto  the  equemultiplices  of  the  fecond 
and  of  doe  fourth ,accordyng  to  any  mnltiplication  Jhall  haue 
the  fame proportion  beyng  compared  together . 


CsnjhuUlQn. 


Dmonflra- 

tm. 


E»  that  there  be foure  magnitudes ,  of 'which  let  A  he  the  firH,  B 

j  jEjSSjffo fecond, C  the  third yand  I D  the  fourth.  And  let  the  firft  A  be  hnto  the 
l t-A^E^fcondBin  the fame  proportion  f hat  the  third  C  isJ>?ito  the  fourth  D . 
And  to .  A  and  C  take  equemultiplices  E  ,and  F,  and  likewife  to  B  and  ID,  any 
other  equimultiples  G  &  U.T he  Ifoyy  as  E  is  to  GJo  is  F to  H.Vnto  Els? 
F take  equemultiplices  If 
ly  Eps  'bnto  G  and  FI 
any  other  equemultiplu 
ces,  that  is,  M  and  1SI. 
yindforafniuch  as  E  is 
equemultiplex  Ivnto  A 
as  F  is  Ip  nto  C,and  l>nto 
E  and  F  be  taken  the  e* 
qnemultiplices  If  Is?  E, 
therfore( by  the  3 .  of  the  .. 
fifth )  If  is  equemulti * 
plex  to  ft,  asEistoC: 
and  by  the  fame  reafon 
alfo  M  is  equemultiplex 
ynito  B,  as  Nis  toD. 

„ And  feing  that  as  A  is 
to  B,fo  is  C  to  D,  and  of 
A  and  €  are  taken  eque* 
multipikes  If  and  E,  ^ 
and  likewife  of  B  if?  D 
are  taken  other  e qnemultiplices, namely, M and  therfore  if  tfexceede  MfL 

alfo 


of Suclides  Element es. 


FoL  138. 


alfo  excedeth  N :  and  if  it  be  equally  it  is  equally  and  if  it  be  lefiejt  is  lefe  (by 
the  conuerfe  of the  6.  definition  of  the fifth  ),And  If  andL  are  equemultiplices 
to  F  and  F:  and  M and  JSL  are  other  equemultiplices  to  G  and  H.  Wherefore  as 
E  is  to  GJo  is  F to  EL  by  the faid fixt  definitionlftherfore  the  firft  be  Imto  the 
fecond  in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  third  is  to  the  fourth :  then  alfo  the  eque * 
multiplices  of  the firfi  and  of  the  third panto  the  equemultiplices  of  the  fecond cjr 
of the fourth  Recording  to  any  multiplication  Jh  all  bane  the fame  proportion  be* 
yng  compared  together :  Tobich  was  required  to  be proued. 

wherfore feing  it  hath  bene  proued  that  if If  exceede  IE,  E 
alfo  excedeth  LSI, and  if  it  be  equal!  it  is  equal! :  and  fit  be  lefie,  it  is  lefe:  it  is 
manifijl  that  if M  exceede  If  yEl  alfo  excedeth  L;  and  if  it  be  equallitis  e* 
quail :  and  fit  be  lefe  it  is  lefe :  and  by  this  reafon  as  G  is  to  F,fo  is  EL  to  F. 

c/L  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft  that  if  there  be  foure  magnitudes  proportional,they  fhal 
alfo  by  conucr/ion  be  proportionall :  that  is,  if  the  firft  be  vnto  the  fecond,  as  the 
thide  is  to  the  fourth  :  then  by  conuerfion  as  the  feconde  is  to  the  firft,' fo  is  the 
fourth  to  the  third. 


T he  5.  Theoreme.  The  5.  Tropqfition % 

If  a  magnitude  be  equemultiplex  to  a  magnitude,  as  a  parte 
taken  away  of the  one, is  to  a  part  taken  away from  the  other : 
the  rejidue  alfo  of  the  one, to  the  refidue  of  the  other  fhal  he  e~ 
quemultiplex,as  the  whole  is  to  the  whole . 


hfppf  that  the  lehole  magnitude  yEBbe  Tmto  the  Ivhole  magnitude  C 
ID  equemultipleXyUs  the  part  taken  away  of the  one ,  namely,  AF,  is  to 
the  part  taken  away  of  the  other , namely  ,C  F.  T  hen  I fay  that  the  reft * 
due  of  the  one , namely, E  E,  is  to  the  refidue  of  the  other , namely ,  ID  F  equemuU 
tiplexas  the  *tohole  A  E  is  to  thelohole  CD.  ELow  mtdtiplex  A  E is  to  CF,fo 
multiplex  make  FEtoCG.  yLndforafmuch  as( byjfirU  of  the fifth)  A  E  is  to 
CF equemultiplex, as  A  E  is  to  G  F :  but  yLE  is  to  CF equemulti* 
plex,  as  yLE  is  to  C  D.  Wherfore  A  E  is  equemultiplex  to  either  y 
of  thefe  G  F and  CD.  Wherfore  GF is  equall  Ipnto  CD.T ake  a* 

’Soay  C  F which"  is  common  to  them  both.  Wherfore  that  which  re*  ] 

mayneth  namely, G  C,is  equall  lonto  that  which  remay neth  name *  ^ 
ly,D  F.  And  forajmuch  as  A F  is  to  C  F equemultiplex  as  FE  is 
to  G  C,but  GC is  equall  lanio  D  F,  therefore  A F  is  to  CF  eque * 
multiplex  as  F  E  is  to  F  D.Eut  A  F  is  put  to  be  equemultiplex  tq 
CF,asAE  is  to  C  D, wherfore  FEistoF  D  equemultiplex ,  as 
AE  is  to  C  D.  Wherfore  the  refidue  FE  is  to  the  refidue  FDe* 
quemultiplexyas  the  whole  A E  is  to  the  1 Me  C  D.  If  therf ore  a 

Kkn,j-  magni * 


3 


A  Lemma, 
or  an  ajjumyt. 


A  Corollary . 
Conuerfe  pro¬ 
portion* 


Cottflrntfiom 

TSemonflr 4- 
tion. 


The  fifth  Boo^e 

magnitude  le  equemultiplex  to  a  magnitude yas  a  part  taken  away  of the  one  is 
to  a parte  taken  away  of  the  other :  the  refidue  oftheonealfo  to  the  refidue  of 
the  other  jhalhe  equemultiplex  as  the  D thole  is  to  the  Tohole:  Tnhich  Teas  required 
tobeproued. 


Two  ups  in 
thh  Promo¬ 
tion, 

The  fir (l. 


K 


The  6.  Theoreme.  The  6,  Bropofition . 

If  two  magnitudes  he  cequcmultiplices  to  two  magnitudes 
any  partes  taken  away  of  them  alfojhe  equemultiplices  to  the 
fame  magnitude  s:the  refidues  alfo  of  them  fhal  ynto  the fame 
magnitudes  he  either  equator  equemultiplices. 

^^j  fppofe  that  there  he  two  magnitudes  .AT*  and  CD  equemultiplices 
to  tWQ  magnitudes  E  and  Fyand  let  the  partes  take  away  of the  mag * 
!  nitudes  A B  and  C  Dy  namely }  AG  and CH  he  equemultiplices  to 
the  fame  magnitudes  E  and  F  T hen  I  fay  that  the  refidues  G  B  and 
H  D  yare  ynto  the  fife  fame  magnitudes  E  and  E  either  equally  or  els  eque * 
multiplices. 

Suppofe fir  ft  that  G  B  he  equall  ynto  E.  T  hen  Ifity  that 

CcnttruZUon  ^ ^ts  ^ni0  VntoE put  an  equall  magnitude  C  If. 

Demons! >4-  *  Andforafinuch  as  AG  is  equemultiplex  ynto  E,as  CH  is 
mtu  ynto  F:  but  G  B  is  equall  ynto  Efijr  t\C  ynto  Either  fore  A 
IB  is  equemultiplex  to  Eyas  ]f_Fl  is  to  F.ButAB  is  put  eque 
multiplex  ynto  E,as  C  D  is  to  F.  Wherfore  KJHis  equimul 
tipkx  ynto  Fyas  C  l D  is  to  E.And  forafmuch  as  either  of  thefe 
JfHaud'C  D  are  equimultiplices  ynto  F fiber  fore  (by  the  i 
common fin  ten  ce  )  If  FI  is  equall  ynto  C  ID  FT  a  he  away  C  El 
Tohich  is  common  to  them  both.  Wherefore  the  refidue  i\C  is 
equalynto  the  refidue  HD. But  Kfi  is  equal. ynto  Ffitther* 
fore  HD  is  equallynto  F.  Wherfore  ifGBbe  equalynto  E, 

D  Halfo fall  be  equall  ynto  F. 

"And  in  like fort  may  ye  prone  yy  ifGBbe  multiplex  to  jE ,H  D  alfo fhal  be 
r.rA  fo  multiplex  ynto  F.  if  tier  fore  there  be  two  magnitudes  equemultiplices  to  two 
*  magnitudes  find  any  parts  taken  away  of them  be  alfo  equemultiplices  t  oy fame 

magnitudes  :the  refidues  alfo  of them /ball  ynto  the fame  magnitudes  be  either 
equall  fir  equemultiplices :  Tehicb  Teas  required  to  be  proued . 

^yThe  7.  Theoreme.  The  y.Brcpoption. 

Equall  magnitudes  bam  to  one  &  the felfe fame  magnitude ; 

one 


H 


i 


B  ©  E  J?- 


ofBucMes  Elements s.  FoLi$p* 


X)  ne  quad  magnitudes  beyngtaken*  the greater  hath  to  one 
and the fame  magnitude  a  greater  proportion  then  bath  the 
lejje.  And  that  one  and  the  fame  magnitude  hath  to  the  lejle  a 
greater proportion  then  it  hath  to  the  greater. 

^PP0/6  B  andC be  Tmeqmll  magnitudes  3  ofiobkh  let  AB  be 

the  greater ,and  CJ  left e.  And  let  there  be  an  other  magnitude  isthaU 
)^foeuer gamely p. Then  I  fay  that  A  B  hath  1) nto  ©  a  greater  pro * 
portion  then  hath  C  to  ©:  and  alfo  that  3)  bath  to  C  a greater  propor* 

tion? 


The  first  part 
if  this  Propo¬ 
rtion  demon- 
firated. 


The  fecottd 
part  demon-* 
firmed. 


lit-  S’ 


rV  t  V* 


7 lefirft  p&rt 
vfthii  Propo¬ 
rtion  demon - 
fluted. 

The  fir  ft  cafe 
9f the  fame. 


A  - 

A  V  - 
^  vl  -i 

.  IVt 

'  UJT..  *_ 

/  \ 

(‘.  s\  \  !  \ 

r\;i; 

i*  *  y 

f'g 

V  .v*  Vo 

■ 

J,  r,\  [ 

«  *  f 

,  E 

f 

;M  Vvu 

c  1  \  S} 

■  c 

",  t>  * 

■ 

v  %  • 

'  k  ' 

* 

: 

.  V-  \  ‘ 

y  ■  ; 

B 

\  !  'V 

' 

' 

i  ‘  '\ 

;  a  .  -v 

*,  -  -  .  < 

. 

■ 

,  ^  < 

K  H 


N 


Thefeeoni 
part  of  the 
proportion  de- 


tiwjtbtn  it  hath  to  A  %$orj$r$Qwh  aiAMkgrfattr  then  QJet there  he  ta * 
ken a magnitude  equallTnto  C ^namely ?EE>. 

Flow  'fheti  ibelepe  ofitefi  two  magnitudes  A  E  and  E  E  being  multiplied 
'frill  at  the  length  he  greater  then  EX.  ■* 1 V  V*  h 

Fir fl  let  A  E  he  lefie  then  E  E : 
and  let  A  E  be  fo  oft  multiplied  7>n* 
till  that 'frhich  is  produce  die  greater 
then  EXj  and  let  that  multiplex  he  F 
G  * frhich  is  greater  then  EX  And  how 
multiplex  F  G  is  to  AF.,fo  multiplex 
let  G  H  he  to  E  E,ty  Kjo  C.  T hen 
double  ID^and  let  the  fame  heL. And 
againe  treble  it  &r  let  the  fame  he \f: 

<(sr  Jo  forth  encreafing  by  one  till fnch 
tyrrie  as  the  multiplex  of  EX  Jo  taken 
he  fir  ft  greater  then  If,  that  is,  that 
multiplex  'frhich  amongfi  al  the  muU 
tiplices  of 'D doth  fir  ft  exceede  K^tS* 
let  the Janie  be  FI, 'frhich  here  is  qua* 
drv.ple  to  EXyind  the firfi  multiplex  greater  then  If-  Flow  fornfinucb  as  Kjsy 
fir  ft  multiplex  lefie  then  FI, therfore  Kjs  not  left  then  Sf.  Md  for  that  F  G  if 
toJF  equemultiplex  as  G  His  to  E  E,  therfore  ( by  the  fir  ft  of the  fifth)  FEE 
is  to  A E  equemultiplex  as  F G  is  t&  A  E:  hiitFG  is  equemultiplex  to  A E  as  Jf, 
is  to  CjVherfore  F  H andlfare  eqnemultiplices  to  A  E  and  C.  Againe  forafi 
much  as  G  IE  is  equemultiplex  to  E  E  as  Kjs  to  C,  hut  E  E  is  equall  Tmto  C> 
therfore  G  IE  is  alfo  e quail  frnio  Ef.  Eut  Kjs  not  lefie  then  bit  "frherfore  ney * 
ther  alfo  is  G  H  lefie  then  bl.  Eut  F  G  is  greater  then  EX. Wherefore  the  "frbolr 
F  EE  is  greater  then  both  thefe  EX  and  bi.  Eut  both  thefe  EX  and  bf  are  equall 
"Onto  ISt,  for  M  is  triple  to  EX, and  M and  EX  together  are  quadruple  to  EX,  and 
Ft  alfo  is  quadruple  to  EX :  "frherefare  both  thefe  bl  and  EX  are  equall  Ttnto  Ft* 
hut  F  IE  is  greater  then  bl  and  EX ffrher fore  F  IE  excedeth  Ft,  (that  is,j>  muU 
tip  lex  of  the  firfi, namely, of A  E  excedeth  the  multiplex  of thefecond,  namely 
of  EX.)  Eut  Kjxcedeth  not  Ft  (that  is, the  multiplex  of the  thir  d, namely  }of CP 
excedeth  not  the  multiplex  of the  fourth, namely  ,of the fame  EX :)  and  F  Hand 
If  are  eqnemultiplices  to  AE ,'  and  C,  and  FI, is  a  certayne  other  multiplex  t& 
EX.Wherfore  (by  the  &  definition)  jEE  hath  to  EX  a  greater  proportion  them 
hath  C  to  EX. 

I fay  moreouer  that  EX  hath  to  C  a  greater  proportion  then  EX  hath  to  A  E„ 
For  the fame  order  of confiruclion fill  remaynmgpfre  may  in  like fort  prone  that 
FI  is  greater  then  If, and  that  it  is  not  greater  then  F  IE.  And  FI  is  multiplex 
to  EX,and  F  IE  and  If  are  certayne  other  eqnemultiplices  to  gf  Eand  C  .Wher* 
fore  EX  hath  to  C  a  greater  proportion  then  EX  hath  to  A  E+ 

-  °  .  "  '  '  Ent 


ofSuelides  Element es. 


F0/.134.. 


(But  nowfuppofe  that  A  E  be  greater  then  EB.  Mow  then  E  &  beyng  the 
lefie, and  being  oftentimes  multiplied fftill  at  the  length  be  greater  then  -D.Let 
it  be fo  multiplied, and  let  the  multiplex  ofE  B,  namely ,  0  H, be  greater  then 
ID .  jfnd how  multiplex  G  His  to  E  B 
fo  multiplex  let  F  G  be  to  AE  and  If  to  F  A 

C.  And  by -the  firmer  reafon  may  ive 
prone  pthat  F  Hand  If  are  equemulti* 
pikes  to  A  B  and  C.  Like  wife  alfo  let  1SL 
be  multiplex  of D ^  aljo  let  it  beyfrfl 
multiplex  ‘fthich  is  greater  then  FG: 

'ft  her  fore  agayn  FG  is  not  left  then  M. 

(But  G  H  is  greater  then  D :  therefore  B 

the  "ft  hole  F  H/xcedeth  D  &  %f,  that 
isJN.:  but Ifexcedeth  not  M.  For  FG 
' fthich  is  greater  then  GH,  that  is ,  then 
Ifexceedeth  not  AT.  And  fo  followyng 
the fame  order  we  did  before,  ~fte  fall 
performe  the  demonstration.  Wherefore 
'bnequall  magnitudes  beyng  taken,  the  K  H  C  V>  L  2*1  N 
greater  hath  to  one  and  the  fame  magni* 

tude  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  the  lefie :  and  that  one  and  the fame  magni * 
tude  hath  to  the  lefie  a  greater  proportion  then  it  hath  to  the  greater:  "fthich  leas 
required  to  be  proued.  ’  ' 

For  that  Orontius feemetb  to  demonfir  ate  this  more  plainly 

therefore  J  thought  it  not  amijje  here  to  fet  it. 

■ - — -  -  _  oi  zi  r:/r  '  ;  -  A  -  -  .c  :  .  'A 

f  Suppose  that  there  be  two  vnequall  magnitudes,  of  which  let  eAB  be  the  greater, 
and  C  the  lefie :  and  let  there  be  a  certaine  bthef  ffiagnitude,namely,2).Then  I  fay  firft, 
HfitivA  B  hath  to  7)  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  Cto  D .  For  forafinuch  as  by  fup- 
pofirion  A  B  is  greater  then  the  magnitude  C ;  therefore  the  magnitude  AB  contay- 
neth  the  fame  magnitude  C,  and  an  other 
magnitude  bdides .  Let  EBbe  equall  vnto 
C :  and  let  zAE  be  thepart  remayning  of 
the  fame  magnitude.  Now  AEm&EB  are 
eyther  vnequall  or  equall  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther .  Firfi:  let  them  be  vnequall :  and  let 
*AE  be  lefie  then  E  B.  And  vnto  <sA E  the 
lefie  take  any  multiplex  whatfoeuer,fo  that 
it  be  greater  the  the  magnitude  D :  and  lef 
the  fame  be  FG .  And  how  multiplex  ES 
is  to  zAE,to  multiplex  let  G  H  be  to  EB, 
and  KtoC .  Agayne  take  the  duple  of  D, 

■which  let  be  L,  and  then  the  triple  ,  and  let 
the  fame  be  rJM .  And  fo  forward,alwayes 

adding  one  :  vntill  there  be  produced  fudi  A 

a  multiplex  to  P  which  lhall  be  nextgrea-  "  :  -  v;; 

ter  then  G  H  ( that  is,  which  amongeft  the  mtlitiplices  of  A  by  the  continual! <u)cKef- 

m*  mo£ 


H 


!  i  IV 


4  ” 


a~ — “ — • - 

A  E 

-t — • — % — 

B 

-4 - » - — < 

c 

D 

K 

1 _ * 

- - - S| 

t-f  -•  .m  .  t  i  t 

P  r 

*  '  *  -  •  1  \  .-  V  V 

FT 

— — t-rH — 

—  -  *-■  ,  ,,  ' 

The fecoad 
cafe  of  the 
firfipm. 

s  ' 

■m  % 


Ftrft  differ cce 
of  the  fir  it 

pm. 


thmwftmio 
wf the feme 
ferfi  differ he. 


Sec<mddiffe~ 

rente* 


Alin. 

Third  diffe-  , 
rente. 


©h-ofone,  doth  firft  beginne  to exceeds  (7  A/)  and  let  the  fame  be  which  let  be  qua¬ 
druple  to  Z).  Now  then  the  multiplex  6’ A/ is  the  next  multiplex leffe  thenA^,  and  ther- 
fttreis  noTleife  then  ^//that  is,  iseitherequall  vnto  it  or  greater  then  it  .  And  foraf- 
much  as  F  G  is  equemuitiplex  to  A  E,  as  G  H  is  to  E  Bt  therefore  how  multiplex  F  G 
is  to  A  E,  fo  multiplex  is  F  H  to  AB  (by  the  firft  ofthe.fift)  .  But  how  multiplex  F  G 
is  to  A  E,  fo  multiplex  is  K  to  C,  therefore  how  multiplex  F H  is  to  A  B,  fo  multiplex 
is  JC to  C\  Moreouerforafmuch  as  G  H  and  K are  equemultiplices  vnto  E  B  and  C;  and 
F,  B  is  byconftrudioa  equall  vnto  C,  therfore  (by  the  common  fentence)C  His  equail 
vnto  <K.  But  G  His  not  lefle  then  ej$f,as  hath  before  bene  (hewed,  and  F  G  was  put  to 
be  greater  then  D  .  Wherefore  the  whole FHis  greater  then  thefetwo  Z>and  M  .  But 
D  and  M  are  equall  vnto  2^.  For  Tffffs  quadruple  to  E).  And  M  being  triple  to  £>,doth 
together  with  D  make  quadruple  vnto  T> .  Wherefore  FHis  greater  then  N •  Farther, 
Jfisprouedto  be  equall  to  G  //.Wherefore  K  islelfethenA^.  ButZA/  and  ATaree- 
^ucn|i«ltiplices  vnto  A B  and  C,  vnto  the  firft  magnitude,!! fay,and  the  third :  andiV 
is  a  certaine  o  ther  m  ultiplex  vnto  2?,  which  reprefenteth  the  fecond  &  the  fourth  mag¬ 
nitude  .  And  the  multiplex  of  the  firft  excedeth  the  multiplex  of  the  fecond :  but  the 
multiplexofthe  third  excedeth  not  the  multiplex  of  the  fourth  .  Wherefore  <tA  B  the 
firft  hath  vnto  EE  the  fecond  a  greater  proportion,  then  hath  C  the  third  to  D  the 
fourth  (by  the  8. definition  ofthysbooke)* 

But  if  AE  be  greater  then  E  B,  let  E  B  the  lefle  be  multiplied  vntill  there  be  pro¬ 
duced  a  multiplex  greater  then  the  magnitude  D  .*  which  let  be  G  ft .  Andhowmulti- 
plex  G  H  is  to  E  B,  fq  m ulti plex  let  F  G  be  to  AE,  ahd  K  alfo  to'  C  :  Thfch  take  vnto  D 
fuch  a  multiplex  a  sis  next  greater  then  FGr  and  againe  let  the  fame  be  k{j-  which  let 
be  quadruple  tq  D .  And  in  like  fort  as  be¬ 
fore  may  \vc  prone,  that  the  whole  F H  is 
vnto  A  B  equem ultiplex  as  GH  isto  EB: 
and  alfo  that  F H  &  K  are  equemultiplices 
\-mo  AB  tk  C :  an  d  finally  that  GH  is  equal! 
vnto  And'forafmuqh  as  the  multiplex  N 
Is  hexVgreater  then F  G:  therefore  F  G is  not 11 
lefie  then  AZ.  But(?A/ ^  is  greater  then©  by 
conftru&ion  .  Wherefore  the  whole  F  H  is 


P  \ 


-4— 


'MW 

X  \ ». .  V\ 


H 


E 


B 


AUv 


K 


a  d:v 

pr- 


H 


equall  to  G  H v  for  how  multiplex 
X  is  to  E  B  the  lefie  ,  fo  multiplex  is  FG  to 
&tf£  the  greater  .  Batthofe  magnitudes 

^icfer;iire:eiqu<ffoultipliees:  vnto  Y.oequftU  . . . . 

magnitudes  arc  according  to  the  fame  proportion  vneejuaft .  Wherefore  iTislefle  theii 
<3,  and  therefore  is  much  lelfe  tbon;  ^C<^bci;efore  againq,  the  multiple*  of  the  firft 
exceedeth  the  multiplex  of  the  fecond:  butthe  multiplexofthe  thkdexcedeth  not  the 
multiplex  of  the  fourth.  Wherefore(by  the  8. definition  ofthefift)./#.#  the  firft, hath  to 
E  the  fecond, a  greater  proportion,  then  hath  C  the  third  to  D  the  fourth* 

Btitnow  if  A  E  be  equall  vnto  £  B,  eyther 
of  them  (hall  be  equall  vnto  C. Wherfore  vnto 
either  of  thofe  three  magnitudes  take  eq tie-* 
multiplices  greater  then  D.  So  that  let  F  G  be 
multiplex  to  A  £,and  G  H  vnto  EB,  and  K-&- 
gayne  to  C :  which  (by  the  d.comon  fentenee.) 
ihall  be  equall  the  one  to  the  other. Xet  ^ al¬ 
fo  be  multiplex  to  JD,and  be  next  greater  then 
euery  one  of  them  ,namdy,let  it  be  quadruple 
to  D  .  This  coftruftion  finilhed,we  may  again 
prouethat  F  A/ and  K  are  equemukiplices.to 
A  B  and  C :  and  that  F  H  the  multiplex  of  the  s  d 

firft  magnitude  exceedeth  JV  the  multiplex  of  -?■  -  «•  < 


:\1 


■i  x 

m 


Ho  no 


ptex  of  the  third  excedeth  notthe  multiplex  ofthefourth .  Wherforeive  may  conclude 
chat  A  B  hath  ytito  D  a  greater  proportion, then  hathC  toi>. 

Now;  alio  the  ieif  fame  magnitude/)'  hath'  vhto  the  lefle.  magnitude  Ca  greaw 

ter  proportion;,  theit  hath  to  the  greater  ^^.Andthi^may  plainly  be  gathered  by  the 
fore  fay  d  difco%rfe',without  chaunging  the  order,  of  the,  magnitudes  &  of  the  equfttmd- 


►  multiplex  to£>  that  is  to  the  fi  riband  third  magnitude ; 
tiplex  to  the  fecond  .namely, to  C :  and  t  H  is  multiplex  to  the  fohrthinamelyjto .  'A B s 


an* 


niton  of  this  rift  booke)  J^xbehrithath  vnto  G  the  feeond  a  greater  proportion^then 
hath  T)  the  thredto  S  the  fourth:  whichiwas. required  to  be  proued. 

•'  .  *  -V'  '  '  ,  '  '  \ 

)e  9.  TheorcMe.  The  p  .  Tropo/ition, 


me  ma 


c£\4agnitudes  whichhaue  to  one  an 
one  and  the fame  proportion :  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other* 
iiAnd  thefe  magnitudes  vntoyphomeone  and  the  fame  mag-* 
hath  one  an  d  thefameproportioniare  alfo  equall . 


H?  dwt  either  of  thefe  two  magnitudes  A  and  B  haue 

ff  to  C  one  And  the fame  proportion,  T  hen  1 fay  that  A  is  e* 
^  quallimtQ  B.  For  if  it  be not,  then  either  of  thefe  A  andB 
Jhould  not  haue  to  C  one  zsr  the  fame proportio  (by  the  8. off  fifth) 
but  byfuppoftion  they  haue ,  therefore  A  is  equall  lento  B* 

Againe ,fuppofe  that  the  magnitude  C  haue  to  either  of  thefe 
magnitudes  A  and  B  one  and  the fame  proportion.  Then I fay  that 
A  is  equall  lento  B.  For  f  it  be  not }  C jhould  not  haue  to  either  of 
thefe  A  and  B  one  and  the  fame  proportion  (by  the former  propofi* 
tion  ):but  hyfuppofition  it  hath}  leherfore  A  is  equaUlento  B.V/ber 
fore  magnitudes  Sehicb  haue  to  one  and  the  fame  magnitude  one 
and  the  fame  proportion  3  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  And  thofe 
magnitudes  lontoiehomeone  and  the fame  magnitude  hath  one  and 
the fame  proportion  3are  aljo  equallr^hich  ~^as  required  to  be  pro* 
ued. 


A 


C 


f&The  io*Theoreme*  The io.  Tropoftm . 

B 

Of  magnitudes  compared  to  one  and  the  fame  magnitude 9 
that  which  hath  the  greater proportion >  is  the  greater  *  And 
that  magnitude  wherunto  one  and  the  fame  magnitude  hath 
the greater proportion  Js  the  lefie* 

Llj,  Suppofe 


The  feeond 
pan  if  this 
propo/tthtte 


The  fir  ft  pars 
of  this  Bropo- 
fition  demon* 
Jlrated, 

The  feeond 
part  proued. 


The  fir  ft  part 
Qfibtsptop'ok* 
Uon  prone  (L 


Ybefecond 
part  demon-' 
Jlr&ted* 


Ciinftrxtfhn. 


Vemonflra- 
tion  * 


;  Vppofethat  A  bane  to  C  agr  eater  proportion  then  B  hath  to  C.  Then  I 
r  Jay  that  A  is.greattr  then  B. For  if it  be  not, then  either  A  is  equall T>nib 
B  or  k fie  then  it.  But  A  cannot  be  equahpnto  Bfior  then  either  ofthefe. 
A  and  BJhouldhaue  Wnto  Cone  and  the fame  proportion  (by  the  7 
of tlx fifth  ):but  by fuppofition  they  bane  not pwher fore  A  is  not  e* 
quail  Jmto  B.  Neither  alfo  is  A lejse  then  Bfior  the  Jhould  A  haue 
to  C  a  lejse  proportion, then  hath  BtoC  (by  the  8.  of  the  fifth )  but 
byjuppojition  it  hath  not.  Wherfore  A  is  not  lefie  then  B.And  it  is 
aljo  proued  that  it  is  not  equalizer  fore  A  is  greater  then  B. 

Agayne  fuppoje  that  C  haue  to  B  agreater  proportion  then  C 
hath  to  A.  T  hen  I  fay  that  B  is  leffe  then  A.  Tor  if  it  be  not, then  is 
it  either  equall  Imto  it  or  els  greater,  but  B  cannot  be  equall  Thto 
A, for  then  JJ?ouldChauetoeit1xrof  theje  A  and  B  one  and  the 
fame  proportion  (by  the  7. of  the fifth )  but  by  fuppofition  it  hath 
not,  wherfore  B  is  not  equall  Tnto  A.  Neither  alfo  is  B  greater 
then  A,  for  then  Jhould  C  haue  to  B  a  leffe  proportion  then  it  hath 
to A( by  the  8. of  the fifth )  but  by fuppojition  it  hath  not :  Cohere* 
fare  Bn  not  greater  then  A.  And  it  -was  proued  that  it  is  not  e* 
quail  Wnto  A pwlxrf ore  B  is  lefie  then  A.  Wherfore  of  magnitudes 
compared  to  one  and  tlx  fame  magnitude,  that  -which  hathy greas¬ 
ier  proportion Js  the  greater.  And  that  magnitude  -whermto  one 
and  the fame  magnitude  hath  the  greater  proportion,  is  the  lefie. 

Which  "8? as  required  to  be  proued. 


5 


The  tu  T  hcoreme.  T he  11.  Tropofition . 

T ro portions  which  are  one  and  thefclfe  fame  to  any  one pro* 
portion  fare  aljo  the felfefame  the  one  to  the  other . 

Vpppofe  that  as  A  is  to  Bjb  is  C  to  D,and  as  C  is  to  Dfio  is  E  to  F. 
T  hen  I fay  that  as  A  is  to  Bjb  is  E  to  F.  T  ake  equemultiplices  to  A, 
C  and  E,  -which  let  be  GfH.fif.And  lik.e'WiJe  toB  fD  and  F  take  a* 
‘ny  other  equemultiplices, -which  let  be E,M,andN.  And  becaufe  as 
A  is  to  BJo  is  C  toD:  and  to  A  and  C  are  taken equemultiplices  G  ts  H,iy  to 
B  and  ID  are  take  certaine  other  equemultiplices  E  &  M.lf therfore  G  exceede 
L,then  alfo  H  excedeth  A, and  if  it  be  equall  it  is  equall,  and  if  it  be  leffe  it  is 
leffe  (by  the  conuerfe  of tlx  6.  definition  of  the fifth )  .Agayne  becaufe  that  as  C 
is  to  D/o  is  E  to  E:  and  to  C andE  are  taken  equemultiplices  Hand  Jf  :  and 
iikewije  to  D  'M  Fare  take  certaine  other  equemultiplices  M <ur  N.If  therfore 
H  exceede  A, then  alfo  If  excedeth  N:  and  if  it  be  equall, it  is  equall, and  if  it 
be  Iefie  fit  is  lefie  (by  the fame  conuerfe )  But  if Jf  exceede  A, then  alfo  G  exce* 
\  C  (  .  deth 


-  v 


FeLtqi* 

detb  L:dnd 


1 


\  I  K& 


Jj  .  C  w 


i 


H 


j 


1 

»T 


if  it  be  equal 
it  is  equally 
and  if  it  be 
lefie}  it  is 
lejfe(by  the 
fame  con* 
uerfefvher 
fore  if  G  ex* 
cede  Ljthen 
K^alfo  ex* 
cedeth  JSl, 
and  fit  be 
equal  it  is  e* 
quail ?and  if 
it  be  leffe }  it 

is  leffe.  'But  [if 

GejrK^are  a  A  M  JL  ?  JP  K  £ 

equemultipli  ' "  »5  ^  V*  >  .W*n»  f  y>  ^ 1 

ces  of j  t?  %Ani  L  &  N  atiieri'dM  otter icCumtiUiflicei  ofS  a?  F Wher* 
fore  (by  the  6.  definition)  as  yt is  to  B  fo  is  B  to  E  Proportions  therfore^hich 
are  one  and  the  felfe  fame  tit  any  one  proportion  yin  alfo  the  felfe  fame  one  to  the 
otheri^hkh  Teas  required  to  beproued. 

«vyiy-o  ^ M V> v.w ot  i%  ViVs\durAm» r\\ vu  ‘J^uuQhr  , .  mW\ 

S-yT be  n.lheoreme.  *?he  xb&mojitim* 

*  .RTw&'VS  3&  Ot 

■  •  t  >  k 

Jf  there  be  a  number  of  magnii 


F  & 

'"vtf 


B^r-nrrr  ■  "  t  /  y  r  F  .  ,  y  .  ,  , 

is* hr,  ie  there  he  a  number  of  magnitudes  how  many  foeuer .namely. 

„  lf»  tU,  i,  Jf (R  £ii*  A. fiS 


equemultiplices  to  Jfiynd  E .  jtnd  let  the  fame  be  G>  H,  likewife  to 

BfDyind  E ytdke  any  other  cqnemuliipbcesytohkh  let  be  LfiffiSl.  And  becaufe 
that  as  KA is  to  Byfois  C  to  DyndEto  E.Jnd  UyAffEytre  taken  equemulti* 
plices  GfHyl\iand hhwife  toEfBfyiretakjencertaine  other equemultiplices 
bfif ,H.  If  therefore  G  exceedeL,  Half)  exceedeth  M,  and  E^fM. :  and  if  it 
be  equally  mquaUfind  ifit  be  kffeytis  leffefhytheconuerfe  oftbefixt  defini* 
*•  U  i{.  tion 


Cotifttnfthnl 

Vmonfir^ 

tien° 


iion  of  the fift).Wherfore  ifG  exceede  L/hen  G,H,J^  }alfo  exceede 

and  if  they  be  equal l,  they  are  equal!:  and  if  they  be  lejje ,  they  are  leffe  (  by  the 

fame ) .  'But  G,and  G,H,K^,are  equimultiples  to  the  magnitude  A,and  to  the 


r*  H  r. 


1C'  r\ 


•7 

<-» 

A 


4 


I  I 


H  K 


3 


F 


M  N 


magnitudes  A,C,E .  For  ( by  the firB  of the fift)  ( if there  be  a  number  of  mag* 
nitudes  equemultipliccs  ton  like  number  of magnitudes  ech  to  eck,how  multiplex 
one  magnitude, is  to  one  ^multipliers  are  all  the  magnitudes ,to  all).  And  by  the 
Janie  reafon  alfo  h,andL^AfN.,  are  equemultiplices  to  the  magnitude  B,and 
to  the  magnitudes  BJD  ,F:  Wherefore  as  A  is  to  BJb  is  A,  C,E,  to  B,D,E 
( hy  the fixt  definition  of  the fift) .  If  therefore  there  lea  number  of magnitudes 
how  many  foeuer, proportional!:  as  one  of  the  antecedentes  is  to  one  of  the  confe* 
quentes  Jo  ore  ad  the  antecedentes  to  all  the  cmfequentes  :  1 xdneb  Tras  required 
to  he pr oued. 


S&The  lyTbeoreme,  Tfhe  13. Tropofition. 


ffthefirfl  haue  ynto  the  fecond  the felf fame proportion  that 

the  third  hath  to  the  fourth  ,andif the  third  haue  ynto  the 

fourth  a  greater  proportio  the  the  fifth  hath  to  the fixtb:  the 

JhaUtheJirjt  alfo  haueynto  the  fecond  a  greater  proportion 

then  hath  the  fifth  to  the  fixtb. 

{V. ijl , ’  \ .-\ "Ai H  WK. ■  d  / v 

Eppoft  that  there  be  fixe  magnitudes,  of Debich  let  Abe  the  fir  ft,  IB 
the  fecond,  C  the  third,  H)  the  fourth,  E  the  fifth,  and  F  the  fixtb. 
Suppofe  that  A  the  firB  haue  hfntoB  the fecond, the  felf  fame  propor* 
tion  that  C  the  third  hath  to  ID  the  fourth.  And  let  C  the  third  haue 
ImtoD  thefourth,  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  B  the fifth  to  F  the  fixth. 
aott  r  Ad  Then 


\  -  • 


ofButlides  Elements.  FoL  143  * 

Then  1 fay  that  A  the  fir fl  hath  to  B  the fecond  a  greater proportion, then  hath 
E  the  fifth  to  F  the fixt.For forafmuch  as  C  hath  to  !D  a  greater  proportion  then 
hath  E  to  F,therfore  there  are  certaine  equemultiplices  to  Cand  E,  and  likewife 
any  other  equemultiplices  lohatfoeuer  to  B)  and  Fptobicb  being  compared  toge* 
ther,the  multiplex  to  C jhall  exceede  the  multiplex  to  ID, but  the  multiplex  to  E 
pall  not  exceede  the  multiplex  to  F  (by  the  connerfe  of  the  eight  definition  of 


H  e 


this  booke).  Let  thofe midtiplices  betaken,  and fuppofe  that  the  equemultipli* 
ces  to  C  and  E,be  G  and  H :  and  likemfe  to  D  and  r  take  any  other  equemulti * 
plices'tobatfoeuer ,and  let  the fame  be  if  and  Lfo  that  let  G  exceede  KJbut  let 
not  H exceede  L.  And  how  multiplex  G  is  to  C  Jo  multiplex  let  M be^to  A.  And 
how  multiplex  If  is  to  Dfo  multiplex  alfo  let  Jx  be  to  B.  . And  becaufe  that  as 
jfis  to  B,fo  is  C  to  D:  and  to  A and  C  are  taken  equemultiplices  M  and  G.And 
likewife  to  B  and  D  are  taken  certqyne  Other  equemultiplices  N  itr  If:  if ther * 
fore  M  exceede  El,  G  alfo  excedeth  Jf:  and  if  it  be  equal l  it  is  equall,and  if  it  it 
lejfe  it  is  leffe  (by  the  cornier fion  of  the  fixt  definition  of  the  fifth.)  'But  by  con* 
JtruBtdn  G  excedeth  If ptvber fore  M alfo excedeth  fit, but H excedeth  not  Lt 
But  Mts  Hare  equemultiplices  to  E:and  ELtjr  L  are  Certaine  other  e* 
quern  ultiplices  yhatfoeuer $o  Band  F.  JVherfore  Ahdth  'Onto  B  a  greater  pro* 
portion  then  E  hath  to  F ( by  the  8.  definition.)  If  therefore  the fir  ft  haue  'Onto 
the  ficond  thefelfe  fame  -proportion  that  the  third  hath  to  the  fourth  ,  and  i  f  the 
tbika  bane  lm  to  the  fourth  agreater  proportion  then  the  fifth  hath  to  the fixth , 
tfenpall  the  fir  ft  alfo  haue'Onto  the  fecond  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  the 
1  J  h  :  Wkiif^as  fcqu’medto 


'tW-\ 


vW 


■ 


TV 


f  jfn  addition  of C amp  me  n 


nr;  v  j 


Ll. 


Conffrutfiotts 


tiemufittt* 

tion. 


An  addition 

«/  Campane 

...  “ 


K 


Jf  there  he  f  cure,  quantities and  if  the fr ft  bane  unto  the  fecond  a  greater  proportion 
the  hath  the  third  to  the  fourth :  then  jhall  there  befome  equemultiplices  of  the  frit  and  the 
third, which  beyng  compared  to  fome  equemultiplices  of  the fecond  and  the fourth, the  mul¬ 
tiplex  ofthefrsi  (hall  be  greater  then  the  multiplex  of  the fecond ,  but  the  multiplex  of  the 
third  fall  not  be  greater  then  the  multiplex  of  the  fourth. \ 

.  .  V;  i/’vhvVr-.  '  "  -■  i 

Which  is  thus  proued,  Suppofe  that  AB.hauevnto  Cagreater  proportion  the  hath 
D  toEflAnd  let  A  F  be  to  Cas  D  is  to  E,Now  then  by  this  proportion  &  the  teth,A  F  is 
lefle  then  A  B.  Let  it  be  lefle  then  A  B  by  the  quan  tide  F  B.And  multiply  F  B  vntil  there 
be  produced  a  quantitie  greater  then  Cf  which  let  be  G  H :  which  alfo  muft  be  fuch  a 
multiplex,  asD  be 
yngfo  oftentymes 
multiplied  ,  maye 
produces  quanti¬ 
tie  not  lefle  the  E.- 
whiche  multiplex 
let  be  K.  And  let  L 
G  be  fo  multiplex 
to  A  F}asGH  is  to 
FBjOrktoD.Now 
then  by  the  firflof 
this  booke  LH  is 
equeniultiplqx  to 
ABasKistOiD. 

And  let  M  be:  to  E 
the  rirfl:  multiplex 
greater  then  K :  & 


L, 


H 


A 

- 1 - 

F  B 

P 

- 1 - - 

- i - 1 - — 

c 

E 

M 

N 

4 

— 1 - 

l  ■'  1" 

—t - 

- 1 - -  .—4 -  - 

f  < 

let  N  be  .equemultiplex  to  C  as  M  is  to  E. Now  then  Nis  the  firfl  multiplex  to  C  greater 
then  LG  ••  For  fofthatasDis  t'oE,foisAFto  C,andK is  equemultiplex  toD  asGL 
is  to  A  F,alfo  M  is  equemultiplex  to  E,as  N  is  to  C  .*  therfore  f  by  the  4.  of  this  booke) 


Fore  take  the  greateft  multiplex  ofC  vnder  N  :  or  amultiplex  equal!  to  N,if  peraduen- 
tureN}  be  the  firfl:  of  the  multiplices  of  C,which  iet  be  O.Now  then  then  N  mall  confift 
of  O  and  C.  Wherfore  forafmuch  asL  G  is  nor  lefle  then  0,andGH  is  greater  then  C, 
therfore  LH  ihall  be  greater  then  N.And  forafmuch  as  K  is  lefle  then  M,  therfore  that 
which  was  required  to  be  prouedfis  manifeft. 

5  ■  )  ■  1  Lft  tv  J  li : 

Although  this  proportion  here  put  by  Gampane  nedeth  no  demonftration  fo? 
thatit  is buttheconuerfe  of  the  8.  definition  of  this  booke,  yet  thought  lit  not 
worthy  to  be  omitted/or  that  it  teacheth  the  way  tofinde  oudueh  equemuldpli- 


v:d 


ve  14 

11  TwW'.’KU  \\  { 


14..  Tropoitm- 

TVi  cl 1  A  d 


1  f the  firfl  haue^nto  the  fecond  the fife  fameproportmihat 
id  A the fiurtl:  and  iftbffpegreaterth^ 

1  7  9  1  1  y  *  I  1  •  ,  x-  /  ,  /  /  #  f 


the  third ,  the fecond  alfo  is  greater  then  the  fourth :  and  fit 
he  equaU  it  is  eefuatt:  and  {fit  be  lejfeitis  lejf . 


I 


ofSuclides  Elementcs .  Bol. 

Vppofe  that  there  he  foure  magnitudes >  of  “which  let  jhhe  the  firfi jB 
thejecondf  the  third jand  ID  the four  than  d  let  A  the  firfi  yhaue  Ion* 
to  B  the  fecond }the felf fame  proportion  that  C  the  third  hath  lento  ID 
the  fourth .  Jfndlet  A  he  greater  then  C .  T  hen  I fay}  that  B  alfo  is 
greater  then  D  .  For  for  a f much  as  A  is  greater  then 
Cj  and  there  is  a  certaine  other  magnitude jndmely y 
(By  therefore  (  hy  the  2. of  the  fft )  A  hath  lento  'B  a 
greater  proportion  then  C  hath  to  B .  And  us  A  is  to 
Bfo  is  C  to  D.Wherfore  C  alfo  hath  Wnto  0  agrea = 
ter  proportion  then  C  hath  to  B. But  that  magnitude 
1 wherunto  one  and  the  fame  magnitude  hathj  great * 
ter  proportion  fs  the  lejfe(  hy  the  19.  of  the  fft). 

Wherfore  0  is  lejfe  then  Bfiy  therefore.  B  isgrea* 
ter  then  0 .  And  in  like  fort  may  'We prone jthdt  if  A 
he  equalFmto  Cy  B fhallaljo  he  e quail  lento  0 ;  and 
if  A  be  lejfe  then  C}  B  Jhall  alfo  he  lejfe  then  .0.  If 
therefore  the firfi  haue  lento  the  fecond  the  fief  fame 
proportion  that  the  third  hath  Wnto  the  fourth  ,  and 
if  the  firfi  hegreater  then  the  third ghe  fecond  alfo  is 
greater  then  the fourth }  and  fit  he  equall  it  is  eqnallyand  fit  be  lejfe  it  is  lejfe: 
* which  ~Was  required  to  he proued.  ;  «  ‘ 

4  A  v  -t  ■  •  .*4  ‘ 

i  »//•'*  -  •  •  •'  •  •  *  44  '  \ 

h&The  15. Theorem  c.  The  if. Tropojhion. 

s  ’  it  *  \  ,  '  •  • 4  \ 

Like  partes  of multipliceSyUnd  alfo  their  mult ip lices  compa * 
red  together  fane  one  and  the fame  proportion. 

t  ■ *  r'\  *■ 

Fppofe  that  jdB  he  equemultiplex  to  C} 
as  D  E  is  to  F.  T hen  IJay}thatas  C  is  to  Fy  A 

fo  is  ylB  to  S)  E  .  For  forafmuch  as  hour 
mWitifF*  M ! r  r:  - 


A 


B 


C 


‘are 


lento F '.  Deiiide  A  B  into  the  magnitudes  equall  Imto 
Cythat  is f>. ltd  A  GyG  FiyaridHB :  and  lihjemfe  0  E 

f"  0  the  magnitudes  cqualhnttoE  y  that  is}  into  ID  If. \ 
LyandL  E.  Now  then  the  multitude  of  'thefe  AG j 
G  Fly  andfFByis  equall  to  y  multitude  of thefe  0  If, 
Iff  and.  L  E~.  And  forafmuch  as  A'Gy  G  Hydnd 
El  By  are  equall  the  one  toy  other :  and  likewifeD  iff 
TfFy  and  EEy  are  alfo  equdU  the  one  toy  other :  ther*  ^ 

fore  as  JG  is  to  D  jfjo  is  G  H  to  J^L }  and  HB 


3 

LI. 


K 


Li 


■  E 


Mj. 


toLE . 


Demonstra¬ 

tion. 


ft,. 


Conjlruftion. 


Demonstra¬ 

tion. 


tJhe  jifth'Booke 

to  L  E.Whereforefhy  the  12,  of the  fifths  one  of y  antece  dentes  is  to  one  of  the 
confequentes  Jo  are  all  the  antecedentes  to  all  the  confequentes.  Wherfore  as  AO 
is  to  !D  Jffio  is  jfBtoD  E.  But  ^A  G  is  equall  T?nto  C3and  likewife  D]f_to  F. 
Wherefore  as  C  is  toF}fois  A  &  to  IDE.  Like  partes  therefore  of  multiplies 
and  alfo  their  multiplies  compared  together  fane  one  and  the  fame  proportion 
that  their  equemultiplices  haue :  lehich  Teas  required  to  he  demonfir ated. 

l~b>  T he  \6fIheoreme .  "The  16.  Bropojition . 

Iffoure  magnitudes  be  proportional!:  then  alternately  alfi 
they  are  proportional l. 

Vppofef  there  he foure  magnitudes  proportionally  namely ,  yffBjCfDy 
fo  that  as  j{ is  to  Byfo  let  C  he  to  ID.  T hen  I  fay ,  that  alternately  alfo 
they  Jhall  he  in  proportion }t hat  is }as  A  is  to  CJo  is  B  to  D.T ah  eque * 


Dmoflraticn 
vf alternate 

proportion,  multiplies  'bnto  B,and  let 

Qnflmmo*  thefame,  <*  ejnilikmfi 
to  C  and  D  take  any  other  eque * 

.  multiplies  ivhdt foeuer ,  and  let 

Dtmonjlra-  ^?e fame  H  &  an^  And  for  af 

much  as  how  multiplex  E  is  to  A} 
fo  multiplex  is  F  to  B}  hut  like 
partes  of  multiplies  <ty  alfo  their 
multiplies  haue  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  proportion  the  one  to  the  o* 
ther(  by  the  former  Tropofition). 

Wherefore  as  ylis  to  BJoisEto 
F .  But  as  .A is  to  Bfo  is  £  to  2), 
therefore  (  by  the  ii.  of  the fif)  e  A  B 

.as  C  is  to  2)  Jo  is  E  to  F.J'game,  y  .  ,  .  •?  >  ■ 

fora f> much  as  G  and  H  are  equemultiplices  to  C  and  D}  hut  like  partes  of  muU 
tiplices  and  alfo  their  multiplies  haue  the  one  to  the  other  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
proportion(hy  the  15.  of the  fife  fWherefore  as  C  is  to  <D?Jo  isG  to  H.  But  as  C 
is  to  D,fo  is  EtoF.  Wherefore  as  E  is  toE,fo  is  G  to  H(hy  the  1 1*  ofthefift). 
But  if there  he  foure  magnitudes  in  proportion ,  and  if  the  firtl  he  greater  then 
the  thirdythe fecondaljo  is  greater  then  the f our  t  h:  and  if  it  he  equall  it  is  equall: 


I 

p 


H 


w*  vvv^v  a  •**  •  J  i  J  JJ  J  JJ 

E  and  F  are  equemultiplices  to  Jand  B  :  and G  and  H  are  certaine  other  eque* 
multiplies  to  Cl 7  D.Wherfore  (by  the  ^definition  of the fifijas  A is  to  Cyfois 
BtoD.  If  therefore  there  he  foure  magnitudes  proportionally  then  alternately 
alfo  they  are  proportional:  lehih  leas  required  to  he  proued. 


Vi 


\ 


Fokitfi. 

S&The  1 7.  Theorems*  The  ff. ‘Proportion. 

-  ' -V*  J  w  »\  II • 

If  magnitudes  compofed  be  proportional! ,  then  alfo  deuided 
they  fhall  beproportionaU. 

□jpgj Vppofe  that  the  magnitudes  campofed  being proportional!, be  A  B,B  E, 
rr-rA  tr  Arts j.„rD  u  n.  r  rr\ a\  r:  nni-.z  r  r... 


jj  C  D,D  Ffo  that  as  A  OB  is  to  B  EJo  is  C  Dto  ©  F.  T  hen  I  fay, that 
■  deuided  alfo  they Jh  all  be  proportionall ,  as  AE  is  to  BE  foisCF to 


f 

T 


d  J  L  L  yj 

DF.T ake  equemultiplices  'imto  AE,  E  B,  CF,F  D,  and  let y fame  be  G  H, 
EL  lf,E  M,  and  MEL .  And  likewijeto  E  B,  and  FT),  take  any  other  eque* 
multiplies  Tv  bat foeuer,  and  let  the fame  be  KJ),and  El  B .  And forafmuch  as 
how  multiplex  G  EL  is  to  A  E,fo  multiplex  is  JfH to  E  B,  therefore  how  muU 
tiplex  G  His  to  A  Efo  multiplex  is  GJftoAB  (by  the firfi  of the fifth  )Mut 
how  multiplex  G  FL  is  to  A  E,fo  multiplex  is  Eld  to  CF:  Wherfore  how  muU 
tiplex  G  fjs  to  AByfo  multiplex  is  L  M  toC  F(by  the  u*ofy fame).  Again* 
forafmuch  as  how  multiplex  EM is  to  CF ,fo  multiplex  is  MFC  to  ID  F,therfore 
how  multiplex  L  M  is  to  C  Ffo  multiplex  is  EEL  to  CD  (  by  the firfi  of the 
felffame).  But  how  multiplex  L  M  is  to  C FJo  muU 
tiplex  is  GlftoAB.  Wherfore  how  multiplex  G  Ef  0 
is  to  A  B  fo  multiplex  is  E  El  to  CD .  wherefore 
G  If  and  E  El,  are  equemultiplices  to  A B  <ty  CD. 

Againe forafmuch  as  how  multiplex  H  If  the firfi  is 
to  EB  the  fecond,  fo  multiplex  is  MEL  the  third  to 
ED  the  fourth.  And  how  multiplex  KJ)  the  fi ft  is 
to  E  B  the  fecond,  fo  multiplex,  is  FI  B  the  fixt  to 
ED  the fourthjVherfore  ( by  the  fecond  of the  fame)  K  ’ 
how  multiplex  H 0  compofed  of  the  firfi  andfift  is  to 
E  B,fo  multiplex  is  MB  compofed  of  the  third  and 
fixt  to  F  D.  And  for  that  as  A  B  is  io.BE,fo  is  CD 
to  DF:  arid  to  AB  ty  CD  are  taken  equemultiplices  ? 

&  Lsfand  E  El :  andlikewifi  to  E  B  and  F  D  are  ta* 
ken  certame  'otJxrequemultipUeeG that  is,  El 0, and 
MB .  If  therefore  G  If  exceede  EL  0,then  EFL  alfo 
exceedeth  M  B:  and  if  it  he  e  quail, itis  equatl:  and  if 
it  be  lejfe,  it  is  lejfe  ( by  the  conuerfion  of  the fixt  defi* 
nition  of the fift )  .EetG  ]f  exceede  HQ:  Wherefore  JfH  common  to  them 
both  being  taken  away, the  refidue G  H,fhaU exceede  the  refidue  Iff) .  But  if 
G  Jfepcceede  EL  0,  then  doth  E  El  exceede  MB:  Wherefore  let  E  El  excede 
MBiand  MFC.  lebicb  is  cordon  to  the  both  being  take  away  f  refidue  E  M fhall 
ebcceede  tire  refidue  El  B .  Wherefore  if  GEL  exceede  JfO,  then JhaU  E  M  ex* 
ceede  N  B .  And  in  like  fort  may  c$>e  prone ,  that  if  G  H  be  equallyntoKJ) , 
then  EM frail  be  equall  Tmto  H  B :  and  if  it  be  lejfe,  it jhall  be  lejfe :  but  G  H 

and 


A 


..  t 


■  F 


H 


•  •M 


3 


Dmctitfratio 
of  proportion 
by  diuifion. 

QitiftrHfliofU 

Demonjlrfa 

ticn. 


and  L  Mare  equemultiplices  to  ME  and  CF:  and  likneife  KJ)  and  K  $  are 
cert  ay  ne  other  equemultiplices  to  E  (B>  and  FD.Wherfore  as  ME  is  to  E  Bpfo 
is  C  F  to  F  D(hy  the fixt  definition  of  thefiftjjf compofed  magnitudes  there* 
fore  he  proportionallfhen  alfo  deuided  theyjhatt  he  proportioned:  iphich 
required  to  he  demon f  rated. 


18. 


.Wili  u  •'  i 


C: 


T  ,  „  t  ^  *vr  1  ' 

*1  Vu\v  r.l'\ \  “-/.A \  ^ \03 G  A  h 

Tbcoreme. 

The  i! 

%fPropoJition . 

>%.p  ?  i 

5  tfcv  Vmmv 

l0A°  "A  ^ 

■AV- 

•  v» 

roportmall. 


T>monprati- 
on  of  Propor¬ 
tion  by  com - 
pofition 
7 bis propor¬ 
tion  is  t  he  con 
nerfeofthc 
former . 
Demotiftratto 
tending  to  an 
mpofibility. 


X 


Vppofe  that  the  magnitudes  deuided  being  proportionally  he  A  BjJ&B, 
C  F}<ur  FID  Jo  that  as  ME  is  to  E  Byfo  let  CFbetoFD.T  hen  ffty, 
.  that  cowpojed  alfo  theyjhatt  he  proportional! fhat  is?  as  A  B  is  to  3  Ey 

oftiw,  fo is  CD  to  D  F .  For  if  A  B  he  not  lento  3  E}as  C  ID  is  to  FD, 


a  lejfe fnamely ,  to  D  G.  Mnd forajmuch  as  3  as  AB  is  to  B  Eyfo  is 
CDtoDG:  the compofed magnitudes  therefore  are  proportion 
nail  y  therefore  deuided  alfo  theyjhatt  he  proportional!  (hyy  t% 
of  tbefirjl)'.  Wherefore  as  A E  is  to  E  B,fo  is  C G  to  G  D  .  But 
by fuppojition  as  A  E  is  to  E  Byfo  is  CF  to  F  D .  Wherefore  (by 
then*  of the fift)  as  CG  is  ioGDyfo  is  CF  to  FS).  Flow  then  p .. 
there  are foure  magnitudes  ?  C  G3GDy  C  Ffand  FD:  of  lohich 


•>  f  x 

0 


4? 


JDsIn  like fortmayye  prone  9ihat  it  can  notfejo  to  d  niagiili&f 
tude greater  then  FD  .  Ftirbythejarneordpr  if  demonBrationy  it  ^ould follow 
that  F  D  greater  thin  thefdytt greater magnitude:  ipbielyisimpoflibledFher* 
fore  it  H L ~  ^ 

nallyt 
proued . 


| W?M  ty^beoreme.  Thei^^Propofimn*  ^ 

If  the  whole  be  to  the  whole,  as  the  part  tahfn  aftayistothe 
part  taken  atyay:  then fhatt  the  rejidue  he  vnto  therejtdue9 
asthe^holeistothenfhole .  i : 


Oj 


/  tuciutes  mmcntes,  FqIa^6. 

Fppoje  that  as  fie  yfak  'Jh.$-i4  QD.tfo--A 

pf  the  part  taken  away  jifi  to  the  part  taken  away 
~C  F,  Then  I  jay y  that  the  refidue  EB  fimll  be  "an* 
to  the  rejidue  F  Dy  as  the  Tvhok  A  Bis  tQ_  the  fififleTD:  For 
for  that  as  the  Tvhole  AB  is  to  the  Tvhole  C  Dyfio  is  A  E  to  OF, 
t her fore  alternately  aljo  (by  the  iC.of the  fft ) as  A B  is  to  A  Ey 
Jb is  CD  to  CF.  And far  that  "token  magnitudes  cmpofid are  . F 
proportienad^hejkitie^M^d^^  tree prqpwtmiallj by  the  17* 
of}  fifi):  therefore  as  B  Eisto  E  fifo  U  D  Fto  F  C.  Wherfore 
alternately  aljo(by  the  16.  of  thefift)as  B  E  is  to  ID  F,fo  is  E  A 
to  EC .  But  as  AE  is  to  C  F  Jo  (by fuppofition  )  is  the  Tvhole 
y{B  to  the  Tv  hole  CD.  Wherefore  the  refidue  EB  fhall  be  J>nto 
the  refidue  FDyas  the  Tvhole  yf  B  is  to  the  Tv  hole  C  D .  Ifther* 
fore,  the  Tv  hole  be  to  the  Tvhole  y  as  the  part  taken  away  is  to  the 
part  taken  away  y  then jhall  the  refidue  be  Tnito  the  refidue yas  the 
Tvhjle  is  to  the  Tv  hole :  Tvhich  Teas  required  to  be  proued. 


2 


*[  A  Lemma  or  Aflumpt. 


Andforajinuch  as  by  fuppofition  as  A  B  is  toC  Dyfois  AEto  CFiandal* 
ternately  as  AB  is  iojCEfio  is  CD  toCF .  Andnowit  is  proued ,  that  as  A  B 
is  to  C  Dyfio  is  EBtoF D.  Wherefore  againe  alternately yas  A  B  is  to  E  Byjb 
is  CD  toF  D  .Wherefore  it  followeth,  that  as  A  B  it  to  A  Eyfo  is  C  Dto  CF: 
and  againe y  as  the  fame  A  B  is  toEByfo  is  the fame  CD  to  DF. 

^Corollary, 

-  -  ;  '  J  tVi  * :  \y  '  -r.  .  ■  r-  -vv.  y  ■■  j  •  \  ’  7  -v  ‘  . 

And  her  eby  it  is  manifefl,  that  if  magnitudes  compofedbe 
proportionally  hen  alfo  by  conuerfion  ofTroportionpwhich  of 
feme  is  called  Proportion  by  £uerfion,andwhich  is yas  before 
it  was  define  d,whe  the  antecedent  is  compared  to  the  excefe, 
wherein  the  antecedent  exceedeth  the  confequent )  they  fhall 
be  proportionally 


PbJThe  lofTheoreme.  The  lofPropofition, 

If  there  be  three  magnitudes  in  one  order,  and  as  many  other 
magnitudes  \n  an  other  order  Jfchich  being  tahpntWo  and  two 
ineche  order,  are  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion,  and  if  of e - 

qualitie 


7i>at  which 
the  fpt  of  this 
loo  he  proued 
only  touching 
multiplicet , 
this  proueth 
generally  of  all 
magnitudes* 


A  Lemma, 


A  Corollary, 

Conuerfion  of 
proportion. 


\» 


5"  VC 
lit 

a  ” 

*i  .•iaiv*o5  •-*'•  vu 

*4*  \ 

.WVi^'wlVJW* 

•vjsstttw.  ?  -\i 

This  propor¬ 
tion  pertai - 
mth  to  Pro¬ 
portion  of e- 
(j utility  inor¬ 
dinate  propor¬ 
tionality* 

The  fir  ft  dif¬ 
ference. 


.b^v \  'TMffitb  2?<w% 

auatitiemibe&ll'otderthtfirB  be  mater  then  We  third, 

it  \  •  &U4  SftVOl'-evWs  If*  Jr  li  t  '  t  it 


reater 


third:  mjd.  if  it  fa  equalldfijhall  be  equaU :  mdifitbeleEejt 

JhMem  K  ;  \ 

I  , SK  01  u Si. k  XX. (  *\t\ rh  , ; .  r •  ■.  *  :  .  ,  >•  :k X‘.  -  „  y'A\ 

Vppofe  beAlir^mi^iitudes'intine  .order,  namely,  A/BjC, 

let' there  lie  as  many  magnitudes  in  an  other  order , 'which  let  be  D, 
E,  Fp’Which  being  taken  t  wo  and  two  in  ech  order ,  let  be  in  one  and 
the fame  proportion  ^thatifAt  A  is  to  B, fo  let  ID  be  to  E, and  as  B  is 
to  C  ,fo  ktEbei<sFA:  tV 


Demon  ftra- 
sioif. 


T  betid fay, 
that  B)  alfo  isofeaterf- 
then  F:  and  if  it  be  e* 
quail, it  is  equall,  and  . 
if  it  be  lejfe,it  is  lejfe. 
forforajmucb  as  A  is 
F 


*5,: 


o 

vi. 


a  cer taint  o 


i\  u 


x  X\\ 


\  O'U^C'j  j  • 
4  U  i  ViT<U 


svc  xi  i  ‘  v. 


xitiii  A  io  i 


fclw 


«  i 


\ 


3 


C 


F 


Wftt 


*i'A 


",  K 


The f  coni 
difference. 


The  third 

at 


rriag,.^ , 

?iam'ety,B,  but  the  :"J 
greater  hath  tof'Cht ' 
and  the  fame  magni • 
tude  a  greater  pro  • 
portion  then  hath  the  lejfe  (  by  the  8.  of  the  f ft) .  Wherefore  A  hath  tnto  B  a 
greater  proportion  then  C  hath  to  B .  But  as  A  is  to  B,  jo  is  ID  to  E:  and  as  Cis 
to  B,fois  F  to  E  (  bytheCorellary  of  the  fourth  of thefift ).  Wherefore  B)  hath 
Tnto  E  a  greater proportion,  then  Fhath  to  E .  But  of magnitudes  compared  to 
one  and  the  fame  magnitude  that 'Which  hath  thegreater proportion  is  thegrea* 
ter  (by  the  i  o.  of  the fift ) .  Wherefore  B)  is  greater  then  F . 

But  now  if  A  beequalhmto  t,  B)  alfo Jb  all  be  equall  Wnto  F.  For  then  A 
and  C  haue  into  B  one  and  the fame  proportion  (by  the firji  part  of  the feuenth 
of this  booke).  And for  that  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  B)  to  E,  and  as  C  is  to  B,fo  is  F 
to  E :  therefore  B)  and  F haue  7m to  E  one  and  the  fame  proportion  .  Wherefore 
by  thefirfl  part  of the  9.  of  this  booke  B)  is  equall  ImtoF. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  A  be  lejfe  then  C.T hen  alfo  fhall  B)  be  lejfe  then  F.For 
by  the  %.of  this  booke  C  jhallhaue'imto  Bagreater  proportion  then  hath  A to 
B .  But  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  B)  to  E  byfuppofition,andas  C  is  to  B,fo  haue 'We 
proued [is  F to  E  .Wherefore  F  hath  Wnto  E  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  B) 
toE .  Wherefore  by  thefirfl  part  of  the  10.  of  this  booke  F  is  greater  then  B). 
X  V  ■  ~  If  therefore 


ofSntliJes  Elements. 


If  therefore  there  he  threp  magnitudes  in  one  order  ,  and  ns  many  other  magni¬ 
tudes  in  an  other  order gtobicb  being  taken  two  and  two  in  ech  order,  are  in  one 
and  the  fame  proportion,  and  if of  equalitie  in  the  fir  A  order  the firB  be  greater 
then  the  third }t  hen  in  the fecond  order  alfo  the first  (hall  be  greater  then y  third: 
and  if  it  be  equall Jt  j hall  be  equall:  and  if  it  be  lejfe ,  it jhall  be  lejfe :  lohich  ~S va$ 
required  to  be  prone d . 

•  -  1  «  J  v . .  v"  f  k 

y&'The  ir.T heotemc .  T'he  21.  cPropoJition> 

If  there  be  three  magnitudes  in  one  order, and  as  many  othet 
magnitudes  in  an  other  order, ’which  being  taken  two  and  two 
in  eche  order  are  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion ,  and  their 
proportion  is  perturb  ate :  if of  equalitie  in  the  firfi  order  the 
fir  ft  be  greater  then  the  third,  the  in  the fecond  order  the  firfi 
alfo  Jhall  be  greater  then  the  third:  and  if  it  be  equall  it  Jhall 
be  equall :  and  if  it  be  lejje  it Jhall  be  lejfe . 

d  there  be  three  magnitudes  in  one  order, namely,  A,  B,C,  and 
|  let  there  be  as  many  other  magnitudes  in  an  other  order,  lehich  let  be 
D  ,E,F :  Svbicb  being  taken  two  <1?  tivo  in  ech  order, let  be  in  one  and 
the fame  proportion , and  let  their  proportion  be  perturbate.  S  o  that  as 
.A is  to  B,fo  let  E  be  to  Efy  as  B  is  to  C,fo  let  ID  be  to  E,and  of  equalitie  let  A 
be  greater  then  C.  F  hen  I jay, that  D  aljo  is  greater  then  F:  and  if  it  be  equall 
it  is  equall :  and  if  it  be  lejfe  it  is  lejfe * 

Firfi  let  A begrea* 
ter  then  C.  And  fir  of 
much  as  A  is  greater 
then  C,isr  there  is  a  ceY* 
taine  other  magnitude, 
namely  fB :  therfore(by 
the  8-ofy  fift )  A  hath 
a  greater  proportio  yn= 
to  B, then  C  hath  to  B< 

But  as  A  is  to  BJo  is  E 
to  F:  and  avaine  as  C  is 
to  B,fo  is  E  to  D  (  by 
the  Corellary  ofy  fourth 
of the fift  Jjvberf ore  E 
hath  ynto  F  a  greater  * 
proportion ,  then  E  hath  to  D .  But  that  magnitude  "tyheruftto  one  and  the  fame 
magnitude  hath  the  greater  proportion,  is  the  leffe(by  the  I0.  ofthefift)Mer* 

Mmj.  fore 


■ 

• 

' 

, 

If 

i 

■ 

► 

j. 

* 

• 

*  i  - 

* 

* 

s  c  c 

c 

D  I>  d  £  pr 

hv'f 

JhispnpofU 
lion  pertai - 
neth  to  tto~ 
portion  of 3* 
quality  itt 
ptrturbdte 
proportion 4* 
itty. 


The  firfi 
fennte. 


Thtfeconi 

difference. 


The  third 
difference. 


Proportion  of 
equality  in  or* 
dm  ate  propor¬ 
tionality. 


- 


fore  F  is  lejfe  then  8).  Wherefore  8>is greater  then  E 
But  now  if  A  bee*  v 


:,U ,  A 

r  .  *  ■*  -3  i  w  *• 


v..*- 


i .  -  .  .  ■  ■ 

.  i  '  r-  ->'  ti  i.  v  -  ,  .. 

| 

I  •  ■ 


*v  ' 


I 


3 


3 


3 


E 


quail  Ttnto  C  ,~fre  may 
aifo froue  that  8)  is  e* 
qualhmto  F.  For  then 
(■by  the  firft  fart  of  the 
7 .  of  this  booke)  A  and 
C  j hall  bane  Trnto  B  one 
and  the  fame  fro  forth 
on.  And  for  that  as  A  is 
to  B,fo  is  E  to  Fjftff  as  ■  ■ 

Cisto  B,fo is  E  tod): 
therefore  E  hath  to  eh 
ther  ofthefe  8)  and  F, 
one  andyfame  fro  for *  ^ 
tion .  Wherefore  by  the. 
feiond  fart  of  the  g.ofthefift  (D  iseqmlhmtoF. 

Likewife ,  if  A  be  lejfe  then  C,  8)  alfo  is  lejfe  then  F.  For  then  Cjhatl  haue 
Imto  B  a  greater  frof  ortion,  then  hath  A  to  B,(  by  the  8. of the fift .  Wherefore 
E  aljo  hath  Tmto  8)  a greater fro portion  then  it  hath  to  F  .  Wherefore  by  the 
fecond  fart  of  the  io .of this  booke  8)  is  lejfe  then  F.  If  therefore  there  be  three 
magnitudes  in  one  order,  as  many  other  magnitudes  in  an  other  order,  "Which 
being  taken  two  and  two  inech  order  are  in  one  &  the  fame  f  ro for tion, yr-  their 
frof  ortion  is  ferturbate,  and  if ofequalitie  in  thefirfl  order  the firft  be  greater 
then  the  third, then  in  the fecond  order  the fir  si  aljo jhall  be  greater  then)  third: 
and  fit  be  e  quail  it jhall  be  equall ;  and  if it  be  lejfe  it jhall  be  lejfe  :  Ivhich  1 m 
required  to  be  froued. 

^fofThe  zz. Theorems.  'The  zz.  Tropoftion. 

If  there  be  a  number  of  magnitudes, hm  many  foeuer  in  one ^ 
order, and  as  many  other  magnitudes  in  an  other  order, which 
being  taken  two  and  two  in  ech  order  are  in  one  and  the  fame 
proportion, they  fhall  aljo  ofequalitie  be  in  one  and  the  fame  , 
proportion. 

Vffofie  that  there  be  a  certaine  number  of  magnitudes  in  one  order . 
As  for  exam  fie :  A,B,C ,  and  let  there  be  as  many  other  magnitudes 
in  an  other  order,  K>hich  let  be  8),E,F,  lehich  being  taken  two 
fesS  anjtm  iet  ye  in  one  and  the  fame  frof  ortion.  So  that  as  A  is  to  B, 

fo  let  8)  be  to  E, and  as  Bis  to  C,fo  let  E  betoF.  T  hen  If  ay,  that  ofequalitie 

~  •  ,  ,  i  '  they 


ofSuclides  Element es. 

they /ball  be  in  the fame  proportion, that  is ,  as  A  is  to  C Jo  is  ©  to  KT  ake  lento 
A  and  D  equemultiplices  G  w  H,  and  likewife  toBtyE  take  any  other  eque * 
multi plices  "Whatjoeuer,  namely ,  f  and  L,and  moreoner 1 )?nto  C and  F  take  any 
other  equemultiplices  alfo  "What  foeuer , namely ,  A  and  FI .  And  forafmuch  as, 
as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  T)  to  E:  and  lento  A  and  t)  are  taken  equemultiplices  G  and 
H:  and  likewife  lento  B  and  Eare  taken  certaine  other  equemultiplices  Kjmd 
L:  therfore 
( by  the  4.0/ 
the  fift )  as 
G  is  to  If) 
fo  is  H  to 
L.  And(hy 
the  Jame 
reafon  )  as 
If  is  to  M, 
fo  is  E  to 
N.  .  'Sting 
therefore  y 
there  be  in 
order  three 
magnitudes 

CD 

Gy  ify  My  <$  K  M  ^  ^  ^  £  F  H 

<ty  as  many 

other  magnitudes  in  an  other  order,  namely,  Ely  Ly  iSly  “which  being  compared 
two  to  two  are  in  one  and  the fame  proportion  ,  therefore  of equalitie(by  the  20* 
of the  fift )  ifM  exceede  M,then  jhall  El  exceede  G:  and  if  it  be  equall  it fhallbe 
equaU :  and  if  it  be  lejfe  it jhall  be  lejfe .  But  G  and  H  are  equemultiplices  Imto 
A  and  Dy  and  M  and  EL  are  certaine  other  equemultiplices  Imto  C  and  F:  there 
fore  (  by  the  6.  definition  of the  fift )  as  A  is  to  C,foisfD  to  F  „ 

So  alfo  if  there  be  more  magnitudes  then  three  in  either  order,  thefirfi  of  the 
one  order  Jhall  be  to  the  Iasi, as  the fir [l  of  the  other  order  is  to  the  lafi.As  if  there 
"Were  four?  in  one  order ,  namely,  A  S  C  (D,  and  other  foure  in  the  other  order, 
namely ,  EFG  H,  "We  may  "With  three  magnitudes  A,B,C,  and  E,F,G ,  prone 
that  as  A  is  to  C,fo  is  E  toG:  And  then  leaning  out  in  either  Order  the fecond 
and  taking  the  fourth,  as  leaning  out  B  and  F,  and  taking  D  and  H,"We  may 
prone  by  thefe  three  and  three  A,CfDjmd  E,G,H,  that  as  A  is  tolDfo  is  E  to 
B  And  obferuingthis  order,  thys  demonstration  "Will  feme  bow  many  foeuer 
the  magnitudes  be  in  either  order.  If  therefore  there  he  a  number  of  magnitudes 
ho  w  many  foeuer  in  one  order ,  and  as  many  other  magnitudes  in  an  other  order, 
"Which  being  taken  two  and  two  in  eche  order  are  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion , 
they  Jhall  alfo  of equalitie  be  in  one  and  the fame  proportion  t  'which  yeas  requi¬ 
red  to  bedemonjlraied  ’ 

\  JSdm.if 


£> 
1 1 


CcnfimBm* 

1 


Vmonflffr 

turn* 


tfhen  there 
are  more  then 
three  magni¬ 
tudes  tn  mbt? 
order* 

AM  Ct)  EFGM 


r.C  .  . 


ookc 


Thei^Theoreme.  Thez^Tropo/kion. 


'there  he  three  magnitudes  in  one  order, and  as  many  other 
magnitudes  in  an  other  order,rt>bicb  heyng  taken  two  &tm 
in  eche  order  are  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion ,  and  if  alfd 
their proportion  be  perturb ate\tben  ofequalitie  they  (hall  be 
in  one  and  the  f 


Proportion  of 
ecjnality  in 
perturbate 
proprotiona- 
litis . 


tmr 


Covffrxflion. 


l  ) 


it 


>7 

77 

r> 

77 

77 

77 


Vppofej  there  be  in  one  order  three  magnitudes, namely,  A, 3, C,  is  let 
\he  take  in  an  other  order  as  many  other  magnituds  ftobich  let  he  3),E,F 

d/icb  being  taken  two  and  two, in  eche  order  let  be  in  one  and  the  fame 
proportion : 
andfuppofe 
that  their  pro 
port  idbe  per* 
turbate.  So 
tha  t  as  A  is  to 

3,foletEbe 

Fondas  3  is 
to  C, fo  let  3> 
be  to  El  The 
I  fay  that  as 
A  is  to  C  Jo  is 
ptoE 
fake  lento  - 
AjBfEyy 
quern  ultipli* 
ces,  and  let 
the  fame  be  G 
H  If;  and 

likeimfe  lento  C,E,F,take  any  other  equemttltiplices  K>hatfoeuef,and lety  fame 
he  L  UN.  And  forafmncb  as  G  and  Hare  equemttltiplices  lento  A  and  BJbut 
the  partes  of  equemultiplices  are  in  the fame  proportion  that  their  equemultipli '* 
ces  are  (byy  1 5  >of  the  fift)  leherfore  as  A  is  to  3 Jo  is  G  to  H.  *  yind  byy fame 
reafon  alfo  as  E  is  to  Ffo  is  Uto  NJBut  as  A  is  to  3 Jo  is  E  to  F.JVherfore  (by 
y  ii.  ofyfift )  as  G  istoH,fo  is  M to  N.And  forafmuch  as, as  3  is  to  Cfois0 
to  E,and  lento  3  & -Dare  taken  equemultiplices  His  Kg  and  likewife  lento  C 
and  E  are  taken  certayne  other  equemultiplices  E  andU:  therfore(by  the  4-Gf 
the  fifth)  as  His  to  Efo  is  If  to  U, and  alternately  alfifby  the  i6.ofthe fift) 
as  3  is  to  0Jois  C  to  E.  And forafmuch  as  H  and  if  are  the  equemultiplices 
of3  and  3),  but  the  partes  of  equemultiplices  are  in  the  fame  proportion  that 
’  -  ^ 4  their 


H 


K  A 


& 


£  m  k 


Fol.ity, 

ghefr  equemultiplices  are  ( by  the 1 5*  of the fift )  therfm'&sd&ds  tit  D,fo  is  H to  ™ 
Jf'fiut  as  *B  is  to  2>jh  is  C  to  Efh&fore  (by  the*  V*pffihefirftfth^Mrsto']fi^  ,s 


it  to  K\fo  is  L  to  M,a?id  alternately ( by  the  1 6.oftbefift)as  H is  to  Lfo  is  If 
toM*  -  hka#,l£  ^iv  ...  0  ■  ,  ti 

(But  as  ^  is  to ‘2?  id  is  E  to  F  (by  iuppofmortjwherfofe  as  6“ is  to  H,(b  is  E  F,(by  the 
1 1  .oftbejift.)  Agayne  for  as  much  as  and  5y(are  equemultiplices  vntoFaudFj 


And  for  thatasvS  isioC,  foisEtpEyby  fu  ppo  dtio  nj ,  A  ndvn  toFan  d  I)  arc  taken  c 


iices 


But, it.  is  prmed  that  as  G-jX  to.  ff  jfo  is  '$eyng  therefore  that 

there  are  in  1  "  1 


magmtucl 

ken  two  and  two  in  eche  order ,  are  in  one  and  ■tb&ffimk  ’ftopWtioHy  and  their 


-f  -J  ~  J.  ^  j  ■  •'*  J  i.  .A  J  J 

it  /hall  be  lejft.fnt  G  and  {(are  equemultifacesynto  A  and  2), arid  L  and  AT 
are  cert  ay  n  e  other  equemultiplices  Tmto  C  and  K  tVherfore  as  A  is  to  C,fo  is  ID 
to  F(  by  the  6.  definition  of the  fifth).  If  therefore  there  be  three  magnitudes  lit 
Me  order, and  as  many  other  magnitudes  in  an  other  .order,  ^rhkhheyng  taken 
two  and  two  in  eche  order, are  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion,  artd'if  alfo  their 
proportion  be  perturb  ate:  then  of equalitie  they JhaUbe  in  one  and  the  fame  pro * 
portion:  lnhich  leas  required  to  be proued. 


... 

■  i  j  ■. 


>.  \ . 


Vi 


'  \  l. 


■  "•  -v  V>UJ\  >  i  OHttf  rAsV-  (  O:  •;%  . v ■-!,  , 

From  this  marlce*firft  to  the  fame  marke  agayne,you  may  jfypuwillin  fiede  of  Tte»ni  argumentes 
which  feeme  fomewhat  intricate»read  thofe  argumcntes  foilowih^ptnited  with  an  Other  letter.whkh 
are  very  perfpicuoas  andfariefe,ind  followed  of  the  moil:  irtterpreterji 

This  Proportion  is  alfo  trud  iP  there  bd 
moreahen  thre  magnitudes  in  either  order.; 

As  for  example,let  there  be  foure.So  that  as 
A  is  to  B,  foletE  be  to  F,  and  as  B  is  to  C, 
fo  let  D  be  to  E,  &  as  C  is  to  P,fo  let  Q Joe  to 
D  .  Then  I  fay  that  as  A  is  to  P,fois  Qjo  F; 

For  forafmuch  as  it  is  before  proued,  that  A 
is  to  C,as  t)  is  to  F  taking  away  B  &E  thete 
ihall  be  three  magnitudes  A,C,P,  in  ond  or¬ 
der,  and  as  many  other  in  an  other  order,- 
namely,  QdAjF/which  being  take  in  ech  or¬ 
der  two  and  twO,are  in  one  and  the; fame  pro 
portion, and  their  proportio  is  perturbate, 
wherfore  by  the  former  propofitio  A  is  to  P 
as  QJs  to  F,  which  was  required  to  be  de* 
m  on  IPrated. 

And  eiien  as  by  the  demonflrauon  in 
three  magnitudes  is  taken  the  proofe  in 
foure  magnitudes  by  leaning  out  one  of  a  b 


.w 


C  P 


D 


F  F 
the 


Ana 
- . '-v  --i:; 


Anaddh’m 

frfCdmgdne. 


Note* 


the  nrteanes,:  lofty  the  demonflration  in  foure  magnitudes  is  ta&ehtheproo&in 
fiue  magnitudes  by  leauyng  out  twoofthemeanes:  and  by  the  demonftration 
in  fine, the  proofe  in  fixe, by  leaning  out  three  mcanes. And  io  forward  cotinually, 
which  is  alfo  to  be  vnderftanded  in  the  Former  kynde  of proportion  of  equalitie, 
which  is  in  ordinate  propordon. 

tl  U-  'K  _!-\\  '  ,  ;v',  . C\  -  \  "•  4  <ll  \t 

ft&fThe  i^Ji  heoreme,  ,  The  z^fPropofition, 

-  ■  '  ■  ■  if  i 

ffthcprft  hmeyrWo  the fecond  the  fame proportion  that  the 
third  hath  to  thefourth, and  if  the  fift  haue  yntothefecond 
the  fame  proportion  that  the  fixt  hath  to  the  fourth:  then  a  f 
fbihefirfiand  fift compofed  together  fall haue  ynto  the  fe~ 
cond  the  fame  proportion  that  the  third  and  fixt  compofed  to~ 
getherhaueynto  the  four tb. 


Ibai  -which 
the  jecond  pro 
pofitioof  this 
books  proued. 
only  touching 
multiplied, 
is  here proued 
generally  tou¬ 
ching  magni¬ 
tudes. 


^fifippofe  that  there  he fixe  magnitudes  \ABfifD  EfFfB  G,  <ts  E  H: 
^ oflehich  let  AB  he  thefirfi,  C  the  fecond, D  E  the  third ,FJ> fourth, 
B  G  the  fift,  and  E  H  the fixt >  And fuppofe  that  A  B  the  fill, haue 
ynto  C  the  fecond , the  fame  proportion  that  D  E  the  third  hath  to  F 


■:r- 


B  I 


H 


i'y 


the  fourth, md  let  B  G  the  fift  haue  ynto  C  the  fecond  the fame  proportion  that 
E  Fi  thefixthath  ynto  F  the  fourth .  T  hen  I  fay, that  the firSi  and  fift  compo 
fed  together , namely , AG J?ath  ynto  C  the  fecond  the 
fame  proportion, that  the  third  and  fixt  compofed  toge*  G 

ther ,  namely,  D  Id,  hath  ynto  F  the  fourth  .  For, for 
that  as  'EG  is  to  C,fo  is  E  H  to  F:then  alfo  by  Conner* 
jion  (byy  Corollary  of the  dp.  of  the fift)  as  C  is  to  B  G, 
foisFtoEH.  And  for  that  as  A  B  is  to  C,  Jo  is  ID  E 
to  F ,  but  as  C  is  to  G  B,fo  is  F  to  EH:  therefore  of e* 
qualitie  (by  the  22.  of  the  fift)  as  AB  is  to  3  G,  fo  is 
D  E  to  E  H  And  forafmuch  as  K>hen  magnitudes  de¬ 
cided  are  proportionally  they  alfo  compofed  are  propor * 
fionall  (byy  i 8  ,of the  fift) :  therfore  as  AG  is  toGB, 
fo  is  D  H to H E :  but as(B  G is  to  C,fo  is  E H  to  F: 

Wherefore  again  e  of equalitie  (  by  the  22  .of the  fift)  as 
A  G  is  to  C,fo  is  D  H  to  F .  If  therefore  the  fir  fi  haue 
ynto  the  fecond  the  fame proportion  that  the  third  hath 
to  the  fourth,  and  if the  fift  haue  ynto  the  fecond  the fame  proportion  that y fixt 
hath  to  the  fourth :  then  alfo  the firU  and  fift  compofed  together fhall  haue  ynto 
the  fecond  the  fame  proportion  that  the  third*  and  fixt  compofed  together  haue 
ynto  the  fourth :  lebich  leas  required  to  he  proued. 


» 

i 


Fol.  150. 

yb/TheiiftTheoreme.  7  heif.*Profojiuon. 


■*,OXq  . 

*0 


Wjemfoum  magnitudes  fr^oriiQmUiihegr.eate/l.  and 
the  least  of  them,  jh  all  be  greater  then  the  other  remay ning. 

Sh^ppoje  that  there  be  foure  magnitudes proportionall  A F,C'0,E and 
WE.  So  that  as  A  F  is  to  C  3)  Jo  let  E  be  to  F.And  let  the  great  eft  of them 
^  be  AF,&-  the  left  of  them  be  F.  T hen  1 fay ,  that  theft  two  magnitudes 
A  F  and  F,  are  greater  then  the  two  magnitudes  CD  Hr  E .  Forafnuch  as  A  F 
is fuppofid  to  be  the  greatest  of all foure ,  therefore  it  is  greater  then  E.  There* 
fore from  the  greater  A  F  cut  of (  by  the  2 .  of the fir  ft)  pnto  E  an  equall  mag * 
nitu.de  A  G.  andlikewife  ( by  the  fame)  from  C  D  cut  of Wnto  F  an  equall  mag* 
jiitude  C  H.  (  Which  may  be  done,  for  that  the  magnitude  C  D  is  greater  then 
the  magnitude E  :  for  that  as  AF  is  to  C  D,  fo  is  E  to  F  therefore  alternately 
as  A  Fis  to  E  Jo  is  C  D  to  F  (by  the  16.  ofthefift).  Fut 3  s  ■ 

A  F  is  greater  then  E:  Wherfore  qlftoC  D  is  greater  then 
F:  Which  thing  may  alfo  beproued  byy  1  ^.,of  the  fame.)  T  G 
Flow  for  that  as  A F  is  to  C  D,fois  E  to  F:  but  E is  e* 
quail  1m  to  A G,  and  F  is  equall  1m  to  C  H:  therefore  as 
AF  is  to  CD,  fo  is  A  G  id  C  H:  and  forafnuch ,  as  j  h 
the  "whole  A  F  is  to  the  "Whole  C  D,fb  is  the  part  taken  at 
way  AG,  to  the  part  taken  away  CH:  therefore  the 
refidue  GF(by  the  l9*  ofthefift)  is  Wnto  the refidue 
H  D,  as  the  "Whole  A  F  is  to  the  "Whole  CD  .  Fut  A  F 
the firli  is  greater  then  C  D  the  third :  Wherfore  G  F  the 
fecond  is greater  then  HD  the  fourth  (  by  the  14 .of  the 
ft  ft ) .  And forafnuch  as  A  G  is  equall  Wnto  E,  ts  CH 
jsequall  ynto  F:  therefore  AG  and  F  are  equall  Wnto  * 

C  Fland  E .  And  for  a  [much  as  if lento  thinges  Wnequall 
be  added  thinges  equall,  allfhall  be  Wnequall  (  by  the  fourth  common  fentence) : 
therefore fting  that  G  F  and  D  H  are  lone  quail,  and  G  F  is  the  greater, if ynto 
G  F  be  added,  A  G  and F:  and  likewife  if 1m to  HD  be  added  C  H&  E, there 
jhall  be  produced  A  F  and  F  greater  then  CD  E.  If  therefore  there  be  foure 

magnitudes  proportionall,thegreateft  and  the  leaH  of them,fhall  be  greater  the 
the  other  remayning :  "Which  "Was  required  to  he  demonftrated. 

*  a  ^  ^  ^  *\  '  .  *  '  'if**  «  .  .H 

Here  follow  certayne  proportions  added  by  Campane^ which  are  not  to  be  con- 
temncd,and  are  cited  euen  of  the  beft  learned5namely,ofM^#«  Regio  montanus,  ‘ 
in  the  Epitome  which  he  writeth  vpon  Ptolome. 

ff  T  he  firU  Fropofition. 

Jf there  be  foure  quantities  ,and  if  the  proportion  of  the  first  to  the  fecond,  be  greater 

•  then 


F 


Vemnftretio 
{ending  to  an 
impefiibilitie. 


An  other  de¬ 
mon  Jh  at  ion  of 
the  (amt 
affirmatively. 


Veiftottfi ratio 
hading  to  a  i 
mpof&bilitie. 


An  other  de¬ 
mon  ft  ration 
oi  the  fame 
affimmuuely* 


then  theprofortiffififthethfidto the fourth : 

tion  of the J ecoha  to  the  firft  yf tall  be  lefe  then  the  proportion  of the  fourth  to  the  third. 

Suppofe  that  the  proportion  o (A  to  B  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of  Cto  D» 
Then  I  fay  c'onlrariwifc  by  ebnuerfion^the  proportion  of  B  to  Ais  leife  then  tfie  pro- 
portion  of  D  to  C.£or if th.epropprtion of B to Ape  one  and  the  fame with  the  pro- 
portiokOTi?  to-C3fht  n  corihei-ftdiy  the  proportion  60x0  B  is  oricvaria  thbTahic  with 
the  proportion  of 

Cto'D,  which  is  -  A  .  .-.a  1  _  V  > 

‘  r*  -  •'  '  1  — 1  1  *  1 — ~-ri »  '■  .  U  _ _ __  ■  _  .  , 

contraryxofuppo-  — 

lltion.  Btiffftlie  f  ‘ 

proportion  of.B  to  B  — j. — r.v:  A.  v  — .. _ ^ 

Obe  greater  then  ■ 

the  proportion  oiV 

£>  to  C,  Then  let  £ '  -  - 

be  vnto  ^as  D  is 

to  C.  And.by  the  i 3  .  of  thi  s  fcbp3ce,thc  proportion  o(£  to  Ail iaU  be  leife  then  the  j«W' 
portion  of 2  to  A.  Wherfore  (by  the  firft  part  of  the  tenth  of  the  fame)£  is  leife  the Bf 
And  therfore  by  the  fecod  part  of  the  8. of  the  fame,^  hath  vnto  E  a  greater  proportio 
then  zA  hath  to  B ,  And  forafmuch.as  by  conuerfe  proportionalitic  tA is  vnto  £  as  Cis 
to  ‘Z>,therfore  by  the  ^.ofthcfame^Chath  to  f>  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  A  to 
A, which  is  contrary  to  the  fuftpofi tion. For  i^was  fuppofcd  to  haue  vnto  B  a  greater 
proportion  then  hath  C  to- D. Wherefore  the  proportion  of  B  to  A  is  neither  one  and 
the  fame  with  the  proportion  of to ‘A)}nor  greater  then  it.Wherforeit  is  leile  q  which 
was  required  to  be proue^. —v'  >?)  .  ,  ■;>  *  '  >/; 

It  may  alfo  be  demdnftrated  dire&ly.Forlet  £  be  vnto  B  as  Cis  to  D .  Then  CO- 
uerfedly  B  is  to  E  as  D  i  s  to  C,  And  forafinuch  as  A  is  greater  then  A  by  the  firft  part  of 
the  tenth  of  this  booke, therfore  by  the  iecond.partof  the  8  of  the  fame  B  hath  vnto  A 
a  leife  proportion  the  n  hath 'A to  £.~Wherfore  by  the  13 .  of thefame  B  hath  vnto  tA/.k 
leife  proportion  then  hath  D  toC :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

fThefecond^Propofition.' 

Jf  there  be fottre  quant  it  ies,and  if  the  proportion  of  the  fir  ft  to  the  fieortd  be  greater  then  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  third  to  the foHttk,tben  alternately  the  proportion  of  the firfito  the  third,  firaUbe 'grea¬ 
ter  then  the  proportion  ef  shefecond  to  the  fourth.  ! 

Let  zA  haue  vnto  B  agrcaterprpportion  then  hath  C  to  D.  Then  I  fay  alternately 
A  hath  to  C a  greater  proportion  then  hath BxqD:  For  one  and  the  fame  proportion 
it  can  not  haue  :  for  then  alternately  tA  ihou!dbeto2asCis  to  D,  which  is  contrary 
to  the  fuppofitio.  But  if  if  hauea  leife  proporti6>let£  be  vnto  Cas2i$toZ>.  Now  the 
by  the  13.  of  this  booke  ..  ; 

E  hatii.  vnto  C  a  greater  ,  ;  ■  :  ,  c  _ _ *  -t.  • 

properties:  then  hath  A  ^  A 
vo  C.  Wherefore  (by  the 

firft  part  of  the  tenth  of  5. - —  ^  ®  ^ 

the  fame)  £  is  greater  the 

A.  Wherrforeby  the  firft: \  _  A  .  ^ 

part  of  the  8. of  the  fame, 

E  hath  to  B'a  greater  pro 

portion  then  hath  \A  to  A  '  f 

B.  And  forafmuch  as  by  fuppofitio  £  is  vnto  C, as  *2  is  to  £>,  therfore  alternately  £  is  to 
B  as  Cis  to  £>.  Wherfore  by  the  13.  of  the  fame,Chath  to  D  a  greater  proportion  theta 
hath  A  to  Awhich  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofitio.  Wherfore  the  proportion  of  A  to  Ch 
neither  one  and  the  fame  with  the  proportion  of£  to  D%  nor  leife  then  itt  wherefore  jfc 
is  greater. Which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

I^is  may  alfo  be  demonftrated  affirmatiuely  ,  let  £  be  vnto  *2  as  Cis  to  ‘D.Now  the 
by  the  firft  part  of  the  tenth  efthis  booke, £  is  leife  then  A :  wherfore  by  the  firft  parte 
of  the  8,of  the  famejthc  proportion  of  A  to  Cis  greater  then  theproportion  of£  to  C. 
But  alternately  £  is  to  Cas  2xs  to  £>.  Whcrfore(by  the  1 3  .of  the  fame)  ^A  hath  to  Ca 

greater 


ofSuclides  Etementes.  FoL  15  u 

greater  proportion  then  hath  B  to  'D 1  which  was  required  to  beproued, 

ft  The  third 'Proportion, 

if there  be  fours  quantities,  and  if  the  proportion  of the fir  si  to  the  fecond  be  greater 
then  the  proportion  of  the  third  to  the fourth  .-then  by  compofition  alfo  the  tproportio  of the 
frit  and fecond  to  the  fecond fall  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of  the  third  and  fourth 
to  the  fourth. 


SuppoTe  that  the  proportion  of  A  to  "B  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of  C  to  D, 
Then  I  lay  that  the  proportion  of  the  whole  zA  'JB  t©  B  is  greater  then  the  proportion 
ofthe  whole  CD  to  D.  For  the  proportion  ofzA-B to  B can  not  be  one  and-the  fame 
with  the  proportion  of  CD  to  D :  forthen  by  diuifioa  alfo  A  lhould  be  vnto  B  as  C  is 
JD  ;  which  is  contrary  to  thy, fuppofition. Neither 
affo  can  it  be  lel'fe  For ifit  be  poffiblefletit  be  :  & 

let  EB  be  vnto  B  as  CD  is  tofZXNow  theft  (by  the  a  .  s- 

i  a  .of  this  boke  EB  hath  vnto  B  a  greater  propor¬ 
tion  then  hath  tAfB  to  Bt  Wherefore  by  the  firft  ’  t  -o 

partofthe  io.ofthe  fame  ££  is  greater  then  the  4  ' 

whole  AB,  And  by  the  common  fentence  £  is 

greater  then  A.  Wherefore  by  the  fir  ft  part  of  the  8.  of  this  booke  £  hath  to  B  a  grea¬ 
ter  propof  tio  t  he  n  hath  A  to  B .  B  u  t  E  is  toB  as  C  is  to  D  by  diuifio  of  proportion :  for 
EB  is  to  B  as  CD  is  to‘Z>.Wherfore(by  the  i  a. of  thefame)  C  hath  to  Da  greater  pro- 
portio  the  hath  A  to  £, which  is  cotrary  to  the  fuppofition.  Wherfore  the  proportion 
of  A  B  to  B  is  not  one  and  the  fame  with  the  proportion  ofCDto  D,  neither  alfo  is  it 
lefle  then  it.  WhcrfoTe  it  is  greater  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

This  may  alfo  be  demonftrated  affirmatincly.Forafmuch  as  the  proportion  oIzA 
to  B  is  greater  then  the  proportion  of  C  to  D  :  let£bevnto  B  as  C  is  to  D.  Andfo  by 
the  frit  part  of  the  t  p,  of  this  booke,  E  fhall  be  leffe  then  A.  And  therfore  by  the  cotn- 
ffion  fentence  £  B  fljaU--.be  lelfe  then  A  B  .Whctlovc  by  the  fir  ft  part  of  the  8, of  the  fame 
AB  hath  vntoT?  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  EB  to  B.  But  by  compofition  £  £  is 
to  Sjas  C*D  is  to  Z).Fpr  by  fuppofition  £is  vnto  B  as  is  to  D.  Wherfore  (by  the  12. of 
this  booke)^  B  hath  to  B  a  greater  proportion  then  bath  CD  to  CD  %  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  proued. 


f  'The fourth  fpropofition. 


if  there  be feure  quantities, and  if  the  proportion  of  the  fir  Band  th  e  fecond  to  the fecond 
he  greater  then  the  proportion  of  the  third  and  fourth  to  the  fourth :  then  by  diuifon  alfo 
the  proportion  ofthe first  to  the fecond ,  fhall  be  greater  then  the  proportion  ofthe  thirde  to 
the  fourth. 

Suppofe  that  the  proportion  o  fAB  to  B  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of  CD  to 
D.  Then  I  fay  that  by  diuifion  alfo  the  proportion  of  zAto  Sis  greater  thenthe  pro¬ 
portion  ofCto  D.  For  it  cannot  be  thefame.  Forthen  by  compofition  A  B  fhould  be 
to£  as  CD  is  to  £>.  Neither  alfo  can  it  be  lefle: 
for  if  theprpportion  of  C  to  D  be  greater  then 

the  proportion  ofzA  to  3?,then  bv  the  former  A  f-  -  ,  ,  ■  . .  f . 

propofitionrthe  proportion  of  CD  to  D  fhould' 

be  greater,  then  the  proportion  of  A  B  to  3*  c  1> 

which  is  contrary  alfo  to  the  fuppofitio.  Wher-  4  *  ”*  “““* 

forethe  proportion  ofe/f  to  B  is  neither  one 

and  the  fame  with  theproportion  ofCto  is kfe  then  ft:.  Whereforeitis  greater 

*hen  it :  which  wasrequired  to  be  prooed. 

The 


Demon  fly  atil 
leading  to  an 
mpofilkllUHe 


An  other  ie- 
monHratton 
ofthe  fame* 


Vemonflritit 
leading  to  an 
mpofitbilith* 


An  ether  <k- 
mottflratioB 
of  the  fame 
affimatwelj. 


Vmondra* 

$i»n. 


Demonjlra- 

tiotr 


cThejifthcRoohg 


The  fame  may  alfo  be  proued  affirmatiuely.  Suppofe  that  £  2?  be  vnto  B  as  CD  i$ 
to  D.  Now  then  fby  the  firft  part  of  the  10.  of 
the  fifth)  £ (hall  be  lefle  then  tAB :  and  there¬ 
fore  by  the  common  fentencc,  £  is  lefle  then  ^ - * — - — *— . . 

wherfore  by  the  firft  part  of  the  8.  of  this  booke, 

the  proportion  of£  to  ^,is  lefle  then  thepropor-  f  ,  »  '  . 

tion  of  A  to  S3but  as£is  to  £,fo  is  C  to  'D:  wher- 

fore  the  proportion  of  C  to  D,is  lefle  then  the  proportion  of^to£.  Wherfore  the  pro 
portion  of  <tA  to  B  is  greater  then  the  proportion  of  C  to ‘Z> :  which  was  required  to 
be  proued.  ^ 

f  The fifth  fpropofition. 

If  there  be  four e  quanti  ties, and  if  the  proportion  ofthefirBandthe fecond  to  the fecond 
he  greater  then  the  proportion  of  the  third  and  the fourth  to  the  fourth  •  then  by  etterpon 
the  proportion  of  the  frit  and  fecond  to  the frit, (hall  be  left  then  the  proportion  of  the  third 
and  fourth  to  the  third. 

Suppofe  that  the  proportion  of  AB  to  B  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of  CD  t© 
2).  Then  I  fay  that  by  euerfion  the  proportion  of  A  B  to  A  is  lefle  then  the  proporti¬ 
on  of  C  D  to  C  .  For  by  diuifion  by  the  former 
propofltion  the  proportion  of  A  to  B  is  greater 

then  the  proportion  of  C  to D.  Wherefore  by  the  - - - - - - . — _ , 

firft  of  thefe  propofitions  conuerfedly,  B  hath  - 

vnto  A  a  lefle  proportio  the  hath  ‘D  to  C.  Wher-  t  f ^ 

fore  by  the  3.  of  the  fame  by.  compofition,  the 
proportion  of  zA  B  to  A  is  lefle  the  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  <7  D  to  C:  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


f  T  he fixt  Tropoftion, 

If there  be  taken  three  quantities  in  one  order, and  as  many  in  an  other  orderyandiftht 
proportion  of  the frft  to  the fecond  in  the firf  order,  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of  the 
firft  to  the fecond  in  the  latter  order:  then  alfo  the  proportion  of  the  firft  to  the  third  in  the 
firf  order, fihall  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of the  firf  to  the  third  in  the  latter  order. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  three  quatities  in  one  order  8c  as  many  other  quatitics 

in  an  other  order  D,£,F.  And  let  the  proportion  of  A  to  B  in  the  firft  order  be  greater 
then  the  proportion  of£>  to  £  in  the  fecond  order,  and  let  alfo  disproportion  of  2?  to 
Cin  the  fi  rft order,  be  greater  then  the  proportion  of£  t©  Fin  the  fecond  ordcr.Thcnl 
fay  that  1  ~  ;v\" 

the  pro-  . - 1 - —t - , - D  . - - - _* — 

portion 
of  A  to 
C  in  the 
firft  or¬ 
der,  is 
greater 
the  the 
propor¬ 
tion  of 
2>  to  F 

in  the  fecond  order .  For  let  G  be  ynto  CasEistoF.  Now  then  by  die  firft part  of the  1© 
of  this  booke  6  fball  be  lefle  then  B.  And  therefore  by  the  focond  parte  of  the  8.  of  the 

fame  9 


B 


H 

G 


0, 


Fol.ijz. 


D 


F 


proportion  of to  Gaii  muche  greater  then  the  proportion  of  0  to  E .  Now  then  let 
M  be  vnto  6*  as  *25  is  to  £.  Wherfore  by  the  firft  part  of  the  i.o.of  the  fam is  greater 
the  H.  And  therfore  by  the  fifftpart  of  the  8. of  the  fame,  the  proportion  of  to  Cis 
greater  then  the  proportion  of//  to  C.  Butby  proportion  of equality  His  to  Cas  £>  is 
to  F  (for  H  is  to  G  as  D  is  to  £,  and  G  is  to  C  as  E  is  to  F.  Wherfore  by  the  i  z .  of  the 
fame  hath  to  C  a  greater  proportion  then  hath -D  to  F  :  which  was  required  to  be 
proued. 

fThefiuenthTropofition. 

if  there  he  taken  three  quantities  in  one  order, and  as  many  other  in  an  other  order ,  and 
if  the  proportion  of  the  fecond  to  the  third  in  the  firf.  order,  be greater then  the  proportion  of 
the  firf  to  the  fecond  in  the  latter  order, if alfo  the  proportion  ofthe  firf  to  the fecond  in  the 
firf  order  he  greater  then  the  proportion  of  the fecond  to  the  third  in  the  latter  order then 
jhaU  the  proportion  ofthefirftio  the  third,  in  the  firf  order  he  greater,  then  the  proportion 
of  the  firf  to  the  third in  the  latter  order. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  three  qualities  in  one  order  A,B,C,  and  as  many  other  in  an 
other  order  D}EXF.  And  let  the  proportion  of  A  to  C  in  the  firft  order,  be  greater  theii 
the  proportion  of ‘I?  to  £  in  the  fecond  order,and  let  alfo  the  proportion  of  A  to  B  in 
the  hr  ft  order,be  greater  then  the  proportion  of  £  to  £in  the  fecond  order.  Then  I  fay 
that  A  hath  to  C 
a  greater  propor 
tion  then  hathD 
to£.  Thisper- 
taineth  to  pro¬ 
portion  of  equa- 
litie.ForletG1  be 
vntoC,as.Disto 
£.  And  by  the  ff  . — ,  , 

•firft  part  of  the  c 

i  o.  of  this  boke,  ' — — 1 - • 

G  fhal  be  lefte  the 

B  .And  therfore  by  the  fecond  part  of  the  8.  of  the  falne,the  proportio  of A  to  <7  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  proportion  of  A  to  B.  Wherfore  A  hath  vnto  G  a  much  greater  proportio 
tjien  hath  £  to  £,Now  then  let  H  be  vnto  G  as  £  is  to  £,And  by  the  firft  part  ofthe  to. 
of  the  fam  e,A  flialbe  greater  then  H.  And  by  the  firft  part  of  the  8 .  of  the  fame, the  pro¬ 
portion  of  A  to  C  is  greater  then  the  proportion  of  H  to  C,  Butby  the  2  3 .  of  the  fame 
the  proportion  of//  to  C is  as  the  proportion  of  D  to  F  (for  Gis  to  Cas  D  is  to .£,  and 
His  to  Gas  £  is  to  £,)  Wherfore(by  the  x  2.  ofthe  fame)  the  proportion  of  A  to  C  is 
■greater  then  the  proportion  of  D  to  £,  which  was  required  to  be  proued, 

f  The  eight  Tropofition. 

...  '  . . . * .  .  .  .  __  ....... 

if  the  proportion  of the  whole  to  the  whole,he  greater  then  the  proportion  of  a  part  taken 
away, to  a  part  taken  away:  the fall  the  proportion  ofthe  ref  due  vnto  the  ref  due  be  greater 
then  the  proportion  ofthe  whole  to  the  whole. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  quantities  AB  &  C 
*D :  from  which  let  there  be  cutte  of  thefe  magni-  4 
tudes  A  £  and  CF:  and  let  the  refidue  be  £  £  and  •— 

F  ‘Z>.  And  let  the  proportio  of  A B  to  CD  be  grea 
ter  then  the  proportion  of  A  E  to  C  F.  Then  I  fay  S~ 
that  the  proportion  0fF.Bx.0FD  is  greater  then 
the  proportion  of^£  to  CiXForfby  the  fecond 

.  of 


H 


E 


B 

-4 


P 


:  r-K  . 


VsmnjlrA- 

tien. 


*  <*Ihe  fifth'Tiooke 

©f  theft  propofitiotisiiow  added)  alternately  the  proportion  of  A  B  to  A  £  is  greater 
then  the  proportion  of  CD  to  CD.  And  therfore  by  cucrfion  of  proportion  (by  the 
of  the  fame)the  proportion  of  AB  to  E'B  is  lefle  then  the  proportion  of  CD  to  F  D, 
Wherfore  agayne  alternately  the  proportion  of  AX  to  CD  is  lefle  then  the  proportio 
©f  £B  to  F  D  ;  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

“j:'  •.  YYvY  .  -V  :  >/■  '  V.:  YYY- 

f  Th  ninth  (PropoJition. 

if  quantities  bow  many foeuer  in  one  order  be  compared  to  as  many  other  in  an  other  or¬ 
der, and  if  there  be  a  greater  proportion  ofeuery  one  that goeth  before  to  that  wherunto  it  is 
referred, then  of  any  thatfolloweth  to  that  wherunto  it  is  referred :  the  proportion  of  them 
all  taken  together  vxto  all  the  other  taken  together,  jhallbc  greater >  then  the  proportion  of 
any  thatfolloweth  to  that  wherunto  it  is  compared, and  alfo  then  the  proportion  of  all  them 
taken  together  to  all  the  other  taken  together,  but  fall  be  lefethtn  the  proportion  of  the 
frit  to  thef.rsL 

Suppofe  that  there  be  three  quantities  in  one  ot&ct,A,X,C,&  as  many  other  in  an  o- 
ther  order  D,E,F.  And  let  the  proportio  of  A  to  D  be  greater  the  the  proportio  o  fB  to 
D,let  alfo  the  proportio  of  B  to  £,bc  greater  then  the  proportio  ofCto  £.T  he  I  fay  that 
the  proportio  of  ABC  take  al  togethcr,tO  DEF  take  altogether^  greater  the  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  £ 
to  £,and  alfo 

then  the  pro-  A  ■ —  . . . — . * - x>  _ — .  — r—  _ _ _ _ _ 

portion  of  C 

to  f,  &  more  3  ’ - *-"* - * - *-* - -  E  < - — = — - - — . 

ouer  the  the 

.  C  -  - 

proportion  *  1 — " — ^ - - - *  ♦ - — — -<  — * 

of£&  Crake 

together, to  £  F  take  together,but  is  lefle  then  the  proportio  of  A  to  D.For  forafmuch 
as  A  hath  to  D  a  greater  proportio  the  hath  B  to  E,  therfore  alternately  A  hath  to  £  a 
greater  proportion  then  hath  D  to  £:wherfore  by  copofition  exD2?hath  to  £  a  greater 
proportio  the  hath  D  £  to  £.  And  againc  alternately  AB  hath  to  D  £  a  greater  propor¬ 
tion  then  hath£  to  £.  Wherefore  by  theformcrpropofition>4hathtoDa  greater 
proportion  then  hath  %AX  to  DE  .  Andbythefamereafon  mayit  be  proued  that 
hathto£  a  greater  proportion  then  bath  BC  to  EF ,  Wherefore  tA  hath  to  Da 
greater  proportion  then  hath  £  C to  EF,  Wherfore  alternately  A  hath  to  B  Ca.  grea¬ 
ter  proportion  then  hath  D  to  £  F, therfore  by  eompofition  *AX  C  hath  to  £  C  a 
greater  proportion  then  hath  X>  EF  to  EF.  Wherfore  agayne  alternately  <tA 
£  C  hath  to  D  £  F  a  greater  proportion  then  hath  £  Cto  £  F.  Wherefore 
(by  the  former  propofition)  the  proportion  of  tA  to  D  is  greater 
then  the  proportion  of  AB  C  to  D  £  F :  Which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  proued. 


$y  The  end  of  the  fifth  booke 

of  Euclides  Elementes. 


Fol.  r«. 


elides  Elementes. 


his  sixth  books,  is  for  vfe  and  pra&ife,  a 
moftfpeciall  booke.  In  it  arc  taught  the  proporti¬ 
ons  of  one  figure  to  an  other  figure .,  &  of  their  fides 
the  one  to  the  other ,  and  of  the  fides  of  one  to  the 
fides  of  an  other ,  likewife  of  the  angles  of  the  one  to 
the  angles  of  the  other  .  Moreouer  it  teachetli  the 
defeription  of  figures  like  to  figures  geuen,  and  mar- 
ueilous  applications  of  figures  to  lines ,  euenly,  or 
with  decreafe  or  exceffe ,  with  many  other  Theo- 
remes,  notonely  of  the  proportions  of  right  lined  fi¬ 
gures,  but  alfo  of  fedtors  of  circles, with  their  angles. 
OntheTheoremesandProblemcsofthis  Booke  depend  for  the  moft  part,  the 
compofitions  ot  all  inftrumentes  of  meafuring  length,  breadth,  or  deepenes,aud 
alfo  the  reafon  of  the  vfe  of  the  fame  inftrumentes,  as  of  the  Geometricali  fquare, 
the  Scale  of  the  Aftrolabe,the  quadrant,  the  ftaffe,  and  fuch  other  .  The  vfe  of 
which  inftrnmentes,  befides  all  other  mechanical!  inftrumentes  of  rayfingVp,of 
mouing,  and  drawing  huge  thinges  incredible  to  the  ignorant,  and  infinite  other 
ginnes  (which  likewife  haue  their  groundes  out  of  this  Booke)  are  ofwonderfull 
and  vnfpeakeable  profite,  befides  the  ineftimable  pleafiire  which  is  in  them. 

Definitions . 


i ,  Lify  retHline figures  are  fuch ,  \rhofe  angles  are  equall  the 
one  to  the  other, and wbofe fides  about  the  equall  angles  are 
proportional!* 


As  if  ye  take  any 
two  reftiline  figures. 

As  for  example, two 
triangles  ABC  ,  and  A 

D  E  F :  if  the  angles  of  A 

the  one  triangle  be  e-  /  \ 
quail  to  the  angles  of  /  \ 

the  other,  namely ,  if  /  \ 

the  angle  A  be  equall  j  \ 
to  the  angle  D,and  the  /  \ 

angle  B  equall  to  the  j  \ 

angle  E ,  &  alfo  the  an-  j  \ 

gle  C  equall  to  the  an-  j  \ 

gleF.  And  moreouer,  b  C 

if  the  fides  which  con- 


A  B 


E  F  C  p  G  ft 


taine  the  equall  angles  be  proportionall.  As  if  the  fide  A  B  haue  that  proportion  to 

Nn.j.  the 


71 he  argument 

efthis/ixth 

boQkg, 


This  book? 
necefiary  for 
the  yfe  of in- 
firumentes  of 

Geomtrj* 


Thefirjlie 

finttsett. 


T  be  feeond 
definition. 


Re  cipro  call 
figures  called 
mutuitt  fi¬ 
gures. 


'The  third  de¬ 
finition. 


l  7  he  fixth  Tiooke 

the  fide  B  C ,  which  the  fide  DE  hath  to  the  fide  E  F3  and  alfo  if  the  fide  B  C  be 
vnto  the  fide  C  A,  as  the  fide  E  F  is  to  the  fide  F  D,  and  moreoueiyfthe  fide  C  A 
be  to  the  fide  A  B,as  the  fide  F  D  is  to  the  fide  D  E,  then  are  thefe  two  triangles 
fayd  to  belike :  andfo  iudgeye  of  any  other  kinde  of  figures .  As  ifin  the  paralle- 
logrammes  ABC  D  and  EFGH,  die  angle  A  be  equall  to  the  angle  E,  and  the 
angle  B  equall  to  the  angle  F,  and  the  angle  C  equall  to  die  angle  G ,  and  the  an¬ 
gle  D  equal!  to  the  angle  H  •.  And  farthermore,  if  the  fide  A  C  haue  that  propor¬ 
tion  to  die  fide  C  D  which  the  fide  E  G  hath  to  the  fide  G  H,  and  if  alfo  the  fide 
CD  be  to  the  fide  DB  as  the  fide  GH  is  to  the  fide  H  F,  and  moreouer,if  the 
fide  D  B  be  to  the  fide  B  A  as  the  fide  H  F  is  to  the  fide  F  E ,  and  finally,  if  the  fide 
BA  be  to  the  fide  AC  asthefide  FEistothefide  E  G,then  are  thefe  parallelo¬ 
gram  me$  like . 

z,  Tgriproc all figures  are  thofe>  when  the  termes  ofproporti 
on  are  both  antecedentes  and  confiequentes  in  either  figure* 

As  if  y  e  haue  two  parallelogrammeS 
ABC  D  and  E  F  G  H .  If  the  fide  A  B  to 
the  fide  E  F,an  antecedent  of  the  firft  figure 
to  a  confequentof  the  feeond  figure ,  haue 
mutually  the  fame  proportion,  which  the 
fide  E  G  hath  to  the  fide  A  C  an  antece¬ 
dent  of  the  feeond  figure  to  a  confequent 
of  the  firft  figure?  then  are  thefe  two  figures 
Reciprocal! .  They  are  called  offome,  fi¬ 
gures  of  mutuall  fides,and  that  vndoubted- 
iy  notamifte  nor  vnaptly .  And  to  make 
thys  definition  more  plaine,  Campane  and 
PeHitariuSy and  others, thus  put  it:  Reciprocall 
figures  are, when  the  fides  of  either  be  mutually 
proportionally  as  in  the  example  and  declaration 
before  gmen .  Among  the  barbarous  they 
are  called  CPtuiekcfia, referuing  ftill  the  Ara- 
bike  wordc. 


3 


3 .  Aright  line  is fayd  to  be  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  rneane 
proportion ,  when  the  whole  is  to  the  greater party  as  thegrea* 
ter  part  is  to  the  lefie . 


As  if  the  line  A  B,  be  fo  deuided  in  the  point 

C,that  the  whole  line  AB  haue  the  fame  pro-  £ _  _ a 

portion,  to  the  greater  part  thereof,  namely,  to 
A  C,  which  the  fame  greater  part  A  C  hath  to 

the  lcffe  part  therof, namely, to  C  B,  then  is  the  line  A  B  deuided  by  an  extreme 
andmeane  proportion.  Commonly  it  is  called  a  line  deuided  by  proportion  haring 
a  meane  and  two  extremes .  How  to  deuide  a  line  in  fuch  fort  was  taught  in  the  II. 
Propofirion  of  the  feeond  Booke,but  not  vnder  this  forme  of proportion. 

4..  The 


Fol.  154.. 


tion  and  ccrtaine  otherfiollowing,  he  Mu|'ht  to  be  contayned  within  twto  equidi- 
ftant lines  :  fathat  %ujfeaW-ha'ue-  orieaititti4^’atfd  to  be  confined  within  two  e-' 
quidiftantlines,is  all  otic.  So  in  all  thdc  examples,  if  from  the  higheft  point  of  the 
figure  ye  draw  an  equidifknt  line  to  thebaic  therof,  and  then  frQ  that  poynt  draw 
a  perpendicular  to  the  iame  bafif  that  perpendicular  is  the  altitude  of  the  figure* 

-o';  ’tofto  tor:  fl  A  '■  :■  noire-  -  u-:h"io  . ;  b?/d  ?i  D-1.-  ‘.to  nor  10a 


»  a  figure  ts  aper^ 
ate. 


The  fourth 

definition* 

■ 


As  the  altitude  or  hight  of  the  triangle  AB  C,  is  the  line  A  D  being  drawer* 
perpendicularly  from  the  poynt  A,  being  the  toppe  Or  highefl  part  of  the  triangle 
to  the  bafe  therof  B  C  .  So  llkewife  in  other  figures  as  ye  feein  the  examples  here 
fet. 


which  - ?  y  ' 
here  hdc.:  -'u 
calicth'  ■ 


% 


5.  JTroportioii  tsjaidto  bemadeoftwo proportions  dr  more, 

ominto 


'quantittesoj't* 

:  '  U'  ' 

StUH  uvytA  yucomc 


mmtij. 

■  ^  l  -  W  1":/  -' 


,  nQi  A  : 


>»*?  rw  ? 


uantitie* 

Of  addition  of  proportions,  hath  bene  fomewhat  fayd  inthe  declaration  of  the 
10  .definition  of  the  fiftfiooke :  which  in;,iubftance  is  ajl  ,orie  >yith  that  whichis 
here  taught  by:  Nuclide .  By  filename  of  quantities  of  proportions,  he  vnderftan- 
deth  thedenomlnatiohs  ofproportions .  So  that  to  adde  two  proportions  toge¬ 
ther, or  more,  and  to  make  one  of  them  ahj  is'hbtHyrig  els, but  to  multiply  their 
quantities  together,  that  is  to  multiply  euef  thdi^qmMatot  of  the  dnh  by  the 
denominator  of  tile  other .  Thys  is  true  in  all  kihci.es  of  proportion,  whetherlt  be 
of  equhlitie^or  of  the  grea|er  inequalitie,  when'  the  greater  quantitie  is !  referred  to 
the  ldfe :  or  of  the  Idle  inequalitie,when  the  Idle  quantitie  is  referred  to  the  grea¬ 
ter  :  or  of  them  mixed  together  0  If  the  proportions  belike,  to  adde  two  together 
^to  double the  one,  to  adddj.  fikeis  to  topic  the  one^and  to^torth  in  IikepropOri 
lions,  as  was  furficicntly  dedared  in  thededaratidn  Of  the  10  .and  1 1  .definitions 


The  fifth 
fitiitml  - 

«  C  i-  *  \  £  ■>  £  » S 


By  thename 
of  quantities 
is  vnderffan- 
dedthedeno - 
minatio  ns  of 
proportions* 


rv  ,  .  -r  ^  “W*-'  •  ViV-  j  J  ^  rAVJrWA  ASiAAA cacrimt  tuuic 

tocond  doubled. ‘Srid  if thefeBe^urC'quahutresihlikeptopOrlidn,thepropOftioii 
Of  the  fifif  todiOtoilrthfiiali  be  file  proportion  of  the  firft  to  the  fecond  tripled: 
which  thinghqdqo.do  'was.  therctaught  ::  Bike^yfepn  proportions  vnlike 
proportipnofibefirfl-extreme- to  the  laft  is  maefeof  all  the  meape  propoitipns  fet 

Nn.ij.  betwenc 


e 


Example  of 
this4efimtio. 


bctwenethem  .  Suppofe  threequantities  A,B,C,  fo  that  let  A  haue  fo  B  fefqui- 
altera  proportion, namely,  6.  to  4 .  And  let  B  to  C  haue  fefquitertia  proportion, 
namely,  4.10  3 .  N  ow  the  proportion  of  A  to 

C,thc  firft  to  the  thyrd,is  made  of  the  propor-  ^  * - » - * - - - • - • — — 

tiori  of  A  to  R,  and  of  the  proportion  of  B  to  3  r  .  f  ’ 
to  C  added  together  flfye  will  adde  them  to*  c 
gether,  ye  muft  by  this  definition  multiply  the  '  -  * 

quantitie  or  denominator  of  the  one, by  the  quatitie  or  denominator  of  thcother. 
Ye  muft  firft  therefore foeke  the  denominators  of  thefe  proportions,  by  the  rule 
before  geuen  in  the  declaration  of  the  definitions  of  the  lift  Booke.As  ifyedeuidc 
A  by  B,namely,  6.  by  4,  fo  fhall  ye  hauein  the  quotient  1  -i_  for  the  denominator 
of  the  proportion  of  A  to  B :  likewife  ifye  deuide  B  by  C, namely,  4.  by  3.  ye  fhall 
hauein  the  quotient  1  -—for  the  denominator  of  the  proportion  of B  to  C,now 
multiply  thefe  two  denominators  1  -i-  and  i~  the  one  into  the  other,  by  the 
rule  before  taught ,  namely,  by  multiplying  the  numerator  of  the  one  into  the  nu¬ 
merator  of  the  other,  and  alfo  the  denominator  of  the  one  into  the  denominator 
of  the  other :  the  numerator  of  1  ±  or  of  _L.  which  is  ail  one,  is  3,  the  denomi¬ 
nator  is  2  :  the  numerator  of  1  —  which  reduced  are  -t-  is  4, 
the  denominator  is  3  :  then  multiply  3. by  4,  numerator  by  nu¬ 
merator,  fo  haue  ye  12 ,  for  a  new  numerator :  likewife  multiply 
a.  by  3  .  denominator  by  denominator, ye  fhall  produce  6.  for  a  ~ 

new  denominator :  fo  haue  you  produced  12.  and  6,  betwene 
which  there  is  dupla  proportion .  Which  proportion  is  alio  be- 
twene  A  and  C,  namely,  6 1  to  3,  the  firft  quantitie  to  the  third.  Wherfore  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  A  to  C  is  layd  to  be  made  of  the  proportion  of  A  to  B  and  of  the  pro- 


12 


4 

3 


lent 
numbers* 

2*  3.  i5»  1 2  * 


Another 

example. 


ofiail  others  be  they  neuer  fomany .  As  in  thefe  examples  in  numbers  here  let 
2. 3. 15.18  .  In  this  example  the  lefte  numbers  are  compared  to  the  greater, as  in  the 
former  the  greater  were  compared  to  the  lefte :  the  denominator  of  the  proporti¬ 
on  of  2.  to  3.  is  ~  that  is,fubfelquialtera,  the  denomination  betwene  3. and  15.1s 
01*  ~~  which  is  all  one,  thatis,  fubquintupla,  betwene  15.  and  1 8 .  the  denomi¬ 
nation  of  the  proportion  is  U-  that  is,fubfefquiqumta,  multiply  all  thefe  denomi¬ 
nation  stogerher  :  firft  the  numerators :  2.  into  1.  produce  2,  then  2. into  5«produce 
jo  :  which  fhall  be  a  new  numerator.  Then  the  de¬ 
nominators  :  3.  into  5.  produce  15  :  and  15.  into  6. 
produce  <?o :  which  fhall  be  a  new  denominator.  2 

So  haiie  you  brought  forth  -it  or  which  is  pro- 
portion  fubnoncupla:  which  is  alfo  the  proportion 
of  2.  to  18.  Wherefore  the  proportion  of 2.  to  18 . 
that  is,  of  the  extremes,  namely,  fubnoncupla,  is  made  of  the  proportions  of 2.  to 
3  :  of 3. to  15  :  and  of  15. to  18  :  namely, of fubfelquialtera, fubquintupla, and  lubfe£ 
quiquinta. 

An  other  example,  where  the  greater  inequalitie  and  the  lefte  inequalitiearc 
mixed  together  6. 4. 2. 3.  the  denomination  of  the  proportion  of  6.  to  4,  is  1 
of  4.  to  2,  is  ~ ,  and  of  2.  to  3  ,  is  :  now  ifye  multiply  as  you  ought,all  thefe 

denominations  together,  ye  iliall  produce  12.  to  <>,  namely,dupla  proportion, 
Forafinuch  as  fo  much  hath  hetherco  bene  fooken  of  addition  of  proportions 

it  fhall 


10 

1 

5 


1 

6 


of  Enclitics  Elements t. 


FoIav. 


it  Ihall  not  be-vmieceflary  ibmewhat  aJfo  to  fay  pf  fubfii®©n  df them » Where  it 
is  to  be  noted,  that  as  addition  ofthem  ,is  niadeby  multiplicatio  of  their  denomi-  0l{f propel' •' 
nations  the  one  into  the  othenfo  is  the  fubilraftion  of  the  one  from  the  other  Eon,  * 
dono,  by  diuhion  of  the  denomination  of  the  brie  by  the  denomination  of  the  o~ 
ther'.  As  ifye  wili  from  fextupla  proportion  fnbtrahe  dupla  proportion,  take  the 
denominations  of  them  bo&VThe  denomination  of  fextupla  proportion,  is  6, 
the  denomination  of  dupla  proportion,  is  2.  Nowdcuide  6.  the  denomination 
of  the  one  by  2. the  denomination  of  the  other :  the  quotient  ihall  be  3  .-which  is 
the  denomination  of  a  new  proportiQippan\ely,tripla :  fo.  that  when  dupla  pro¬ 
portion  is  fubtrahed  frcmfexmpla,  ther eihall remayne  tripla  proportion  .  And 
thus  may  ye  do  in  all  others . 


t  <0 

Va¬ 


ns 


6.  A  Tarallelogramme  applied  to  a  right  line ,  is  Jay d  to  want 


in  forme  by  a 


gramea) 


eto  onegeuen : 


a~ 


ling  of  the  whole  line ,  rbefathi**, 
by  a  parallelogramme  like  to  onegeuen :  and  then  is  it fay  d  to 
exceedejwhen  it  exceedeth  the  line  by  a  parallelogramme  like 
to  that  which  was  peuen. 

o 

As  letE  be  a  Parallelogram e 
geuen,  and  let  A  B  be  a  right  C 
line, to  whom  is  applied  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  A  C  D  F.  Now 


^  r 


if  it  want  of  the  filling  of  the 
line  A  B,by  the  parallelogram  e 
DFGB  being  like  to  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  geuen  E,  then  is 
the  parallelogramme  iayd  to  A 
want  in  forme  by  a  parallelo¬ 
gramme  like  vnto  a  parallelogramme  geuen. 

Likewife  if  it  exceede,  as  the  parallelogramme  AC  GD  applyed  to  [the  line 
A  B,  if  it  exceede  it  by  the 

parallelogramme  F  GBD  c  p*  c 

being  like  to  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  E  which  was  ge¬ 
uen  ,  then  is  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  A  B  G  D,  iayd  to 
exceede  in  forme  by  a  pa¬ 
rallelogramme like  to  a  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  geuen. 

This  definition  is  added  by  Flufates  as  it  feemeth,  it  is  not  in  any  comon  Grefce 
booke  abroadjHorjn  any  Commentary.  It  is  for  many  Theoremes  following  very 
nccdlarv. 


—T- 

G  / 


B 


P 


A Theftxth Boafy  S % 

%^ffhe\JThmemc. 

^Triangles  & pdrallelogrtimmes  which  are  Vnder  one  &the 
felffame  ahitudeiare  in  proportion  as  the  bafe  of  the  one  is  to 
the  baje  of  the  other. 


<CmSb*B'wt. 


Vemanffra* 
tion  of  the 
ptt  fart. 


=±si 


grammes. 


Vppofe  that  there  he  two  triangles  ABC  and  A  CD  py* 
two  paralleiogrammes  E  C  andC  F.  Which  let  befit  Ten* 
der  one  and  the felfefame  altitude  or  perpendicular  line 
drawenfrom  the  toppe  A  to  the  bafe  (BID.  Then  I  fay 
that  as  the  bafe  B  C  is  to  the  bafi  CD fio  is  the  triangle 
ABA  to  the  triangle  A  CD :  and  the parallelogramme 
B  C  to  the  parallelogramme  C  F .  Forforafinuch  as  the 

Cand  C  F  are  lander 
One  and  the  felfe  fame 
altitude ,  therfore  the 
lines  E  A  and  A  F 
make  both  one  right 
line,and  fo  alfo  do  the 
Imes  B  C  and  C  (D : 
and  therefore  the  lyne 
E  Fis  a  parallel  Imto 
the  line  BD /Produce 
the  right  line  ID  Bon  eche fide  dire  ft ly  to  the  poinies  HyL  (by  the  2  .petition  of 
thefirfi)  And  Imto  the  bafe  BC  (by  the  2.  of  the  firfi) put  as  many  equall lines 
as  you  as  for  example jtwoyiamelyJB  Gyand  G  H  and  Imto  the  bafi  C  D 

on  the  other fide,  put  as  many  equall  as  you  did  to  the  other  bafieptohicb  let  be  D 
T(?and  fL.Then  draw  thefi  right  tines  A  GyA  HyA  If  and  AIL. 

yfndforafmucl?  as  the  lines  CByB  Gyand  G  Hare  equall  the  one  to  the  o* 
ther fiber  fore  the  triangles  alfo  AHG}  AG  Band  ABC,  are  (by  the  38.  of 
the  firfi )  equallthe  one  to  the  other. Wherf ore  how  multiplex  the  bafe  H  C  is  to 
the  bafe  B  CJo  multiplex  alfo  is  the  triangle  AH  C  to  the  triangle  A  B  C.And 
by  the fame  reafon  alfofiow  multiplex  the  bafe  L  C  is  to  the  bafi  DCyfo  multi* 
plex  alfo  is  the  triangle  A  LCto  the  triangle  A  D  C. Wherf  ore  if the  bafi  H  C 
be  equall  Imto  the  bafe  CL /hen  (by  the  38 .  of the firfi )  the  triangle  A  H  C  is 

feCLphen 


equall Tmto  the  triangle  A  C  Is.  And  tp  the  baje . 
alfo  the  triangle  A  HC  excedeth  the  triangle  A  C  Lymd  if  the  bafi  be  leffeythe 
triagle  alfofhall  be  lejfi.lSlo^o  then  there  arefoure  magnitudes  yiamely /he  two 
bafis  B  C  and  C  Dyand  the  two  triangles  A  B  Cyand  A C Dyand to  the  bafe  B 
C find  to  the  triangle  ABC yiamelyjto  the firfi  and  the  third ?  are  taken  eque * 

muU 


ofEuclides  Elementes.  FoL  i}6* 

multiplices , namely  ,the  bafe  HCand  the  Wangle  A  HC,  and  likewife  to }  bafe 
CD  and  to  the  triangle  A  DC, namely, to  thejecond  and  the  fourth,  are  taken 
certaine  other  equemultiplices, that  is, the  bafe  CE,a?id  the  triangle  ADC.  And 
ft  hath  bene protied  that  if  the  multiplex  of  the  frfl  magnitude,  that  is, the  bafe 
H  C,do  exceede  the  multiplex  of  the J'econd,that  is, the  bafe  C  JL,  the  multiplex 
alfo  of  the  third /hat  is,  the  triangle  A  H  C  excedeth  the  multiplex  of}  fourth, 
that  is, the  triangle  „ A  L  C , and  if  the [aid  bafe  H  C  be  equall.  to  the  [aid  bafe  C 
L, the  triangle  alfo  AH  C  is  equall  to  the  triangle  A  E  C, and  if  it  be  leffe  it  is 
leffe.Wherfire  by  the fixt  definition  of}  fifth, as  the firjl  of theforefiid  magni* 
tiides  is  to  the  fecona  jo  is  the  third  to  the  fourth Whei  fore  as  the  bafe  B  C  is  W 
the  bafe  CD  Jo  is  the  triangle  A  B  C  to  the  triangle  AC  D. 

And becaufe (by  the 4-1' of tbefirjl) the parallelogramme  EC  is  double  to  j^emonjirtu 
the  triangle  ABC,  and(  by  the  fame )  the  parallelogramme  F  C  is  double  to  the  tion  of  the 
triangle  AC  D,therfore  the  parallelogrammes EC  and  FC  are  equemultipli *  fi&**P*r$* 
ces  Ion  to  the  triangles  ABC  and  A  C  D.  But  the  partes  of equemultiplices  (by 
the  of the fifth)haue  one  and  the fame  proportion  ’frith  their  equemultiplices .. 

IVherfore  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  A  C  D Jo  is  the  parallelograme 
EC  to  the  parallelogramme  F  C.  And forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  demonflrated, 
that  as  the  baje  B  C  is  to  the  bafe  C  D  Jo  is  the  triangle  A  B  C,  to  the  triangle 
A  C  D,  and  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  AC  D  Jo  is  the  paradelo * 
gramme  EC  to  the  parallelogramme  FC.  Wherefore  ( by  the  i 1-  of  the  fifth)  as 
the  bafe  B  C  is  to  the  bafe  C  D  Jo  is  the  parallelogramme  EC  to  the  paraUelo* 
gramme  FC.  T he  parallelogrammes  may  alfo  be  demonslrated  a  part  by  them* 
felues  as  the  triangles  are yf’fre  defcr  'tbe  Tapon  the  bafes  B  G,G  H,and  D  JJ<5T 
FJE parallelogrammes  lander  the  Jelf fame  altitude  that  the  parallelogrammes 
geuen  are.  Wherfore  triangles  and  parallelogrammes  "frhich  are  Tinder  one  and 
the felfe fame  altitude, are  in  proportion, as  the  baje  of the  one  is  to}  bafe  of tht 
other : ’frhich -fr as  required  to  be  demonstrated. 


Here  Flu  fates  addeth  this  Corollary* 

jftm  right  lines  being  geuen,  the  one  of  them  be  dcuided  how fo  euer:  the  re  A  angle fi-  A  C  U 
gures  contained  under  the  whole  line vndeuided, and  eche  of  the fiegmentes  of  the  line  deni-  added  fo 
Jed, are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, as  the figmentes  are  the  'one  to  the  other .  For  i-  fluffata, 
maginyng  the  figures  B  A  and  A  D  in  the  former  defcription,to  be  re&angled^he 
rectangle  figures  contained  vnder  the  whole  right  Iyne  A  C5  and  the  fegments  of 
the  right  line  B  D, which  is  cut  in  the  poynt  C3namely,the  parallelogrammes  B  A 
and  A  D,are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  othcr3as  the  iegmetes  B  C  and  C  D  are. 

mm  zfTheoreme.  7 he  i.fPropofiiwn, 
to  any  one  of  the (ides  of  a  triangle  be  dmven  a  parallel 


n.  tiff. 


rt 


The  fir  ft  part 
of  this  Theo¬ 
rem* 


Demonfira- 
tion  of  the 
ficondpart. 


Tight  line jtfh  ail  cutthefiJes  of  the  f time  triangle proportion 
ually*  <tAnd  if the fide  sofa  tritingle  be  cut  proportionally,  a 
1  ™  dram  from JeUion  tofettion  is  a  parallel  to  theo~ 
we  fiftb?  triam  1 


n 


Tppvfe  that  there  be  at riangle  ABC,  Mo  one  of  the.  fides  thereof 
t  namely  j  Mo  B  C,  let  there  be  drawen  a  parallel  line  D  E  cuttyng  tlx 
fides  A  C  and  A  B  in  the  pointes  E  and  D.  Then  I  fay  firjl  that  as  BD 
is  to  D  A  Jo  is  C  E  to  E  A. (Draw  a.  line  from  B  toEyjr  alj'o from  C  to  D.Wher 
fore  (by  the  37*  of  the fr ft)  the  triangle  B  D  Eis  equall  Tmto  tl?e  triangle  CD 
E :  for  they  are fet  Ttpon  one  and  the  fame  bafe  D  E,  and  are  contained  within 
thefelfe fame  parallels  D  E  and  B  C .Coupler 
alfo  a  eertaine  other  triangle  AD  E .  Now 
t  binges  e quail  (by  the  j. of  the  fifth)  haue  to 
me  jelfe  thing  one  and  the  fame  proportion , 

Wher fore  asy  triangle  BD  E  is  toy  triangle 
A D  EJo  isy  triangle  CD  Eto  the  triangle 
A  D  E.But  asy  tnangle  BD  E  is  toy  trian * 
gle  A  D  EJotsy  bafeB  Dtoy  baJeD  A  (by 
the  firjl  of this  bookefiFor  they  are  Tender  one 
and  the Jelfe  fame  toppe, namely,  E}  and  ther* 
fore  are  Tmder  one  and  the  fame  altitude.  And 
by  the  fame  reafon  as  the  triangle  CD  Eis  to  the  triangle  AtDEffo  is  the  lyne 
C  Eto  the  lyne  E  A.  Wherfore  (by  the  11.  of  the fifth)  as  the  line  B  D  is  to  the 
line  D  /  the  line  CEto  the  line.E  A. 

But  now Japp  of e  that  iny  triangle  ABC  the fides  A  B  A?  AC  be  cut proper* 
tionallyjby  as  BD  is  to  D  Afro  let  C  E  he  to  E  Aysr  draw  a  line  from  D  to  B. 
Then Jecondlyl fay y  the  line  D  Eis  a  parallel  toy  lyneBC. For  the  fame  order 
of mijlruchon  being  kept  for  y  asB  D  is  to  D  A,  Jo  is  C  Eto  E  A,  but  as  B  D 
is  to  D  A  Jo  isy  triangle  BDE  toy  triangle  A  D  FJbythe  \  .of the fixt)ty  as 
C  E  is  to  E  A  Jo(byy  fame)  is  the  triangle  CD  Etoy  triangle  AD  Euherfore 
(by  the  n-  of  the  fifth)  as  the  triangle  BDE  is  to  the  triangle  A  D  Efo  is  thy 
triangle  CD  Eto  the  triangle  A  D  E.Wherfore  either  of thefe  triangles  BDE 
and  CDE  haue  to  the  triangle  jiDE  one  and  the fame  proportion. Where  fore 
( by  the  9.  of  the fifth)  the  triangle  BD  Eis  equall  Tmto  the  triangle  C  D  Ey 
and  they  are  ’Vpon  one  and  the  felfe  bafe , namely ,D  E.  But  triangles  equall  and 
fet  T>pon  one  bafe,are  afro  contained  yoitbin  the fame  parallel  lines  (by  the  $<?•  of 
the  fir  ft. )  Wherfore  the  line  D  E  is  Tmto  the  line  BCa  parallel  Iftherfare  to  a* 
ny  one  of the  fides  of a  triangle  be  drawn  a  parallel  line  ?  it  cutteth  the  other fides 
of the fame  triangle  proportionally,  yfnd  if the fides  of  a  triangle  be  cut  prop  or*- 
homily,  a  right  lyne  drawen  from feclion  to Jettionfs  parallel  to  the  other  fide 
of  the  triangle :  n Anch  thing *ms  required  to  be  demonfirated . 


Here 


Fol.isj. 


If  a  lint  pArallel  tv  one  of  the  fides  of  a  triangle  do  cut  the  triangle, it jhatl  ckt  of  from  the 
whole  tri-angle  atriangle  like  t  o  the  whole  triangle.  For  as  it  hath  b  ene  proued  it  deui- 
deth  the  fides  proportionally, So  that  as  E  C  is  to  E  A,fo  is  B  D  to  D  A*  wherfore 
by  the  1 8  .of the  fiftlgas  A  C  is  to  A  E,  fo  is  A  B  to  A  D  .Wherfore  alternately  by 
the  16.  of  the  fifth  as  A  C  is  to  A  B.fo  is  A  E  to  A  D:  wherefore  in  the  two  trian¬ 
gles  E  A  D  and  CAB  the  fides  about  the  common  angle  A  are  proportional.The 
fayd  triangles  alfo  are  equiangle.  Forforafinuch  as  the  right  lyncs  AECand  A 
1)  B  do  fall  ypon  the  parallel  lynes  E  D  and  C  B,  therefore  by  .the  2?.  of  the  firft 
they  make  the  angles  A  E  D  and  A  D  E in  the  triangle  A  D  E  equall  to  the  angles 
A  C  B  and  A  B  C  in  the  triangle  ACB.  Wherefore  by  the  firft.  definition  of  thi? 
booke  the  whole  triangle  A  B  C  is  like  vnto  the  triangle  cut  ofADE, 

fi&Tbe  5. 7 'beoreme.  7 *he  if Trofiqfition • 

If  an  angle  of  a  triangle  be  deuidedinto  two  equall  partes  And 
if  the  right  line  which  deuideth  the  angle  deuide  alfo  the 
bafe :  the jegmentes  of  the  hafe j hall  be  in  the fame proportion 
the  one  to  the  other ,  that  the  other  fides  of  the  triangle  are  „ 
And  if  the  fegmetes  of  the  bafe  be  in  the fame  proportion  that 
the  other  fides  of  the  fayd  triangle  are :  a  right  dr awen front 
the  toppeofthe  triangle  vnto  thefeBion^fhall  deuide  the  an ~ 
gle  of  the  triangle  into  two  equall partes. 


het  cutalfothehafeBCin  the  point  D.  Then  I fay  that  as 
— —  the figment  3  D  is  to} fegment  ID  C, fo  is  the  fide  3  A  to  the  fide  J 
C.  For  hy  the  point  C(hy  the  51  *  of the  firfi)  draw 
Tnito  the  line  D  Aa  parallel  line  CEand  ~exten.de 
the  line  3  A  till  it  concur  re  fifth  the  line  C  R  in  the 
point  Eyqnd  do  make  the  triangle  3  E  C.  But  the 
lync  3  A  fhallconcurre  icith  the  line  C  E(hy  the  5. 
petition) for  that  the  angles  E  3  C,and  3  CEjtft 
le fie  then  two  right  angles.  For  the  angle  EC  Bis 
equall  to  the  outwarde  and  oppofite  angle  AD  3 
( by  the  29.  of the  firfi.)  And  the  two  angles  AD 
3  and  DBA  of  the  triangle  3  AD  are  lejfe  then 
two  right  angles  (by  the  17 •  of  the firfi)  ISLowfor •  ^ 
afmuch  asypon  tkeparallds  A D  and E  C falletb  the  right  line  AC,  therefore 

(hy 


A  CoroGaty 
added  by 
flujfateu 


Cotfffrutlioftc 


’Demtnftra- 
tion  of  the 
firff  pan* 


e 


Vemonftr*' 
ttonofthe 
Jecondpart, 
Svhtch  is  the 
cotumfe  of 
the  fir  Of. 


by  the  29*  of  the firft)jhea?igle  AC  Bis  equqtlyntqthe  angfi  CAS).  But  yn* 
to  the  angle  C  Ap  is  the  angle  B  AS) fuppofed  to  be  equall.  wherfore  the  am 
-  gle  B  Apis'alfo  equall  yhto  the  angle  ACBlAgaine  becavfe  ypon  the  paraU 
lets  AS)  andECfalletb  the  fight  line  BAB,  the  outward  angle  BAS)  (by 
"  the  2  3  •  ofthefi  vjl  fits  equa  ll  ynto  the  inward  angle  A  E  C.But  before  it  ipas  pro* 
uell  that)  angle  A  C  B  is  equall  yntoy  angle  B A S) ptoherfore y  angle  ACE  is 
equal!  yntoy  angle  AEC. Wherefore  (byy  6.  of)  firJtJy  fide  A  E  is  e  quail  ynto 
thefide  A  C.  And  becaufe  to  one  of y  fides  ofy  triangle  B  C  EyiamelygoECis 
dramn  a paralkflme A S),  therfqrefbyy  2:ofyfixt)asBp  is  top  Cfoisif 
A  to  A  E.  But  AE.is  equall  Unto  AC gherfiore  as  B  S)  is  to  P  Cfo  is  BA,  to  AC. 
But  nowfiuppofe  that  as  the  figment  B  S>  is  to  the  |j 
figment  S)  Cfo  is  the  fide  B  A  to  thefide  ACgy 
draw  a  line  from  Ago  S.  T  hen  If  ay  that  the  an* 
gle  B  AC  is  by y  right  line  AS)  aeuided  into  two 
equall partes. For  the  fame  order-  of  confirutlion  ye* 
nidjnvng  y  for  that  as  B  S)  is  to  Pfi \  Jo  bs  B  A 
to  A  t  ,  but  as  B  'D  is  to  S)  C  fo  is  B  A  to  A  E (by 
the  '2  -  °f  the  fixt)  for  Aito  one  of  the  fides  of  the 
triangle  B  C  Eyiameljy  ynto  the  fide  E  C  is  drawn 
a  parallel  line  AS).  Wherefore  alfo  as  BA  is  to  A 
Cfo  is  B  A  to  A  E  (by  the  1 1*  of  the  fifth)  Wher* 
fore  (by  the  9.  of  the  fifth ) AC  is  equall  ynto  A  El.  Wherfore  alfo  ( by  the  £.  of 
thefirfi)  the  angle  A  B  C  is  . equall.  ynto  the  angle  A  C B,  hut  the. angle  AE  C 
(by  the  29 -of the  firfi)  is  equall  ynto  the  outward  angle  BAS :  and  the  angle 
AC  Bis  equall  ynto  the  angle  C  AS)  7x>hich  is  alternate  ynto-  bmffivherefon 


AgO..  A 


*.  f-Pf  '#Cv! 


iron  the  one  to  the  other  ghat  the  other  Jules  of the faid  triangle  are.  And  if  the 
fegmentes  of  the  bafe  be  in  the  fdrhd proportion  that  the  other  fides  of  the  fqyd 
triangle  areg  right  line  drawen  from  the  toppe  of  the  triangle  ynto  the  feBiort 
deuideth  the  angle  of  the  triangle  into  two  equall  partes.  :i 

This  conftriidHon  is  the  halje  partof that  Gnomiqal  figure  defcnbed  in  the  4^1 
proportion  of  the  firft  booke;^hMi  Gnomical  figure  is  ofgreat  vfe  in  a  manor  in 
all  Geometrical  diunonftratiGns* 

:  a  ; «  .  .  >3  -  ih  k  a  J  " 


nn 

non. 


n?*. 


In  tquiangle  triangles f he Jides 


derthelmudllamki:^ 


Suppofi 


ofSmlules  Elmentes. 


FoIa4)  8, 


Vppofe  that  there  he  two  equiangle  triangles  ABC  and  DCE:  and 
let  the  angle  ABC  of  the  one  triangle,  be  equal l  lento y  angle  ID  CE 
of  the  other  triangle ,and  the  angle  B  A  C  equall  len  toy  angle  CDE, 
and  moreouer ,  the  angle  AC  B  equaUlnito  the  angle  DEC.T hen 
I fay  ghat  thofe  fides  of y  triangles  A  BC,(sr  DC  E,  1 tibich  include  the  e  quail 
angles, are  proportional! ,and  the  fides  -ft Inch  are  fubtended  lander  the  equall  an* 
gles  are  of  like proportion.For  let  two  fdes  of  the  fayd  triangles ,  namely,  two  of 
thofe  fides  “which  are  fubtended  lender  equal!  angles :  as  for  example  the  fides 
B  C  and  C  E,  he  jo  Jet  that  they  both  make  one  right  lint .  And  becaufie  the  an * 
gles  A  BC(y  A  CB  are  lejfe  then  two  right  angles(  by  the  tj*  of  the firft ):  but 
the  angle  AC  B  is  e* 
quail  1 mto  the  angle  F 

D  E  C:  therfiorey  an * 
gles  ABC  ty  DEC 
are  lejfe  the  two  right 
angles .  Wherefore  the 
lines  B  A  '(S'  E  D  be* 
mg  produced ,  Tv  ill  at 
the  length  meete  tow* 
ther .  Let  them  meete 
and  ioyne  together  in 
tbepoynt  F.  And  becauje  by  fuppofition  the  angle  D  C  E  is  equalhmto  the  an* 
gle  ABC ,  therfore  the  line  BE  is  (by  the  28.  of the fir  ft)  a  parallel fl  lento  the 
line  C  D .  And  forafinuch  as  by  fuppofition  the  angle  ACB  is  equall  lento  the 
angle  DEC ,  therefore  againe  ( by  the  28.  of  the firft)the  line  AC  is  aparaUeU 
lento  the  line  F  E.  Wherefore  F  ADC  is  a  parallelogramme .  Wherfore  the  fide 
E  A  is  equall  lento  the  fide  D  C:  and  the  fide  A C lento  the  fide  F  D  (by  the  34. 
oft the  firfl) .  And  becaufie  lento  one  of the  fides  of the  triangle  BFE ,  namely, to 
EE  is  drawen  a  parallel l  line  AC ,  therefore  as  BA  is  to  A  E,fois  BC  to  CE 
(by  the  2 .  of the fixt) .  But  AEis  equall  lento  CD.  Wherfore  (by  the  luof the 
fift)  as  BA  is  to  C  D,fo  is  B  C  to  C  E,  which  are fides fubtended  lender  equall 
angles .  Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  16.  of  the fift)  as  A  B  is  toBC,fioisDC 
to  C  E.  Againe  forafinuch  as  C  D  is  a  paraded  lento  B  F,  therefore  againe  (  by 
the  2  .of the fixt)  as  BC  is  to  C  E,J'o  is  ED  to  DE.  But  F  D  is  equal!  lento 
AC-  Wherefore  as  Bfi  is  to  fE,fois  AQto  D E,  which  are  alj'o  fides  fub* 
tended  lender  equall  angles .  Wherfore  alternately  (by  the  16*  of the  fift  )as  B  fi 
is  to  fiJ,fo  is  fiE  to  E  D.  Wherfore  forafinuch  as  it  hath  bene  demonftrated, 
that  as  A  B  is  lento  B  fi,fois  D  fi  lento  fiE:  but  as  Bfi  is  lento  fi  A  ,  fib  is 
fiE  lento  ED :  it fijlioweth  of equali  tie  (by  the  22.  of the fift)  that  as  BA  is 
lento  A  fi/o  is  fi  D  lento  D  E.Wherfore  in  equiangle  triangles  ,y  fides  "Which 
include y  equad  angles  are proportionad :  andy  fides ' which  are  fubtended  lender 
the  equall  angles  are  of  like  propoytioniwhich  Was  required  to  be  demonftrated. 


Conjlrufthn 


Vtmonftr 

tion. 


This  is  the 
comterfeof 
the  former 
propofitton* 


CoHjlrnttion. 


Demonjlra* 

iion. 


SyTbe  Theorem .  The  5.  Tropojit'm . 


If  Wo  triangles  baue  their  Jtdes  proportionally  the  triangles 
are  eqtii  angle  %and  thofe  angles  in  the  are  e quail, vnder  which 
are Jubtended (ides  of  like  proportion . 

Vppofe  that  there  he  tm  triangles  ABCyty  ID  E  Flatting  their fides 
proportionally  A  B  is  to  B  CJo  let  D  E  he  to  E  E:&  as  B  C  is  to  A  C, 
fo  let  E  F  he  to  D  F :  and  moreover, as  'BA  is  to  A  C,fo  let  ED  he  to 
DF.1l  hen  1 fay  ghat  tl?e  triangle  .AB  C  is  equiangle  lento  the  triangle  DEF: 
and  thofe  angles  in  them  are  equall  Tender  fhich  are jubtended fdes  of  like  pro* 
portion, thatts,  the  angle  ABC  is  equall  Tmto  the  angle  D  E  F:  and  the  angle 
B  C  Alento  the  angle  EE  D:  and  moreover ,the  angle  B  AC  toy  angle  ED  F. 
Vpon  the  right  line  E  E,and  lento  the pointes  in  it  E  ts  F,defcribe(by  the  23. of 
the firft )  angles  equall  lento  the  angles  ABC  <ty  ACB,  lehich  let  heF  EG  and 
E  EG, namely,  let  the  angle  FE  G  he  equall  lento  the  angle  ABC,  and  let  the 
angle  EFG  he  equall  to  the  angle  ACB .  And  forafmuch  as  the  angles  y(BG 
and  JC!B  are  lejfe  then  two  right  angles  (by  the  17. of  the firft) :  therefore  alfo 
the  angles  F  EG  and  EFG  are  lejfe  then  two  right  angles .  Wherefore  (by  the 
s. petition  ofy firjl)y  right  lines  EG  iyEG  fhall  aty  length  concurre.  Let  the 
concurre  in  the poynt  G  .wherefore  EFG  is  a  triangle  .  Wherefore  the  angle 
remay ning  B  fit  C  is  equall  lento  the  angle  remay •  A 

ning  EGF  (bythefirfi  Corollary  of  the  32.  of  the 
fir  ft) .  Wherfore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangle  len* 
to  the  triangle  GEF .  Wherefore  in  the  triangles 
ABC  and  E  G  F  the fides,  lehich  include  the  equall 
angles  (  by  the  4.  of  the fixt)  are  proportionaU,and 
the fides  K>hicb  apefubt  ended  lender  the  equall  an • 
gles  are  of  like  proportion .  wherefore  as  (A  B  is  to 
BC,fois  GE  to  EE.  But  as  AB  is  toBC,jb  by 
fuppofition  is  D  E  to  EF.  wherefore  asD  E  is  to 
EF ,fo  is  GE  to  EF (by  the  1 1  .of the fift).  Where • 
fore  either  of  thefe  DE  and  EG  bane  to  EF  one 
and  the fame  proportion .  Wherefore(by  the  9.  of the 
fift )  D  E  is  equall  lento  E  G .  „ And  by  the  fame  rea* 
fon  alfo  D  F  is  equall  lento  F  G .  Flow  forafmuch  as 
DE  is  equall  to  EG  and  EF  is  common  lento  them  both,  therefore  thefe  two 
fides  DEtyE  F,are  equall  lento  thefe  two  fides  G  E  and  E  F,  andy  bafe  D  F 
is  equall  lento  the  bafe  EG .  Wherefore  the  angle  DEF  (by  the  8.  of  thefirft ) 
is  equall  lento  the  angle  GEF:  and  the  triangle  DEF  (by  the  4. of thefirft) 
is  equall  lento  the  triangle  GEF:  and  the  rejl  of the  angles  of  the  one  triangle 


cfSuclides  Blementes . 


1 19* 


are  e quail imto  the  rest  of  the  angles  of  the  other  triangle  the  one  toy  other  ,  im*. 
der  "Which  are fit h tended  e quail Jides .  Wherefore  the  angle  D  FE  is  equall  Ipn* 
to  the  angle  OF  E:  and  the  angle  EDF  Isnto  the  angle  EOF.  And  becaufe 
the  angle  FED  is  equall  lento  the  angle  GEF :  but  the  angle  GEF  is  equall 
ynto  the  angle  ABC:  therefore  the  angle  A B  C  is  alfo  equall  Wito  the  angle 
FED  .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  angle  „ ACE  is  equall  intoy  angle  D  F  E: 
and  moreouer  ,the  angle  IB  AC  Ipnto  the  angle  ED  F .  Wherefore  the  triangle 
ABC  is  equiangle  lento  the  triangle  DEF .  If  two  triangles  therefore  bane 
their fides  proportionally  he  triangles fhall  be  equiangle ,  isr  thofe  angles  in  them 
fhall  be  equal^  lender  "Which  are Jubtended fdes  of  like  proportion  :  'Which  "Was 
required  to  be  demonstrated. 

c&The  6.  Theoreme.  The  6.  Tropoftion. 

If  there  he  Wo  triangles  wherofthe  one  hath  one  angle  equal 1 
to  one  angle  of  the  other the  fides  including  the  equall  aw 
gles  he  proportion  all :  the  triangles  fhall  he  equiangle ,  and 
thofe  angles  in  them  fall  be  equall \  lender  which  are  fubtew 
ded fides  of  like proportion. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  two  triangles  A  B  C,  and  DEF,  'Which  let  haue 
the  angle  B  AC  of the  one  triangle  equall  Ipnto  the  angle  ED  F  of  the 
-  other  triangle ,  and  let  the fdes  including  the  equall  angles  be  proportion 
Kail,  that  is,  as  BA  is  to  A  C,fo  let  E  D  be  to  D  F.  Then  I Jay, that  j  triangle 
ABC  is  equiangle  Ipnto  the  triangle  D  E  F:  and  the  angle  ABC  is  equall  Ipn* 
tot  he  angle  DEF ,  and  the  angle  A  CB  equall  Ipnto  the  angle  DF  E, 1 which 
angles  are finite  ded  to fides  of  like  pro* 
portion .  Vnto  the  right  line  D  F,  and 
to  the  poynt  in  it  D  (  by  the  23.  of  the 
first)  defcribe  ''unto  either  of  y  angles 
B  AC  and  ED F, an  equall  angle 
FDG .  And  Ipnto  the  right  line  D  F, 
and  Ipnto  the  point  in  it  F  (byy  fame) 
defcribe  Ipnto  y  angle  AC  Ban  equall 
angle  DFG .  .And forafmuch  as  the 
two  angles  B  AC  and  AC  B, are  (by 
the  n.  of  the firft )  leffe  then  two  right 
angles :  therefore  alfo  the  two  angles 
FD  G  and  DFG,  are  leffe  then 
two  right  angles  Wherforey  lines  D  Gl?  F  G  being  produced, fhall  cocurre  (by 
the  s. petition ) .  Let  the  concurre  in  the  point  G.  Wherefore  D  EG  is  a  triangle. 

Oof  Wherefore 


B 


ConftruUkn* 


s7befixthcBooJte 

Wherefore  the  angk  remaining  A  B  Cis  equall  lento  the  angle  remaining 
(by  the  3  a.  of the firfi ) .  Wherefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  equiangle  lento  the  tri¬ 
angle  DGF .  Wherefore  as  B  A  is  in  proportion  to  A  C,  jo  is  GD  to  DF(by 
the  4.  of thejixt) .  But  it  is fuppofed ,  that  as  BA  is  to  A  C,fo  is  ED  to  DF. 
Wherefore  ( by  the  11.  of  the fift)  as  E  D  is  to  D  F,fo  is  GD  toDF.  Where* 
fore  (by  the  9. of  the fift )  E  D  is  equall  lento  D  G .  And  DF  is  common  Tmto 
them  both .  Flow  then  tl>ere  are  two  a 

Jides  ED  and  DF  equall  lento  two 
fides  GD  and  DF:  and  the  angle 

E  D  F  (by  fuppofition )  is  equall  lento  Q 

the  angle  GD  F.  Wherefore  (  by  the 
4.  of  the firfi ) the  bafe  EF is  equall 
lento  the  bafe  GF,and  the  triangle 
DEF  is  (by  the fame )  equall  lento 
the  triangle  GDF ,  and  the  other  an* 
gles  remay nmg  in  them  are  equall  the 
one  to  the  other,  lender  lehich  are  fib * 
tended  equall  fides.  Wherefore  the  an* 
gle  DFG  is  equall  lento  the  angle 
DFE:  and  the  angle  DGF  lento  the  angle  DEF.  But  the  angle  DFG  is 
( by  confiruBion )  equall  lent  oy  angle  AC  B .  And  the  angle  D  G  F  is  as  it  hath 
bene  proued,  equall  toy  angle  A  B  C.Wherfore  alfoy  angle  AC  Bis  equalfynto 
the  angle  D  FE  *  Andy  angle  AB  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  D  E  F.  But  by  fip • 
pofition  the  angle  B  AC  is  equall  lento  the  angle  EDF.  Wherefore  thetri* 
angle  ABC  is  equiangle  lento  the  triangle  DEF.  If  therefore  there  be 
mo  triangles,  thereof  the  one  hath  one  angle  equall  to  one  angle  of the  other , 
and  if alfi  the  fides  including  the  equall  angles  be  proportionaU:  then  (hall  the 
triangles  alfo  be  equiangle,  and  thofe  angles  in  them Jhalbe  equall, lander  lohich 
are fubt ended fides  of like  proportion:  nhtch  leas  required  to  be  proued. 


h+fl  he  yfTheoreme .  The  7.  Tropofition . 

ff there  be  two  triagles,wherofthe  one  hath  one  angle  equal 
to  one  angle  of  the  other, and  the fides  which  include  the  other 
angles, be  proportionaU,  and  if  either  of  the  other  angles  re~ 
mayningbe  either  lefie  or  not  lejje  then  a  right  angleithe  (hal 
the  triangles  be  equiangle,  and  thofe  angles  inthemfhaU  be 
equaU, which  are  contayned  lender  the  fides  proportionaU . 

Suppofi 


ofSttclides  Ekmenteu 


FoLi6ot 


Vppofelhat  there  be  two  triangles  A3  C  and  DEF,  Tohicb  let  hade 
one  angle  of  the  one  squall  to  one  angle  of the  other, namely ,  the  angle 
F  AC  equall lento  the  angle  E  D  F.  And  let  the fides  lehich  include 
the  other  angles,  namely ,  the  angles  A  ©  C  and  D  E  Fbe  proportion 
nail, fo  that  as  AFis  to  ©  C,fo  let  ID  E  he  to  E  F.  And  let  the  other  angles  re* 
mayning,  namely,  A  CD  and  DFE  be  frft  either  of them  lejfe  then  a  right 
angle  A hen  I fay  that  the  triangle  A  ©  C  is  equiangle  ^nto  the  triangle  D  E  F. 
And  that  the  angle  AFC  is  equalllmtothe  an* 
gle  D  E  F , namely ,the  angles  nohich  are  contai* 
he  dander  the  fides  proportional l,  and  that  the 
angle  remayning, namely  fi  angle  C  is  equall lan* 
to  the  angle  remayning, namely ,toy  angle  F. For 
fir  si  the  angle  AFC  is  either  equall  to  the  an* 
gle  D  E  F,or  els  lone  quail.  If  the  angle  AFC  be 
equall  to  the  angle  D  E  F/beh  the  angle  remain 
ning, namely , A  C F,  JhaUbe  equall  to  the  angle 


E 


remay mng  D  F  E  (by  the  corollary  of  the  32.  of  5 
thefirfl )  And  therfore  the  triangles  AFC  and  DEF  are  equiangle.  Fut  if 
the  angle  AFC  be  Dnequall  Imto  the  angle  D  E  F , then  is  the  one  of themgrea 
tey  then  the  other. Let  the  angle  AFC  be  the greater  ,and  ynto  the  right  line  A 
Fond  lento  the  point  in  it  F(by  the  23.  of thefirfl)  defcribe  lento  the  angle  D 
E  F  an  equall  angle  AFG.  Andforafinuch  as  the  angle  A  is  equall  lento  the 
angle  D,  and  the  angle  AFG  is  equall  lento  the  angle  DEF,  therfore  the  am 
gle  remayning  AG  F  is  equall  lento  the  angle  remayning  DFE  (by  the  coroU 
lary  of  the  3  2. of  the firfl  Wherfore  the  triangle  AFG  is  equiangle  lento  the  tri* 
angle  D  E  F.  wherfore  (by  the  4.  of  the fixth)  as  the  fide  A  F  is  to  the  fide  F 
G, fo  is  the  fide  D  E  to  the fide  E  F.  Fut  by fupppofition  the  fide  D  E  is  to  the 
fideE  F ,as  t  he fide  A  F  is  to  the fide  F  C,  Wherfore  ( by  the  u.ofi the  fifth)  as 
the fide  AF  is  to  the  fide  F  C fo  is  the  fame  fide  A  F  to  the  fide  FG .  TVher > 
fore  AF  hath  to  either  ofthefe  F  C  andFG  one  and  the fame  proportion ,  and 
therfore  ( by  the  9.  of the  fifth  )FC  is  equall  lento  F  G.  Wherefore  (by  the  s.  of 
thefirfl )y  angle  F  G  C  is  equall  lento y  angle  F  CG:  but  by feuppofitiony  angle 
F  C  G  is  kjfe  then  a.  right  angle.  Wherfore  the  angle  FGCis  alfo  lefie  then  a 
right  angle. Wherfore  (by  the  13. .of  the firfl )  the fide  angle  y>nto  it,  namely,  A 
G  F  is  greater  then  a  right  angle, and  it  is  already  prouedthat  the fame  angle  is 
equall  lento  the  angle  F.  Wherfore  the  angle  F  is  alfo  greater  then  a  right  angle . 
Fut  it  is fuppofed  to  be  lejfe  D vhich  is  abjurde.  Wherefore  the  angle  AFC  is  not 
Imequalhmto  the  angle  D  E  F  floherfore  it  is  equall  len  to  it.  And  the  angle  A 
is  equall  1m to  the  angle  D  byfuppofition.Wherjore  the  angle  remayning, name* 
lyfi,is  equall  lento  the  angle  remayning, namely, to  F (by  the  corollary  of  the  32 . 
of  the  firfl)  Wherfore  the  triangle  AFC  is  equiangle  Dnto  the  triangle  DEF. 

Fut  nowfuppofi  that  either  of the  angles  ACF  and  D  FE  be  not  leffe  then 
•  °- 


a  ripb 


The  fir  n  < 
part  if  this 
propcfition • 


Bemonjlra- 
tion  leading  ts 
an  impofobi* 
litie . 


7 he  ficond 
part  of  tbit 

proportions 


B  \  '  } 

4  right  a,ngle. That  is  Jet  either  of them  he  a  right  angle, or  either  of them  grea* 
ter  then  a  right  angle.  T hen  I  fay  againe  that  in  that  cafe  alfo  the  triangle  A  8 
C  isequiangle  Wnto  the  triangle  T  EF.  For  if  either  of  them  be  a  right  angle f 
forafmuch  as  all  right  angles  are  (by  the 4. petition)  equall  the  one  to  the  other , 
firaight  "Way  "Will  follow  the  intent  of  the  propofitioti.  Tut  if  either  of  them  be 
greater  then  a  right  angle, then  the  fame  order  of  conftruBion  that  "Was  before 
being  kept,  ~we  may  in  like fort  prone  that  the  fide  B  C  is  equall  Ivnto  the  fide  8 
G.  Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  BCG  is  equall  Wnto  the  angle  BGC.  'But  the  angle 
BCG  is  greater  then  a  right  angle.Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  BGC  is  greater  the 
a  right  angle. Wherfore  two  angles  of the  triangle  BGC  are  greater  then  two 
right  angle  siwhich  ( by  the  17.  of  the  fir. ft)  is  impoffible. Wherfore  the  angle  A  8 
C  is  not  ynequall  T^nto  the  angle  T  EF.  y Bid  therfore  is  it  equall:  but  the  angle 
A  is  equall  Ttnto  the  angle  T  (by fuppofition)  Wher¬ 
fore  the  angle  remayning, namely, C  is  equal Tmto  the 
angle  remayningyiamely ,to  F  (by  the  corollary  of  the 
32.  of the  fir  ft).  Wherfore  the  triangle  A  B  C  is  equi* 

.angle  3 Onto  the  triangle  1)  E  F.If  therefore  there  be 
two  triangles  "W herofthe  one  hath  one  angle  equall  to 
one  angle  of the  other  yin  d  the fides  "Which  include  the 3 
other  angle  be proportionall ,and  if either  of the  other 

angles  remaining  be  either  leffe  or  not  leffe  then  a  right  angle, the  triangle  fhall 
he  equiangle ,and  thofe  aigles  in  them  fhall  be  equall  "Which  are  contained  lender 
fides  proportional! :  "Which  "Was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  8  .Theorem? .  7  he  8 .  Tropofition * 


If  in  a  rectangle  triangle  be  drawn from  the  right  angle 
to  the  bafe  a  perpendicular  line,  the  perpendicular  line  fhall 
deuide  the  triangle  into  two  triangles  life  Tmto  the  whole ,and 
alfo  like  the  one  to  the  other. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  a  reft  angle  triangle  ABC,  "whofe  right  angle 
let  be  BAC:  and  ( by  the  12.  of the firfi) from  the  point  A  to  the  line 
B  C  let  there  be  drawen  a  perpendicular  line  AT),  "which  perpendi¬ 
cularline  let  deuide  the  "Whole  triangle  ABC  into  thefe  two  trian* 
„  gles  ABB)  and  JTC.  (  Note  that  this  perpendicular  line  AT,  drawen 
„  from  the  right  angle  to  the  bafe,  mu  ft  needes fall  "Within  the  triangle  AB  C,<up 
„  fo  deuide  the  triangle  into  two  triangles ..  Forifitfhould fall  "Without ,  then  pro* 
„  ducing  the  fide  B  C  Wnto  the  perpendicular  line, there  jhould  be  made  a  triangle, 
„  "whofe  outward  angle  being  an  acute  angle,  jhould  be  lefie  then  the  inward  and 
oppofite  angle " which  is  a  right  angle :  "Which  is  cotrary  to  the  16. of the  firfi.  Net* 


ofSuclides  Element  es. 


FoLidh 


.  tier  can  it fallypoh  any  of the jides  A  B  or  A  C:for  then  two  angles  of one  and 
the  fife  fame  triangle  Jhould  not  be  lejfe  then  two  right  angles yontr ary  to  the 
felfe  fame  17.  of  the  firft  .  Wherefore  it  f diet h Within  the  triangle  ABC  )s 
Then  l fay,  that  either  of  theft  triah*  g  "- 

gles  A  B  CD  and  A  CD  C,  are  like  Ion  to 
the  ‘Whole  triangle  ABC:  and  mote* 
oner, that  they  are  like  the  one  to  the  0* 
ther.  Firft  that  the  triangle  AB  D  is 
like  "onto  the  ‘Whole  triangle  ABC  is 
thus  proued.  Forafmuch  as  (by  the  4. 
petitionftbe  angle  B  Ads  e quail  'M*  B 
to  the  angle  A  CD  B,for  either  of  them 
is  a  right  angle .  And  in  the  two  triangles  ABC  and  ABB)  the  angle  Bis 
common  .Wherefore  the  angle  remayning, namely,  AC  B  is  (by  the  Corollary 
of  the  32.  of the firft  )equall  Unto  the  angle  remaining,, namely  pto  BAD .  wher <= 
fore  the  triangle,  ABC  is  sqm  angle  lento.  the  triangle  ABD .  Wherefore  the 
Jides  ‘Which  contains  the  squall  angles,  are  (  by  the  4-  of  the  Jixt ) proper tio  nali 
Wher  fore  as  the fide  (JB ‘Which fubtendethy  right  angle  of  the  triangle  A  D  (( 
is  Ipnto  the fide  BA  "Which  fubtendeth  the  right  angle  of  the  triangle  AB  D, 
fo  is  the  I amefide  A  D  'Which fubtendeth  the  angle  C  of  the  triangle  AB  C,  1 m« 
to  the fide  B  D  ‘Which fubtendethy  angle  BAD  of the  triangle  AB  D ,  ‘Which 
is  equall  Ion  to  the  angle  C:  and  moreotter ,  the  fide  A  C  lento  the fide  A  D  ‘which 
fubtendthe  angle  B  Common  to  both  the  triangles.  V/herfore  the  triangle  ABC 
is  like  lento  the  triangle  ABD  (by  the  1.  definition  of the  Jixt ) .  In  like  maner 
aljb  may  ~We prone ,  that  the  triangle  ADC  is  like  lento  the  triangle  ABC. 
For  the  right  angle  AD  C  is  equall  to  the' right  angle  B  A  Cyy  the  angle  at  the 
point  C  is  common  to  either  ojthoft  triangles .  Wherefore  the  angle  remqyning y 
namely, DA  C  is  squall  to  the  angle  remaining,  namely,  to  ABC(  hyy  Corolla * 
ry  of  the  3  2.  of the  firli) .  wherefore  the  triangles  ABC  &  A  DC  are  equian * 
gle .  And  therefore(  by  the  4.  of the 'Jixt)  the  Jides  ‘Which  are  about  the  equall  an* 
gles  are  proportional! .  Wherefore  as  in  the  triangle  A  BC  the fide  BC  is  to  the 
Jide  C  A,fo  in  the  triangle  AD  C  is  the  fide  AC  to  the  fide  DC:  and  againey 
asih  the  triangle  AB  C  the fide  C  A  is  to  the fide  A  Bffo  in  the  triangle  ADC 
is  the  fide  CD  to  the fide D  A .  And  more  oner, as  in  the  triangle  ABC  the fide 
C  B  is  to  the fide  B  A,fo  in  the  triangle  A  D  (fits  the  fide  QA.  to  the fide  AD. 
Wherefore  the  triangle  A  D  ft  is  like  lento  the  "whole  triangle  AB  ft.Wh  erfore 
either  oftheje  triangles  A  B  DyyAD  ft  is  like  hntoj  ‘Whole  triangle  ABC ; 

I fay  aljo,  that  the  triangles  ABD  and  A  D  (fare  like  the  one  to  the  other. 
For  forafmuch  as  the  right  angle  B  DA  is  equall  lentoy  right  angle  A  D  C(by 
the  4  petition)and  as  it  hath  already  bene  proued, the  angle  B  A  D  is  equall  fin * 
to  the  angle  ft:  therefore  the  angle  r emayning, namely ,  B  is  equally?! to  the  ait* 
gle  remaining,, namely ,t to  D  A  ft  (  by  the  Corollary  of the  3  2. of thefirftJW-her * 

Oo.iij.  fore 


55 


n 


Demooiinf* 

tkn. 


f 


VmftthUkn* 


Demon  ft r a- 
tistJ,  ; 


id  A  .  !The  fi%tb  Tdookf 

fire  the  triangle  ABDisequrngle  Twto  the  triangle  JP  C  .  Wherefore  ** 
the  fide -BP  lehich  in  the  triangle  AB  P fubtendeth  the  angle  $  AP  is  Irnip 
the  fide  p  A  'fyhkb  in  the  triangle  JD  £  fubtendeth  the  angle  C  ^hij  is  & 
quallynto  the  angle  BA  ID  Jo  is  the fide  A  p-vhichiny triangle  4$  D fib? 
tendeth  the  angle  Bfinto  the fide  D  C -fthicb  in  the  triangle  A D  C fubtendeth 
the  angle  D  AC  Tvhich  is  equall  Trnto  the  angle  B :  and  more  oner  Jo  is  the  fide 
B  A  lento  the  fide  A  C  yhicb fibtende  the  right  angle f,  Wherefore  the  triangle 
ABDis  like  lento  the  triangle  A(pC.  If  therefore  in  a  re&angle  triangle  be 
dramn  from  the  right  angle ynto  the  hafi  a  perpendicular  linejhe  perpendicu* 
lar  line  fi  all deuide  the  triangle  into  two  triangles  like  pntg  the  yhole  ?andalfi 
like  the  one  to  the  other :  which  Teas  required  to  fi  proved. 

i~&Corollarj. 


Merely  it  is  manifejljhatifin  a  reBangle  triangle  he  draw* 

en  from  the  right  angle  ynto  the  bafe  a perpendicular  Imejbe 

fame  line  drawen  is  a  meane  proportion  all  betwene  thefiBfi 

ons  of  the  bafe :  And  moreouerfietwene  the  whole  bafe  and  ei* 

thcr  of  the feBions ,  thefdeannext  to  the  fayd feBion  is  the 

meane  proportionall .  For  is  was  proued,  that  as  CD  is  to  D  A, fi 

is  D  jto  D B :  and horeouer  asCB is  tg B  A?fi is  BA  to  BP:  and 
finally )  asBCistgC  AJg  is  C  A  to  CD- 

The  i.  Trobleme.  The  p.  Tropojition, 


right  line  hemggenenjo  eutoffroitany  part  appointed. 


fs  JgpljpEf  the  right  line  geuen  be  4  B.  It  is  requi - 
red  that  from  the  fame  line  JB  be  cut  of 
'^ffatiypart  appointed  .  Suppofe  that  a  thyrd 
sfffifpart  be  appointed  to  be  cut  of. From y  point 
A  draw  a  right  line  A  C  making  "With  the 
line  A B  an  angle :  and  in  the  line  A  C  take  a  poynt  at 
all  aduentures ptyhich  let  he  D.And  beginning  at  P put 
yiitg  A  Djm  equall  lines  DE<y  FC  (by  tfi  2. of  the 
frit ).  And  dra  w  a  right  line  front  BtoC :  and  by  the 
pfint  D(  by  the  3  s.of the firjl)  draw  Imto  B  C  a  pa* 
railed  line  P  K  Now  forafmuch  as  ynito  one  of  j>  files 
of  the  triangle  A  B  C}namely}  y>ntoj> fide  B  C  is  draw* 
en  a parallell  line  Fp>  it fidow.eth  byj  2,0ft this  booke} 


« 


vfEticlidef  Eimmhts.  Fol.uSu 

that  as  CD  is  m  proportion  ImtoD  A,fi  is  B  FtoF  A.  But  ( by  conftruBion) 
C  D  is  double  to  D  A.  Wherefore y  line  Bf  is  alfo  double  to  the  line  F  A.wker* 
fore  the  line  B  His  treble  lento  the  line  A  F.  Wherfore  from  the  right  line  geuen 
J  B,  is  cut  of  a  third  part  appointed,  namely,  A  f  ;  yhicb  Teas  required  to  k 
done  i 

The  % .  Trobleme.  7 he  loCTrofo/ition. 

To  drnde  a  right  limgcw  not deuided,  Ukg Unto  a  rig ht  line 
geuen  heyng  dmided. 


JWppfi  that  the  right  line  geuen  not  deuided  he  A  B,  and  the  right  lyne 
3 geuen  being  deuided  Jet  beiAC.lt  is  required  to  deuidej  line  ABlehicb 
^  is  not  deuided  like  Ivnto  the  line  A  C noh'ich  is  deuided.  Suppofi  the  lyne 
AC  be  deuided  in  the  pointes  D  andE,&  let y  lines  AB.esr  ACfobe  put, that 
they  make  an  angle  at  all  aduentures,  and  draw  a  line  from  B  to  C,  and  by  the 
pointes  A)  arid  E  draw  Imto  the  line  BC  (by  the  31*  of  the  firfi)  two  parallel 
lines  D  F  and  E  G :  and  by  the  point  3)  l>nto 
the  line  AB(by  the fame )  draw  a  parallel  line 
ID  H  f  .Wherfore  either  of  thefe figures  EH 
and  FI  Bare  par allelogrammes. Wherfore  the 
line  D  H is  equall  imtothe  line  F &,and  the 
line  IF  If  is  equall ynto  the  line  G  B.jfad be* 
caufie  to  one  of  the  (ides  of  the  triangle  D  If 
Cjiamely,to  the fide  JfC  is  drawn  a  paral * 
lei  line  HE ,  therefore  the  line  CE  (by  the 
2.  of  the fixt)  is  in  proportion  lanta  the  line  E 
D  as  the  line  If  IF  is  to.  the  line  HD:  but 
the  line  f  H is  equall  lonto  the  UneB  G}  and 
the  line  HD  is  equal  Im  to  the  lined.  F.Wher 
fore  ( by  the  11.  of the  fift. )  as  C  E  is  Imto  E  Dfo  isBGto  G  F.Agayne  beast fe 
to  one  of  the fides  of  the  triangle  A  G  E, namely , to  GEis  drawn  a  parallel  lyne 
F  Dy  her  fore  the  line  ED  (by  the  2.  of the. fixth)  is  in  proportion  into  the  lyne 
D  Ays  the  line  G  F  is  to.  the  line  F  A.  Audit  is  already  proued  that  as  CEis  to 
E  Dfi  is  BGtoG  F.  Wherfore  as  C  E  is  to  E  D,fo  isBG  toGF,  and  as  E 
D  is  to  D  A  Jo  is  G  Fto  F  A.  Wherfore  the  right  line  geuen  not  deuided ,name 
Ijj  A  Bis  deuided  like  ¥nto  the  right  line  geuen  being  deuided,  lehich  is  AC: 
‘fyhich'fras  required  to  be  done. 

f  A  Corollary  out  of  Fluffates*. 

By  this  Proportion  we  ma^  d^uide  any  right  line  |?tjcfi,aceordyiag  thcpJTQ- 
’  ‘  ‘  Oodiii,  portion 


^  -  ’  # 

0-  ,  ■  "  A 


‘  ;  "A  } 

Dmonputr 

mm 


A  Corollary 
out  of 

Flufmu 


By  this  mi 
the  former 
proportion 
may  a  right 
iine  be  divi¬ 
ded  in  1 3  tv  hat 
partes  foeuer 
you  wtil* 


^mtionofany  pght  lyiies-gcuef!*  For  let  thole  righdynes  hauyng  proportion  be 
iqy'ned  together  dire&ly, that  they  may  make  all  one  right  lyne,  and  then  ioyne 
them  to  thelyne.gcuen  anglewife.  Andfoproceedeas  in  the  proportion,  where 
you  fee  that  the  right  linegeuen  A  B  is  deuided  into  the  right  lynes  A  F,  F  G  and 
G  B' which,  ha  ne  the  felfe  fame  proportion  that' the  right  lines  AD,  DE,  and 
EChaue. 

By  this  and  theformer  proportion  alio  may  a  right  line  geuen  he  eafily  deui¬ 
ded  into  what  partes  fo  eueryou  will  name.  As  ifyou  will  deuide  the  line  A  B  in¬ 
to  three  equali  partes,  let  the  lyneD  E  be  made  equal!  to  thelyne  AD,  and  the 
tyne  E  C  made  equali  to  the  fame  by  the  third  ofthe  frft.  And  then  vfing  the  felfe 
fame  manor  of  confrrudion  that  was  before:  thelyne  A  Bihall  be  deuided  into 
three  equali  partes.  And  fo  of  any  kyndc  ofpartes  whatfoeuef. 


oition . 


yyTbe  i.jpr 


mtb  them. 


two  mht  Lines  geuen.}  to. 


a  third  m  proportion 


ConttrHffion* 


’Demonjlra-'  , 
turn* 


Vppofethat  there  he  two  right  lines  geuen  B  A  and  A  C-Jtnd  let  them  he 
I  f  0  put  that  they  comprehend  an  angle  howfbeuer  it  he.  It  is  required  to 
*Jinde  lento  'BA  andlento-AC  a  third  line  in  proportion!!*  reduce y  lynes 
A  B  and  At  C  lento  the  point  es  ID  and  E.And  'Imto  the 
line  AC  (by  the  2.of  the  firfl)  put  an  equali  line  BDy  A 

and  draw  a  lyne  from  B  to  C.  And  by  the pointe  D  (by 
the  3 1. of  the frit)  drawlmto’  the  lyne  BC  a  parallel 
lyneD  Eylvhich  let  concurreyvith  the  line  AC  in  the 
foint.EAAow fomfmuch  as.  lento  one  ofthe Jides  of  the 
triangle  AD  E,  namely ,  to  D  Eis  drawne  a  parallel 
line  B  C :  therfore  as  AB  is  in  proportion  lento  B  D3 
fo(hy  the  2.  of the  fixt)  is  AC  lento  C  E.  But  the  lyne 
B  D  is  equal!  lento  the  line  A  C.  Wherfore  as  the  lyne 
A  B  is  to  the  line  A  C Jo  is  the  line  A  C  to  the  line  C  E. 

Wherfore  len  to  the  two  right  lines  geuen  A  B  and  AC 
is found  a  third  line  C  Em  proportio  yeith  them :  lehich 
npasrequiredtoAe  done. 

'  -*  ■  '  V  •  V  '  . 

;  f  Another  icay  after  Telitarius. 

,  Letthelines  A  Band  B  C  be  fetdireftly  in  fuch  fort  that  they  both  make  one  right 

An  other  it? iy  j{ne<  Then  fro  the  point  A  ered  the  lyne  A  D  makyng  with  the  lyue  A  B  an  angle  at  all 
after  Pema  aduentures.  And  put  the  lyne  A  D  equali  to  the  lyne  B  C.  And  draws  right  line  from 
0  to  B  which  produce  beyond  the  poynt  B  vnto  the  point  E.  ;And  by  thepoint  C  draw 
vnto  thelyne  D  A  a  parallel  lyne  C  E  concurring  with  the  lyne  DE  in  the  point  E.Theia 
Ifaythfttthg  line  C  E is  the  third  line  proportionall  witbthe  lines  A  B  and  B  C.Forfor 
•  *  i  '*•  '  afiuuch 


Fal.i6}, 


An  ctls> 
aftir 
I'elitattHSs 


qfSuchdes  Ekmentes* 

afmuch  as  by  the  i  y.  of  the  firth  the  angle  B  of  the 
triangle  A  B  D  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  of  the  tri-  » 

angle  C  B  E,and  by  the  29.  of  the  fame,  the  angle 
A  is  equall  to  the  angle  C,  and  the  angle  D  to  the 
angle  E :  therefore  by  the  4.  of  this  booke  A  B  is 
to  D  A, as  B  C  is  to  C  E»  Whcrforc  (by  the  r  1 .  of 
the  fifth)  A  B  is  to  B  C  as  B  C  is  to  C  E;  which  was 
required  to  be  done. 


f  jfn  other  Way  alfo  after  Telitarius, 

let  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  be  fo  ioyned  toge¬ 
ther,  that  they  may  make  a  right  angle,  namely,  A 
BC,  And  drawe  a  line  from  A  to  C,  and  from  the 
point Cdrawevnto the  line  AC  a  perpendicular 
CD  (by  the  1 1.  ofthefirft)  And  produce  thelyne 
C  D  till  it  concurre  with  the  line  A  B  produced  vn- 
to  thepointeD.  Then  I  fay  that  the  line  BD  is  a 
third  lyne  proportional!  with  the  lines  AB  and  B 
C :  which  thing  is  manifeft  by  the  corollary  of  the  8, of  this  booke* 

The  4..  T robleme.  The  iz.  Tftropofotiort* 

Unto  three  right  lines geuen  to finde  a  fourth  in  proportion 
wi  th  them . 


3  Vpp°fe  that  the  three  right  lines  geuen  he  jf,  (B,  C,  It  is  required  to 
finde  an  to  jI[B,C,a  fourth  line  in  proportioivith  them.Let  there  he 
taken  two  right  lines  G)  E&(DF  comprehending  an  angle  as  it [hall  ^JlruSkn, 

happen, namely [E  G)  E.Andfhy  the  2. of  the firH panto  the  line  A put 
an  equall  line  GE  G.And  an* 

to  the  line  <B(  by  the  fame ) 
put  an  equall  line  G  E.  And 
moreover,  antoj  line  C put 
an  equall  line  (DEI.  Then 
draw  a  line  fro  G  to  El.  And 
by  the poynt  E(hy  the  3  i.of 
the fir  ft)  draw  "Onto  the  line 
G  El  a  parallell  line  EE. 

Now forafmuch  as  an  to  one 
of  the  [ides  of  the  triangle 
IDEE,  namely ,  antoy fide 
E  Fis  drawen  a  parallell  line 
G  El:  therefore  (by  the  2. of 

thefixt)  as  the  line  G)  G  is  to  the  line  G  E,fo  is  the  line  D  H  to  the  line  U  F. 

! But 


Dmotijlnb 

sics. 


An  othtr 
Tf  ay  after 
Cmpane, 


Conjlrnttion. 


Vmtoflrt- 

ttfMi 


e 

b  1 

But  the  line  ©  G  is  equal!  Mo  the  line  A}and  the  line  G  E  is  equallMo  the 
line  By  and  the  line  ©  Hmo  the  line  C.Wherfore  as  the  line  A  is  Mo  the  line 
B} fo  is  the  line  C  lento  the  line  I IF .  Wherfore  lento  the  three  right  lines  geuen 
AfB3C}  is  found  a fourth  line  H  F  in  proportion  leith  them :  lehich  Teas  requi* 
red  to  he  done » 

ff  An  other  leay  after  Campane. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  three  right  lines  A  B,B  C,and  BiD.lt  is  required  to  adde  yn~ 
to  them  a  fourth  line  in  proportion  with  them.  Ioyne  A  B  the  firft,  with  B  D  the  third, 
in  fuch  fort  that  they  both  make  one  right  line,namely,A  D.  And  vpon  the  faid  lyne  A 
Bereft  from  the  point  B  the  fecond 
line  BC  making  an  angle  at  all  aduen- 
tures.  And  draw  a  line  from  A  to  C. 

Then  by  the  point  D  draw  the  lyne  D 
E  parallel  to  thclinc  A  C,  which  pro¬ 
duce  vntill  it  concurre  in  the  point  E, 
with  thelineCB  being  likewife  pro¬ 
duced  to  the  point  E.  Then  I  fay  that  A 
the  line  B  E  is  the  fourth  line  in  pro¬ 
portion  with  the  lines  AB,  B  C,  and 
B  D  :  fo  that  as  A  B  is  to  B  C,  fo  is  B 
D  to  B  E.  For  forafniuch  as  by  the  1 5 
and  29.  of  the  firft  the  two  triangles 
A  BC  and  DBE  areequiangle,therfore  (by  the  4,of.thi$  booke)  AB  is  to  B  C,  as  B  D 
is  to  B  E  .-which  was  required  to  be  done. 

l&Tbe  5.  Trobleme.  The  13.  Tropojition . 

Vnto  two  right  lines  geuen  3to finde  out  a  meane proportion  all* 

J  Vppofe  the  two  right  lines geuen  to  be  AB  and  BC  .It  is  required  be* 
twene  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  BC  to  finde  out  a  meane  line  proportion 
nail .  Let  the  lines  AB  and  BC  be  fo  ioyned  together  that  they 
both  make  one  right  line 3  namely 3A  C.  Andlpp - 
on  the  line  A  C  deferibe  a  femicircle  A  ID  C3and 
from  the  poynt  Braife  lop  Mo  the  line  AC  (by 
the  1 1. of  the  firjl)a  perpendicular  line  B  D3cut* 
ting  the  circumference  in  the  point  D :  and  draw 
a  line  from  A  to  D3  and  an  other  from  Dto  C. 

How  forafmuch  as  (  by  the  3 /.  of the  third )  the  A 
angle  in  the femicircle  ADC  is  a  right  angle , 
and for  that  in  the  re  cl  angle  triangle  JDC  is  drawen  from  the  right  angle 
Mo  the  bafe  a  perpendicular  line  D  B :  therefore  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  8.  of 
the fixt)  the  line  ©  Bis  a  meane  proportional  betwene  thefegmetes  of the  bafe 
A  B  <ur  B  C.Wherefore  betwene  the  two  right  lines geuen ,A  BtyBC?is found 
a  Mane  proportional!  ©  B :  lehich  leas  required  to  be  done. 

“  “'i,rQ» 


ofSuclides  Element es .  Fold 

fl  jiftropofition  added  by  { Velitarius * 

meant  pTOfatiorull  beynggeum,to fade  out  in  a  Unegeuen  the  two  extremes.  ffm  J  propofttk ® 
it  behoueth  that the  meant geuen  be  not  greater  then  the  halfe  of  the  lyne  geuen*  added  by  Pe~ 

Hums , 

Suppofe  that  the  meane  geuen  be  A 2? ,and  let  the  right  line  geuen  be  B  C.  It  is  re¬ 
quired  in  the  line  B  C  to  finde  out  two  extremes,betwene  which  A  B  Ihal  be  the  meane 
proportionall.  So  that  yet  the  lyne  A  B  be  not  greater  then  the  halfe  part  of  the  line  B 
C.  For  fo  could  it  not  be  a  meane. Ioyne  the  lines  AB  and  5  CTdire<Stly  infuch  fott,that 
they  both  make  one  right  line,  name  — ' — 

ly,  A  C.  Then  vppon  the  line  B  C  de-  D  Ey 

feribe  the  femicircle  B  E  C*And  from 
the  point  A  ere£t  rnto  the  Iyne  AC  a 
perpendicular  lin cAD:  which  lyne 
A  D  put  equal  vnto  the  line  AB.  And 
by  the  point  D  draw  vnto  the  line  A 
C%  parallel  line  lD  E,  which  vndoub- 
tedly  lhall  cither  cut  or  touch  the  fe* 
micircle,as  in  the  point  E,for  that  the  line  is  not  greater  then  the  femidiameter* 

Then  from  the  point  E  draw  vnto  the  line  B  Ca.  perpendicular  line  E  F  (by  the  i  a,  of 
thefint)  ThenlfaythatthelinejSCisfodeuidedinthepointFjthatthelyne  AB  is  a 
meane  proportionall  betwene  the  lines  BF  and  FC.  Which  thing  is  manifell  (by  the 
3  i  •  of  the  third)  &  corollary  of  the  8  .of  this  booke.  For  the  line  F  E  is  equal  to  the  line 
by  the  3  4.  ofthefirft,andfo  is  equall  to  the  line  ^4  2? :  then  if  we  draw  theryght 
lincs^fandCAjtherefliallbemadearedtangletriangle^jEC.Andfoby  the  fayd  co¬ 
rollary ,  the  line  B  F  lhall  be  to  the  lyne  F  £  (and  therfore  to  the  line  A B)  as  the  line  FE 
is  to  the  lyne  F  C :  which  was  required  to  be  done* 

Flullates  putteth  this  Propofition  added  by  Pelirarius  as  a  corollary  following 
of  this  13. propofition. 

The  9 .  T heoreme .  The  i^.Tropofition. 

fn  e  quail parattelogrammes  which  haue  one  angle  of  the  one 
e  quail  vnto  one  angle  of  the  other *  the fides  /hall  be  recipro - 
Callpumely^hofefides  which  contame  the  equal  angles.  And 
tfparallelogrammes  which  hauing  one  angle  of  the  one, equal 
vnto  one  angle  of  the  other ,  haue  alfo  their  fides  reciprocal, 
namely, t  bo/e  which  contayne  the  e quail  angles,  they Jhall  al¬ 
fo  be  equall. 

Vppofe  that  there  he  two  equall  ftarallelogrammes  A  ft  and  ft  C, batting 
[  the  angle  ft  of  the  one  equall  Tonto  the  angle  ft  of  the  other  .  And  let  the  T, 
lines  (D  'B  and  ft  E  be  jet  d'treHly  in fuel? fort  that  they  both  make  one  oftbupnpo- 
right  line  jiamely  JD  E.Jnd  then( by  the  14.0ft he firjl) Jhall  the  lines  Fft  and  AW** 

BG  hefofet  that  they fall  make  alfo  one  right  line,  namely,  G  F.  Then  I  fay , 
that  the  fides  of the  pdrallelogrammes  Jft  and  ft  C,  fthich  containe  the  equall 


"Dm&nStra- 
Sion  of  the 
vf the  fame. 


The  fecond 
pan  which  is 
the  Conner fe  oj 
the  fir  ft. 


i 

- 

*  t  i  1  '  . 

2>  & 

J  :  \  ", 

a 


angles,  are  reciprocally  proportional!:  tbai  ■  is, as  B  -Z)  is  toB  E Jo  is  GB  to1. B  F. 
Make  complete  the  parallelogramme  E  E  by producingthe  ftdes  AE  andCE, 
till  they  concurre  in  thepoynt  H.  ISLow  fiorafinuch  as  the  parallelogramnte  AB 
is  (byfuppofiiion )  e  quail  T? nto  the  parallelogramme  B  C  ,  and  there  is  a  certaihe 
other  parallelogramme  F.  E:.therfore(  by  the  7. of the fift)  as  the  parallelograme 
A B  is  to  the  parallelogramme  F EJo 
is  the  parallelogramme  BC  to  the  pa* 
tallelogramme  F  E.  (But  as  the  parade* 
logramme  A  'B  is  to  y  parallelogramme 
F  EJo  is  the fide  TB  to  the  fide  B  E 
(by  the firH  of  this  booke).And  (by  the 
fame )  as  the  parallelogramme  B  C  is  to 
the  parallelogramme  EEJb  is  the fide 
GB  to  the fide  B  F .  Wherefore  alfo(by 
,  the  1 1.  of the  fift)  as  the  fide  D  Bis  to 
the  fide  BE,  fo  is  the  fide  GB  to  the 

fide  B  F .  Wherefore  in  the parallelogrammes  A  B  and  B  C  the  fides  which  con* 
tame  the  equall  angles,  are  reciprokally  proportionall:  which  ^as  fir (l  required 
to  be  proued.  J  7  * 

But  now fuppofe  that  the  fides  about  the  equall  angles  be  reciprokally  propor* 
tionallfo  that  as  the fide  D  B  is  to  the fide  B  EJo  let  the fide  GBbeto  the fide 
f  B  F .  Then  I fay ,y the  parallelogramme  AB  is  equall  Tantoy  parallelogramme 
B  C.  For  for  that  as  the  fide  T>  Bis  to  the fide  B  EJo  is  the  fide  GB  to  the fide 
B  F:  but  as  the  fide  ID  B  is  to  the fide  B  E,fo(  by  the  1.  of the fixt)is  the  paralle * 
logramme  A B  to  the parallelogramme  FE:  and  as  the  fide  GB  is  to  the  fide 
BFJo  is  the  parallelogramme  BC  to  the  parallelogramme  FE.  Wherefore  aljo 
( by  the  u.of the  fft )  as  the  parallelogramme  A  B  is  to  the  paradelograme  F  E, 
fo  is  the  parallelogramme  BC  to  the fame  parallelogramme  F  E .  Wherefore  the 
parallelogramme  AB  is  equall  Ion  to  the  parallelogramme  BC(bythe  9. of  the 
fift ) .  Wherefore  in  equall  and  equiangle parallelogrammes  the  fides  which  con * 
taine  the  equall  angles  are  reciprokall:  and  if  in  equiangle  parallelogrammes  the 
fides  which  containe  the  equall  angles  be  reciprokall,  the  parallelogrammes  alfo 
J hall  be  equall :  which  Was  required  to  be  proued, . 

3V The  1  o .  'Theoreme.  The  15.  Tropoftion . 

In  equal  triangles  which  haue  one  angle  of  the  one  equall  vn* 
to  one  angle  of  the  other ,  thofe fides  are  reciprokfil, which  in~ 
elude  the  equall  angles  .  And  thofe  triagles  which  hauyng  one 
angle  of  the  one  equall  ynto  one  angle  of  the  other,  haue  alfo 

'  '  ‘  their 


Fohi6i* 


mentis . 


their  fide  s  which  include  the  equall  angles  reciprocal,  areal' 
Jo  equal! . 


J.  K  \ 


fpte?  Tjpofe  that  there  be  two  e  quail  triangles  A3C }and  A  0  E  having  one 
Wan£le  °fthe  one  equaHnto  one  angle  of the  other,  namely,  the  angle  3 
A  C  e quail  l)Hto  the  angle  0  A  E-  T hen  I  fay  that  in  thoje  triangles  A 
3  C  and  A  2)  Jfiiefides^cEindud&fqualanAuesyare  reciprokalke  propor* 
tionallfthat  is, as  the  fide  C  A  is  to  the fide  A0 }  Jo  is  the  fide  E  A  to  the  fide 
A  3.  For  let y  lines  C  A  and.  40  he fo  putj  they  both  make  directly  one  right 
line.  Andfioalfo  the  lines  EA  and  A  3 
jhal  both  make  one  right  line( by  the  1 4.  of 
thefirfi )  And  draw  a  line  froth  3  to  0. 

Flow  forafmuch  as  (by  Juppofition)  the 
triangle  A3  C  is  equall  lento  the  triangle 
A  0  E.  And  there  is  a  cettaine  other  trU 
angle  3A0,  lento  lahich  the  two  equall 
triangles  being  compared, it  K>ill  follow  by 
the  7.  of the  fifth,  that  as  the  triangle  A  3 
C  is  lento  the  triangle  3A0,fo  isy  tridn* 

gle  E  A  0  to  the jame  triangle  3  A  0. 3ut  as  the  triangle  A3C  is  to  the  tria * 
gle  3  A  0  Jo  by  the  1.  ofthefixth,  is  the  bafe  C  A  to  the  bafe  A  0 :  and  as  the 
triangle  E  A  0  is  to  the  triangle  3  A 0  Jo  (by  the  fame )  is  the  bafe  EAto  the 
bafe  A  3.  Jvherfore  ( by  the  11.  of the  fifth)  as  the  fide  C  A  is  to  the fide  A  0, 
fo  is  the fide  EAto  the fide  A  3.  Wherefore  in  the  triangles  A3  C  and  A0E 
the  fides  ’tohicb  include  the  equall  angles  are  reciprokally  proportional! 

3ut  now fuppofe  that  in  the  triangles  A3  C  and  A0E,  the fides  ipbicb  in * 
elude  the  equall  angles, be  reciprokally  proportionally  fo  that  as  the fide  CA  is  to 
the  fide  A  0  Jo  let  the  fide  E  A  be  to  the  fide  A3.T hen  1 fay  that  the  triangle 
A  3  C  is  equall l)nto  the  triangle  A0E.  For  agayne  draw  a  Imefrom  3  to  0 „ 
And for  that  as  the  line  C  A  is  to  the  line  A  0  Jo  is  the  line  EAto  the  line  A  3, 
but  as  the  line  C  A  is  to  the  line  A0Jo  is  the  triangle  A3  C  to  the  triangle  3 
A  0,and  as  the  line  E  A  is  to  the  line  A  3 fo  is  the  triangle  EA0  to.  the  tri* 
angle 3  A  0.Wherfore as  the  triangle  A3Cis  to  the  triangle 3  A0  fo  is  the 
triangle  EA0  to yfiame  triangle  3A0.  Wherfore  either  ofthefe  triangles  A3 
C andEA0  hatie  lonto y  triangle  3A0  one  andy felfe fame prcportion.Wher 
fore  ( by  the  9 .  of the  fifth )  the  triangle  A3C  is  equal  lonto  the  triangle  EA0. 
If ther fort  there  be  taken  equall  triangles  hauyng  one  angle  of the  one  equall>n* 
to  one  angle  of  the  other, thofe fides  in  them jhal  be  reciprokalgiohich  include  the 
equal  angles :and  thofe  triangles' K>hicb  having  one  angle  of  the  one  equall  1 mta 
one  angle  of  the  other, hauealfo  their  fides  Inch  mclude  the  equall  angles  red * 
prokaljhal  alfo  be  equall ;  -which  leas  required  to  be  proved. 

FpJu  The 


Thefirfi  part 

of  this  prop®* 
i dim , 


VemotiRns* 
non  of  tbs 
Jams. 


The  feemd 
part  Tvbicb  it 
the  comer fe 
of  thefirfi* 


Den. tonftra- 
tion  of  the 
fir  ft  part. 


1  he  fecmi 
part  which  h 
the  comerfe 
$f the  nr  ft. 


5-fc?  The  ii;  Theoreme*  The  16.  Tropofimn. 

If there  be four  e  right  lines  in  proportionjhe  reHangle  figure 
comprehended  Vnder  the  extremes :  is  e quail  to  the  r eQangle 
figure  contayned  vnder  the  meanes :  f find  if  the  reffangleft - 
gure  which  is  contained  vnder  the  extremes,  be  equaUvnto 
the  reBangle  figure  which  it  confined  vnder  the  meanes : 
then  are  thofiefoure  lines  in  proportion. 

Nppofethat  there  he  four  e  right  lines  inproportio, namely,  A  B,C  ID, 
E ,an  d  F :  fo  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  C  D,Jo  let  the  tine  E  be 
to  the  line  F .  7  hen  I  Jay, that  the  re  Pi  angle  figure  comprehended  Vny 
eler  the  extremes  A  rB  and  F,  is  equall  Vnto  the  rectangle  figure  con * 
tayned 'Snider  the  meanes  C  D  and  E .  From  the poynt  A  (  by  the  n.of  thefirft ) 
rape  Vp  Vnto  the  right  line  AB  a  perpendicular  line  A  G.  And  (  by  the  fame) 
from  the  point  C  Vnto  the  right  line  CD  raife  Vf  a  perpendicular  line  C  H.And 
( by  the  z.Oj f the fir ft) put  the  line  A  G  equall  Vnto  the  line  F,  and  put  aljoy  line 
C  H  equall  Vnto  the  line  E,  and  make  complete  the par allelogrammes  G  B  and 
HD.  Now  for  that  by fiuppofition  as  the  line  AB  is  to  the  line  CD  Jb  is  the 
line  E  to  the  hue  F.  But  the  line  E  is  equall  Vnto  the  line  C H,<w  the  lineF imp 
to  the  line  A  G ,  therefore  as  the  line  AB  is  to  the  line  C  D,Jb  is  the  line  C  H 
to  the  line  A  G .  Wherefore  in  the 
parallelogrdmes  B  G  and  D H the 
fides  which  include y  equall  angles, 
are  reciprokally  proportionall .  But 
equi angle  par  allelogrammes  whofie 
(i ides  which  include  the  equall  an* 
glcs,  are  reciprokall,  are  alfo  equall 
( by  the  14.of.tke fixt) .  Wherefore 
the  par allelogramme  BG  is  equall 
Vnto  the  paraffelogrdme  D  H.  But 
the  par  allelogramme  BG  is  that 
* Schick  is  contayned  'Vnder  the  lines 
A  B  and  F,  for  the  line  AG  is  put 
equall  Vnto  the  line  F.  And  the  par  allelogramme  D  H  is  that  which  is  contained 
'Vnder  the  lines  C  D  and  E, for  the  line  C  His  put  equall  Vnto  the  line  E.Wher* 
fore  the  reef  angle  figure  contained  Vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  F,  is  equall  Vnto  the 
re  ff angle  figure  contayned  Vnder  the  lines  C  D  and  E. 

But  now filppofe  that  the  reef  angle  figure  comprehended  Vnder  the  lines  A.  IS 
and  F,  be  equall  Vnto  the  reCfa?igle figure  coprehended  Vnder y  lines  CD  vr  F, 

Then 


1 

E> 

f 

1 

!*, 

1 

f 

. 

r 

,  ..'vis  v 

s 

,1 

C  *  3J 

A  C  E 

P 

0) 


Mementos* 


Fo!a66* 


the  lines G  (D-and  E  -ffikithai  fhkh'is  coutayned  lender  the  lines  A  3  and  F  is 
the paraMogrmitifiFB'-GyfoY'the  line  \A&  U  equallUnto  the  line  F  <  And  that 
alfo  finch  is  containedUnder  the  lines  CDiyEis  the  pantile  legramme  DFI, 
for  the  line  C  El  is  equal!  lento  the  line  E  *  Wherefoi'e-Fbe  '■"petfallelogramme'BO ' 
is  equal l  lento  the parallelogramme  ID  FI,  far  they  are  alfo  equiangle.  Butmpa* 
rallelogrammes  equall  <ts  equiangle  the files  finch  ineludethe  equa  il  angles  a  re 
reciprokall  (  hy  the  14*  of  the fiixt ) .  Wherfore  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  C  D, 
fo  is  the  line  C  H  to  the  line  A  G,  hut  the  lineC  FI  is  equal!  Unto  the  line  E,and 
the  line  A G  is  equall  Untoy  line  F Wherefore  as  the  hie  A  IB  is  to  the  line  C  D, 
fo  is  theiine  Eto  the  line  F .If therefore  there  he fonte right  lines  in  proportion  , 
the  rectangle figure  comprehended  lender  the  extremes, is  equall  to  the  reSlangle 
figure  contaynedUnder  the  meanes .  And  if  the  reFlangle figure  fhich is  contain 
ned  louder  the  extremes, he  equall  Unto  the  re& angle  figure  which  is  contained 
Under  the  meanes  ^ihenarethofefoure  linesin  proportion ;  fhich  fas  reqi 
to 


m' V  U 


The  n.Theoreme,  The  17.  Trofiojition. 

'•>  V  Y  •  1  ’•  \  T:  ;V;  V,  V  -  .  \  '  .  *'•  >  ’•  "  .  - 


com  fir F 


YA\  : 


ypt  lines in  proportion, the  rectangle  figure 
x  re  extremes  fis  e quail  vnto  the  [quare 
meane*<iAndifthe  redeangle  figure  which 
lento  the f quare  made  of  the 


aretm/e 


n 


Theorem « 


fntane L 

.u; 

ifVppofi  that  there-  be  three  lines  in  proportion  d[B,C, fo  that  as  A  is  to 
Y\fib,f°  let  B  he  to  C.  T  hen  I fay  that  the  re  cl  angle  figure  comprehended 
^  Under y  lines  A  and.  C  is  equall  Unto y f quare  made  of the  line  3.  Vnto  The  fir  ft 
the  line  B  (hy  the  2.  of  the  F  -  v  ■  •vn?4-.  v  :  - jP  pynoftha 

fixfi)  put  an  equall  line fiD. 

An  d  hecaufe  hyfuppofition), 
as  A  is  to  3  fib  is  B  to  Cfhut 
B  is  equall  Un  to  (D,  fherpg 
fore  ( by  tie  7.  ofthefiftlfas 
yijs  to  BfoisJD  to  C,hut  if  ., 
there  be  joure  right  lines  pro 
portionall,  the  reStatigle  fi¬ 
gure  comprehended  Under 


sw- 


K\ 


A 

5  v3? 


'■y 

T* 


pxsvA. 

t 

) 

\  h  t\  1  * 


v. 

\  ^ 

B  *  ■'  ■ 

t  \  i  ,  « 

JL. _ ■'  .  1 ’ 

«■  -••  •> 

••  \ 

uT, 

V.v  V\ 

A  B  I>  C 


A 


Tf-H- 


the 


the  extremes  is  equall  lanto  the  rectangle  figure  comprehended  lander  the  meaner 
(by  the  i6.of the  Jixt).Wherfore  that  -Which  is  contained  lander  the  lines  A and 
C  is  equal!  lanto  that  -which  is  comprehended  lander  the  lines  B  and  ID.  ‘But  that 
-which  is  contained  lander  the  lines  Band  D,is  the fquare  of the  line  B>  for  the 
line  B  is  equall  lanto  the  line  D.  Wherfore  the  re  Siangle  figure  com preheded lan * 
dejr  the  lines  A  and  C  is  equall  lanto  fiae fquare  made  of  the  lyne  B. 

Thefscond  ^ut  nmv fuPP°fe  ^?at  ^?at 

fart  which  is  "Which  is  comprehended  lan*  ( 

der  the  lines  Aisr  C  be  equal 
lanto  the  fquare  made  of  the 
line  B.  Then  alfo  I fay,  that 
as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  B, 
fo  is  the  line  B  to  the  lyne  C. 

T he fame  order  of  confiru * 

Siion  that  1 vas  before ,  beyng 
kept,  forafmuch  asy  -which 
is  contained  lander  the  lynes  A 


B  DC 


A  Cotofliiry. 


A  and  C  is  equall  lanto  the fquare  -Which  is  made  of the  line  B .  But  the  fquare 
“Which  is  made  of  the  line  B  is  that  T! vhich  is  contained landery  lines  B  &  ID,  for 
the  line  B  is  put  equall  lanto  the  line  D.  Wherefore  that  -which  is  contayned  In* 
der  the  lines  A  and  C  is  equall  Into  that -which  is  contayaied  lander  the  lines  B 
and  D.  But  if  the  reSlangle figure  comprehended  lander  the  extremes, be  equal! 
lanto  the  reSlangle figure  comprehended  lander  the  meane  lynes ,  the  foure  right 
lines Jball  be  proportionality  the  1 6.  of the Jixth)  Wherfore as  the  line  A  is  to 
the  line  B  Jo  is  the  line  ZD  to  the  line  C.But  the  line  B  is  equall  lanto  the  lyne  ID. 
Wherfore  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  lyne  B Jo  is  B  to  the  line  C.  If  therefore  there  be 
three  right  lynes  in  proportion, the  reSlangle  figure  comprehended  lander  thelex* 
tr ernes, is  equall  lanto  the  fquare  that  is  made  of  the  meane.  And  if  the  reSiangle 
figure  * which  is  contayned  lander  the  extremes, be  equall  Into  the fquare  made  of 
the  meane,  then  are  thofe  three  right  lines  proportional :  -which  * Was  required  to 
be  deanonf rated. 

jr  Corollary  added  by  Vluffates. 

Hereby  we  gather  that  euery  right  lyne  is  a  meane proportionall betwene  euery  two  right 
lines  which  make  a  rettangle figure  equall  to  the fquare  of  the fame  right  lyne. 

The  6,  TProblerne.  Tfhe  18.  Tropojttion^ 

Upon  a  right  linegeuenjo  deferibe  a  reUiline figure  like^and 
in  like  fort  fituate  Into  a  reUiline figure geuen . 

Suppofe 


ofSuclides  Ehmntes.  Fol.xSy* 

:  Vppofe  that  the  right  line geuen  he  A  E,  and  let  the  readme  figure ge* 
’  uen  he  EG.  It  is  required  Erppn  the  right  line  geuen  A  E  to  defer ibe  a 
'  reEtiline figure  like,  and  in  like  fort  fituate  Tmt  o  the  re Sliline  figure ge* 
uen  G  E .  Drawe  a  line from  H  to  E,  and  Imto  the  right  line  A  E  and  toy  point 
in  it  A,  make  Urn  to  the  angle  E  an  equall  angle  D  A  E(by  the  2  3.  of the  fir  Id) 
and  imto  the  right  line  A  E  and  finto  the  point  in  it  E(by  the fame )  make  Jnito 
the  angle  EE  H  an  eqtiall  angle  A  E  D.Whereforey  angle  remaining  E  HE 
is  eqUalhpnto  the  angle  remayriing  ADE  .fEherefore  the  triangle  HE  F  is 
equiangle  Imto  the  triangle  DAE » Wherefore  fytlk.j.of  thefixt)  as  the fide 

-  LmJ  La  ‘  **  ^ 


to 


to 


01s 


ide 
ide 

fide  D  A,  and y  fide 
EE  to  the fide  A  E. 

Againe  (by  the  23 ,  of 
the  firU  )  pnto  the 
right  line  E  D  and 
Tmtoy  point,  in  it  ID, 
make  into  the  angle 

O,  -  ,  :  ■  x  -  •  ;  _v.-;  ^  .  ,  ■  .  ^ 

E  HG  an  e quail  an* 

gle  EDC  ,  and f by  the fame)  Imto  the  right  line  E  D  and  Vnto  the  point  in  it 
E,  make  ynto  the  .angle  H  E  G  an  equal l  angle  D  E  C.  Wherefore  the  angle 
remayning, namely,  G ,  is equally nto  the  angle  remayningfiamely ,to  C.Where* 
fot&tbetriajigk' HE& itefoiangk-  Itnto  the  triangle  D  EC .  Wkereforelhj 
Elk  4.  oftfkfixjtfds the fide  El  E  is  in  proportion  to  the fideD  EAoisthefidp 
EEGto  tbfjidirD  E,  anddjk  fideG  F  to  the  fide  CE.  And  it  is  already  proued 
thAds  HE  is  to' DE,fo  is  HE  to  D  A, and E Eto  AE(  WhereforeChythet 
j  1.  of  the fifit )as  E  H  is  toJD,fo  is  E  Eto  AEfndHG  toD  C,  andmore* 


v  is  ■  r  "  -  x  EfvE-J'  -tv-yore  it?c 

rivhole  angle E  HG  is  equalhmto  the  iehole  dhgleADC,  and  by  the fame  rea* 
foriHWdhgle  E  EG  is  equall  Jnito  the  angle  AE  Cg  Eut  (byconflruhfwn)  tht 
angle  E  is  equall  Enrto  the  angle  A, and  the  angle  tr  is  proued  equall Irnto  the  an* 
gleC .  Wherefore  the  figure  A  C  is  .equiangle  Emto  the  figure  EG,  andthofe 
fides  ^hich  in  it  include  the  eqitdtt angles  arefiroportioriall,  as  *He  haue  before 
proued.  Wherefore  the  r e  If i  line  figure  4  C  is  (by  the  fir  ft  definition  of the fixt) 
dik^nto  the  reiElike  figure  foueix  E  G .  Wherefore  ppon  the  right  line geuen 
"4$ds defg^kdm^dmefigttk'4 0  like gsrinWfortfihateiimt&th^e^E 


& 


The  fy^riieQfemef 

,  \  ...  f  \  e\_\  “  \  !£-.  .  v  :  •>  t-  V\. o  ^  y  c\/t  •e  A.  ■ 

\A  vJu-  vt  w  v 

.I  (5  Tp.tij. 


Defcriptlon  of 
the  red iline 
figure  nqui* 
red. 


Demhfir** 

tioo. 


-a 


Demnftra- 

Sion. 


.  a  ;vs 


A  ConUary. 


A^etnan^ 
the fides  of l)  he  proportion  are. 


roportion 


VppoJ'e  the  triangles  like  tobe^AB  C and DEE>  hatting  the  angle 
B  of  the  one  triangle yequal  Vnto  the  angle  E  of the  other  triangle 
as  A  B  is  to  B  C Jo  let  ID  E  be  to  E  E Jo  that  let B  Gear  EE  be fides 
of like  proportion.Ehen  Ifaj  that  the  proportion  of  the  triangle  A  B 
CVnto  the  triangle  DEE  is  double  to  the  proportion  of the  fide  B  C  to  the  fide 
EE.  Vnto  the  two  lines  B  Cand  EE  (by  the  io.of the fixth)  make  a  third  lyne 
in  proportion  BGfo  that  asBCis  to  E  FJo  let  EE  be  to  BGjmd  draw  a  lyne 
from  J  to  G.Kow  forafmuch  as  A  B  is  to  B  C,as  D  E  is  to  E  Fjberf ore  alter* 
natelj(bj  the  i6.of  the fifth )as  AB  is  to  D  EIo  is  BC  to  U  E  But  as  B  C  is 
to  E  Ffo  is  EE  to  B  Gather  fore  alfiofby  the  A 
1 1. of  the fifth)  as  A  B  is  to  D  EJo  is  EE  to 
B  G.  Wherfore  the  fides  of  the  triangles  A  B 
GisrDE  F /which  include )  equal  angles  are 
reciprokatly  proportional!.  But  if  in  triangles 
hauing  one  angle  of  the  one  equal!  to  one  angle 
of)  other ,  the fides  "which  include)  equal!  an* 


fballbeiue  to  tbelhird  double  proportion  that  it  hath  to  thejeconf(hy  the  to.  ^ 
frnition  of  the  fifth)  therfore  the  lint  BC  hath  lento  the  line  fG  double  propore 
ft  on  that  it  hath  to  the  line  E  f  But  as  BC  is  toB  GJo  (by  the  1.  of  the fixtf) 
is  the  triangle  A  B  C  to  the  triangle  A B  G Wherfore  thetiangk.  ABCis.  Vn& 
fht  triangle AB  G  in  double  proportion  that  the  fide  B  C  is  to  thefidtEEBut 
the  triangle  AB  G  is  equal!  to  the  triangle  B)  E  E. Wherfore  alfo  the  triangle  A 
B  if  is  Vnto  the  triangle  DEE  in  double  proportion  that the fide B  C  is  to  the 
fide  E  F Wherfore  Ij/ke  triangles  are  one  to  the  other  in  double  proportion  that 
the  fides  of  hike  proportion  are:  "Which  "Was  required  to  beproued. 

^ -*  *  J  ’■  "  '  r 

^  .  .  v.  „  1  v.  ,  -  ^  '.v  ,  . . v- 


y'.A  OiW 


Corollary. 


\  y  w 

,v.v hrd 

■s\  %'Vl 


J 

'  : ,  * 
es\ii\ 

'•'V. 


Hereof  iff  manifefl  that  if  there  be  three  right  lines  in  pro* 
portion, as  thefrfiisto  the  third fo  is  the  triangle  defer ibid 
Vpon  the  firjl junto  the  triangle  defcriled  vpon  the  fecond^  fo 
that  the  fay  d  triangles  he  lifyand  in  lyhp  Jortdefcribed,  for 
ithath  hneproued  that  as  the  lyne  CB  is  to  ibeline  B  (j,Jo 

*V-.  '  *J-  **>  -•  ••  • 


IS 


IS. 


erites.  FoIaGS. 

the  triangle  AB  C to  the  triangle  ©  EF:  which  was  re* 


5^  The  14.,  Fheoreme .  The  26.  Fropofitm. 

Likp  Foligonon  figures,  are  deuided into  like  triangles  arid 
equallin  whole,  <tAnd 

the  one  Toligonon  figure  is  to  the  other  Foligonon  figurcm 
double  proportion  that  one  of  the (ides  of  like  proportion  is  to 
GneoftkefidesQflil^propQ 


'jj^Fppofey  the  like  Poligonon figures  be  JFB  C  i>  E,&  FGH fif, 
bauing  the  angle  at  the  point  F  equall  to  the  angle  at  the  point  A?and 
the  angle  at  the  point  G  equalled  the  angle  at  tile  point  B?and  the  an? 
gle  at  the  point  FI  equall  toy  angle  at  the  point  C:  and  Jo  of  the  ref 
And  moreouer,  as  the fide  yFB  is  to  the  fide  B  C } fo  let  the fide  FG  be  to  the 
fide  G  H  y  and  as  the  fide  B  C  is  to  the  fide  CDyfb  let  the  fide  G  H  be  to  the 
fide  Hl\jandfo forth .  And  let  the  fides  A  Bfy  FGbefides  of  like proportion. 

Then  I  -  ■  -  .4  '  ■  :  '  1  '  ^  ;  .  ; 

F 


K  G 


that  theje  , 

Boligonbn 
figures-  - 
JBCD* 

E  &FG* 

HKL, 

are  deui * 

Jed  into 
like  trian 


The  firfl 

ptntftkti 

Tbemmta 


gles  and  equall  in  ?wmber .  For  draw  thefie  right  lines yji  C?A  DfF  H,<&  Ffii 
And for  aj much  as(  by fuppofition, that  isybj  reafon  the  figure  yFB  ODE  is  like 
ynto  the  figure  FGHlfiL  )  the  angle  B  is  equall  Tonto  the  angle  G  y  and  as 
the  fide  A  B  is  to  the  fide  B  C}  fo  is  the  fide  FG  to  the  fide  G  itfclloweth 
that  the  two  triangles  AB  Cand  FG  Fl-haue  one  angle  of  the  one  equdll  to  one 
angle  of  the  other ,  and  htiuealfo  the  files  about  the  equall  angles  proportionally 
WlterFfortfbj  the  tofihefixt )  the  triangle  A  B  C is  eqmangle  T?nto  the  triatfr 


1 The  fecond 
fart  demon* 
grated. 

V\ 

>  V  -  **■  ^ 


tended  lender  -, the  equall  angles  are  of  like  proportion.Wherfore  as  AC  is  to  E  C> 
foisFH #  OH.  But  byfiippofitibn  as  EC  is  to  C D,fi  is  GH  to  HI £ 
Wherefore  ofequalitie  (  hythe  zz.of  the  fift)as  AC  is  to  CD  Jo  is  V  H  to 
HJf.  Andforafmuch as  by fuppofition  the  "Whole  angle  BOD  is  equall  to  the 
Ip  hole  angle  G  HKfigand  it  is  prone d  that  the  angle  E  C  A  is  equall  to  the  an* 
gle  G  HF :  therefore  the  angle  remayning  AC  A)  is  equall  to  the  angle  remay * 
nitig  FH  JfJAy  tfe  3.  common fentence  ).  Wherefore  the  triangles  ACID, 
and  FHlf,  Fane  againe  one  angle  of the  one  equall  to  one  angle  of  the  other, 
and  the  fide  s  -which  are  about  the  equall fides  are  proportionall.  Wherefore  (  by 
thefamefixt  of  this  booke  )the  triangles  AC  D'fifi  F  H  are  equi atigle.  And 

(by  the  4. of  this  booke  )the fides  "which  are  about  the  equall  angles  are  proportion 
nail .  And  by  t  he  fame  reafon  may  •we  prone  that  the  triangle  A  IDE  isequian* 
gle  Jmto  the  triangle  F  EjL .  And  that  the  fides  "which  are  about  the  equall  an* 
gles  are  proportionall.  Wherefore  the  triangle  A  EC  is  like  to }  triangle  FG  H, 
and  the  triangle  A  C  D  to  the  triangle F  Fl If,  and  alfo  the  triangle  AD  E  to 
'thetrifgleF  Iff  ( bythefirftdefin Wherfore  the  Bp * 
ligonon figures  geuen  AE  C D  Ej  andFG  H K^E,  are  deuided into  triangles 
'likeagepalljunitmher.  '  .  ■ .  ...  .  . 

laymomupr,  that  the  triangles  are  the  one  to  the  other  find  to  the  "Whole 
iMn  figures  proportionall :  that  is,  as  the  triangle  A  EC  is  to  the  triangle 
W  Hffi}& th&hmngle  A  C  Dtoihe  iriadgle  F HFf,  and'y  'triangle.  A  D  $ 
to  the  triangle  F  IfE:  and  as  the  triangle  A  EC  is  to  the  triangle  F  GH,fiois 
the  Baligonon  figure  A E  CDEto  the  Boligonon figure  FGH  f\E .  For  for* 
ajmuch  as  t  he  triangle  ABC  is  like  to  the  triangle  F  G  H,  and  AC  and  F  H 

ary  fides  of  like  proportion ,  therfore  the  proportion  of  the  triangle  A  E  C,  to  the 
triayigle  \  ^  ah ■ 

FGH  h 
double  to 
the  prb. 
portion  of 
the  fide  1 
Affio  the  - 


thetritifigle  AcD far he  triangle  F Hfif.  Againe,  forafmuch  as  the  triangle 
ACfbislike  to  the  triangle  F  HJf,and  fie  fides  ADgy  Ffi  are  ofUkegro* 
poffionr  fierfore  fie  proportion  of the  irimgle  A  CD  to  the  triangle  FFffii 

•  is  double 


X 


of  Emilies  Elementes.  FoL  1 6p . 

is  double  to  the  proportion  of the  fide  A  D  to  the fide  F  If  (by  the forefay  dip. of 
the  fixt ) .  And  by  the  fame  reafint  the  proportion  of  the  triangle  A  D  Etoy  trio- 
angle  F  tfE,  is  double  to  the  proportion  of  the fame fide  AID  to  the fide  F  If. 

Wherfore(  by  the  i  i.of  the  fift )  as  the  triangle  A  C  D  is  to  the  triangle  F  H  If } 
fo  is  the  triangle  AIDE  to  the  triangle  F  if  E .  Fut  as  the  triangle  A  CD  is 
to  the  triangle  F  FI  if,fo  is  it  prone  d  that  the  triangle  AFC  is  to  the  triangle 
F  C  H.  Wherefore  alfo  (by  the  i  lo ft  he  fift)  as  the  triangle  A  F  C  is  to  the  tri * 
angle  F G  H3 fo  is  the  triangle  AD  E  to  the  triangle F IfE  .  Wherefore  the 
forefay  d  triangles  are  proportionall :  namely }as  AFC  is  to  FG  H} fo  is  AC  D 
to  F  H  If ,  and  AD  E  to  F  If E .  Wherefore  (by  the  12. of the  fift)as  one  of 
the  antecedents  is  to  one  of  the  confequentes  foare  all  the  antecedentes  to  all  the 
confequentes .  Wherefore  as  the  triangle  AFC  is  to  the  triangle  F  G  FI  fo  is 
the  Foligonon  figure  AFC  D  E  to  the  Foligonon  figure  FGH  ifE .  Wher* 
fore  the  triangles  are  proportionall  both  the  one  to  the  other yy  alfo  to  the  Hole 
Foligonon  figures. 

Eaflly  I  fay  y  hat  the  Foligonon  figure  AFC  DE  hath  to  the  Foligonon  fi *  7  he  third 
gure  FGH  ifE  a  double  proportion  to  that  Hitch  the fide  A  F  hath  to  the  larU 
fide  F  G :  Hitch  are fides  of  like  proportion .  For  it  is  prouedyhat  as  the  trian* 
gle  AFC  is  to  the  triangle  F  G  Hfo  is  the  Foligonon  figure  AFCD  Eto  the 
Foligonon  figure  FG  HifE .  Fut  the  triangle  AFC  hath  to  the  triangle 
FG  H  a  double  proportion  to  that  Hich  the  fide  A  F  hath  to  the fide  FG  (by 
the  former  19.  Fropofition  of this  booke) :  for  it  is  prouedyhat J  triangle  AFC 
is  like  to  the  triangle  FGH.  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  the  Foligonon  figure 
AFCDE  to  the  Foligonon  figure  FG  H  ifE  is  double  to  the  proportion  of 
the fide  A  F  to  the  fide  FG :  Hitch  are fides  of  like  proportion .  wherefore  like 
Foligonon  figures  are  deuided.  <yc.  as  before:  Hich  leas  required  to  be  proued. 

^Thefirfi  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manif  eft fihat  all  like  reBiline  figures  whatfoe*  jhefrnce- 
ueryire  the  one  to  the  other  in  double proportion  that  the  fides  roUaV' 
of likp  proportion  are .  For  any  like  re  inline  figures  Hatfoeuer  are 
by  this  Fropofition  deuided  into  like  triangles  and  equallin  number. 

^Eheficond  Corollary . 

Hereby  alfo  it  is  mamfefl,  that  if  there  he  three  right  lines 

Sortionaii,  as  the firjl  is  to  the  third,  fo  is  the  figure  defers  ConS. 

vppon  the  firfl  to  the  figure  deferibed  vpon  the  fccond., 

Jo  that  the  fay  d  figures  he  life  and  in  life  fort  deferibed. 

For 


b* 


Dmonflra- 

mn» 


V "  A  *,•' 


For  it  is proued,  that  the  proportion  of theBoligonon  figured.  B  C  Bto 
the  Boligonon figure  FG  HKJL  is  double  toy  proportion  of  the fide  A  B 
to  the fule  F  0 .  And  if  (by. the  i  i.of the Jixt)  lento  the  lines A  Band  FG 
fye  take  a  third  line  in  proportion  yiamely  ,MM,  the firfi  line , namely ,A  B 
fall  haue  lento  the  third  line, namely ,  to  MM,  double  proportion  that  it 
hath. to  the fecond  line,  namely,  to  FG  (  by  the  io.  definition  of  the fi ft  ■). 
Wherfore  asy  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  MM,fo  if  the  refit  line  figure  ABC 
to  the  reffiline figure  F  G  Fi,  the fayd  re  fli  line  figures  being  like  &  in  like • 
fort  defcribed. 

.  w  .  .  .  ■  •  \ 

wjftion. 


*  fetter  *A©q 

'S.J  *'i  _ 

A  1  O' 


i&Tie If.  Theorem . 


A  *, 


iV'.  J  XT 


TkeBiline  figures  which  are  like  ynioone  and  the  fame  reBu 
line  figure, are  alfo  like  the  one  to  the  other . 

t  -  -a  v  *\  t  \  4  'V  i 

jl  Vppofe  there  be  two  reSfiline  figures  Aland  B  like  "onto  the  reSfiline 
'figure  C.  T  hen  1 fay  that  the  figure  fit  is  alfo  like  i mto  the  figure  B« 

I  For  fora  fmuch  as  the  figure  fit  is  like  lento  the  figure  C fit  is  alfo  equip 
angle  lento  it  (by  the  cornier fion  of the  firfi  definition  of the fixth}(? 
the fiules  including  the  equall  angles 
fall  he  proportionall.  Agqyne  for of 
fnuch  as  the  figure  B  is  like  lento  the 
figure  C,it  is  alfo  (by  the  fame  defind 
tion )  equiangle  lento  it,  and  the  fides 
about  the  equdU  angles  are  proportion 
half  Wherfore  both  thefe  figures  At 
and  Bare  equiangle  lento  the  figure 
C,and  the  fides  about  the  equall  angles  are proportionall.  Wherfore(by  the firfi 
commonfentence)  the  figure  A  is  equiangle  lento  the  figure  B,  and  the fides  a* 
bout  the  equall  angles  are  proportionall,  leherfore  the  figure  B  is  like  lento  the 
figure  A,  ‘Vehicle  leas  required  to  be  proued. 

Theiti.Theoreme.  TbenfPropofition • 

ff  there  be  foure  right  lines proportionaU,tbe  reBiline figures 
alfo  defcnbedypon  them  beyng  lykp,and  in  like  forte  fituate * 
/ball  be  proportional \  And  if  the  reBiline figures yppon  them 
defiribed  be  proportional ,  thofe  right  Hynes  alfo  pad  be pro - 
portionadf 

Suppofe 


I  is  to  C  0,fio  let  EFbetoG  H.  And  Ispon  the  lines  A3  and  C  ID  (by 
hbe  i  8 .  -oj'f  be  fixth)  let  there  be  dejcribed  two  reef  time  figures  JfA3, 
and  LC  D  like  the  one  to  tlx  other , and  in  like  fort Jituate.  AndSpon  the  lynes 
E  F  and  G  H  (by  the fame)  let  there  he  dejbibed  alfo  two  recli  line  figures  M  F 
nndJSl  FI  like  the  one  to  the  other, andin  like  forte  Jituate.  1  hen  I  fay  that  as 

\.r  '■  r*  tjt  a  yt*  :*  •  '  ■  •  •  • 


igure 


3  is 

to  the  figure  L  L  D, 
fo  is  the  figure  MF 
to  the  figure  F l  FI. 
Vnto  the  lines  A 3 
and  CD  (by  the  it. 
of  the  fixth)  make  a 
third  fine  in  propor¬ 
tion  giamely  f)  r  and 
1m  to  the  lines  EF 
and  G  H  in  like  fort 
make  a  third  fine  in 
a  line  proportion, 
namely  fP.  And for 
that  as  the  line  A 3 
is  to  the  line  C  D,fo 


is  the  line  EF  to  the 


The  fir  Ft 
part  tfibis 
propojitisne 


line  G  H,hut  as  the  line  CD  is  to  the  line  0  Jo  is  the  tine  G  H  to  the  fine  3. 

Wherfore  of  equality  (by  the  22.  of the  fifth)  as  the  fine  A  3  is  lento  the  line  0# 
fo  is  the  fine  EFto  the  line  'P.3ut  as  the  line  A  3  is  to  the  line  0  Jo  is  the  figure 
JfiA  3  to  the  figure  LCD  (  by  the fecond  corollary  of  the  20.  of the fixth).  And 
as  the  line  EF  is  to  the  fine  3  Jo  is  the  figure  M  F  to  the  figure  FI  H.  Where* 
fiorefby  theii.ofthefifth)as  the  figure  If  A  3  is  to  the  figure  LCD  So  is  theft? 
gureMF  to  the  figure  FI  H,  '  .  -  .  : 

3ut  now juppoje  that  as  the  figure  If  A3  is  to  the  figure  L  C  D,fo  is  the 
figure  MF  to  the  figure  K  Hjhen  I fay  that  as  the  line  A  3  is  to  the  line  CD,  part  ichkh  if 
fo  is  the  line  EFto  the  line  G  FI. As  the line  A3  is  to the  fine  C  D,fo  (by  the  dcconuerfe 
12.  of  thefixth)  let  the  fine  E  F  be  to  the  fine  Qfjf  ,  and  1>pon  the  fine  Off  (by 
the  18.  of the fixth)  defer  ibelmto  either  of  thefts figures  M  Band  h 1  FI  a  like  fi¬ 
gure, and  in  like  fort Jituate  S  fi.  Flow  for ajmucb  as  the  fine  A3  is  to  the  fine 
CD, fob  the  fine  E  F  to  the  line  Off,  arid  Import  the  lines  A3  and  C  D  are  de¬ 
ferred  two  figures  fike,and  in  like Jort Jituate  I\A  3  dndL  C  D,dndyp‘on  the 
lines  E  F  and  QSfiare  dejcribedaljo  two  figures  like,  and  in  like fort  Jituate  M 
E  and  SPf  ther fore  as  the  figure  l\A  3  is  to  the  figure  L  C  D,fo  is  the  figure: 

MF  to  tire figureS  tie) fore  alfo  (by  the  1  r.  of  the  fifth  }ar  the  figure  F 

is  to  theftgfWS  Py  fitstfiefigwre  MF  to  the figure  FI  'Hyieherfofe  the  figure 
Vv*  1’  M  F 


*  Note  that 
this  is  proued 
in  the  aJSumpt 
foUotvtng. 


An  afiumpu 


MF hath  to  either  of thefe  figures  El  H^andS^one  and  the  fame  proportion, 
wberfore  by  the 9. of  the fifth ,the figure  N.  H is  equallanto  the figure  S  %*And 
it  is  into  it  lik$,and  in  like fort fituate.  *  ftut'm  like  and  equally eSliline  figures 
bey  fig  in  like  fort fituate, the  fides  of  like  proportion  on  H vhicb  they  are  defcribed 
are  equall.  JVherforey  lineG  His  equall  lan  to  the  line  QJfi^Hnd  becaufe  as  the 
lyne  yf  ft  is  to  the  line  C  i D  fo  is  the  line  E  F  to  the  line  QjSjbut  the  line  Qffijs 
equall  lanto  the  line  G  H,therfore  as  the  line  \A  ft  is  to  the  line  ClDfo  is  the  line 
EF  to  the  line  GH.  )  A  < 

If  therefore  there  K 

be  foure  right  lines 
proportionall ,  the 
re^iline figures  al * 
fo  defcribed  lapon 
them  beyng  like  and  ^ 
in  lyke fort fituate 
Jhall  be  proportionall 
And  if  the  reSIdine 
figures  lapon  them 
defcribed  beyng  like 
and  in  like  fort  jitu * 
ate  be  proportionally 
thofe  right  lines  alfo 
Jhall  be  proportional: 
which  D ms  required 
to  be  proued. 


5* 


V  1  .  -  —  *  -  •  . 

.And  now  that  in  like  and  equall  figures , being  in  like fort fituate,  the fides  of 
like  proportion  are  alfo  equall  (which  thing  Was  before  in  this propofition  taken 
asgraunted )  may  thus  be  proued.  Suppojey  the  re  Eli  line  figures  N  HandS 
be  equall  and  like, and  as  HGistoG  Eljo  let  to  Q^S,and  let  G  Hand 

Qfifijbe fides  of  like  proportion .T  hen  I fay  that  the fide  QjQfts  equall  lanto  the 
fide  G  H  For  if they  be  lanequall,the  one  of them  is  greater  then  the  other,  let 
the fide  ^QJqe greater  then  the fide  H  G.And  for  that  as  the  line  G^QJs  to  the 
line  QSjfo  is  the  line  HG  to  the  line  G  El, and  alternately  alfo  (by  the  16.  of 
the fifth?)  as  the  line  t0  the  line  H  G,fo  is  the  line  QS,to  the  lyne  G  El, 
but  the  line  IJQfts greater  then  the  line  H G.  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  (JS  is  greet 
ter  theny  line  G  El. Wherefore  alfoy figure  is  greater  then  the  figure  HEL 

butfby fnppofitionfit  is  equall  lanto  it, which  is  impofiible.Wherfiorey  line  fiftfij 
is  not  greater  theny  line  G  H.  In  like forte  alfo  may  We  proue  that  it  is  not  left 
then  it ,  wherfore  it  is  equall  lanto  it:  which  Was  required  to  be  proued. 

The 


ofSuclides  Element  es. 


FoLiju 


flxjfates  demonib'ateth  this  feoond part  more  briefiy,by  the  firii  corollary  of  the  ao,  of  this  boke,  thus.  Jn  other  dmt* 
Foralmuch  as  the  re&iline  figures  are  by  fuppofition  in  one  and  the  fame  proportioned  the  fame  pro  -  Jl  rattan  of  the 
portion  is  double  to  the  proportion  of  the  fides  A  B  to  C  D,and  E  F  to  G  H(by  the  forefaid  corollary)  fecond -part  ?f~ 
the  proportion  alfd  of  the  fides  fhail  be  one  and  the  filfefame  (by  the  7.  common  fentence)  namely,  ter  Flu  fates. 
the  line  A  B  fhail  be  vnto  the  line  C  D  as  the  line  E  F  is  to  the  line  GH. 

•  c^rbe  ij  .Theorem  e.  The  ifTropofition. 

Equiangle  Tar  alldog}' ammes  heme  the  one  to  the  other  that 
proportion  which-  is  com po fed  of  the fides . 

Vppoje  the  equiangle  B '  arallelogrammes  to  be  AC  and  C  F3  hailing  the 
angle  B  CD  of the  one  equal l  to  the  angle  EC  G  of the  other  .  Then  I 
fay,  that  the  farallelogramme  A C  is  fnto  the parallelogramme  C  F  in 
that  proportion  Which  is  compofed  of the  proportion  of  their fides 3that  is,  of that  ....  f 

ip  Inch  the  fide  B  C  hath  to  the  fide  C  G3and  of that  "which  the fide  ID  C  hath  to 
the fide  C  E.  Let  the  lines  ©  C  and  C  G  be fo put  that  they  both  make  one  right 


M 


a 


line  (by  the  if-of  the firjlf  Wherefore 
( by  the  fame)  the  lines  D  C  and  C  E 
fhail  make  alfio  one  right  line .  Make 
complete  the parallelogramme  D  G  by 
producing  the  fides  A  D  andFG  till 
they  concur  re  in  the  point  Fly  and  let 
there  be  put  a  certaine  right  line  If. 

And  as  the  line  ©  C  is  to  the  line  C  G} 

Jo  (by  the  12. of  the  fixt)  put  fnito  the 
line  If  a  line  in  the  fame  proportion 
Mmch  let  be  L :  and  as  D  C  is  to  C  Ey 
jo  fmto  L  put  a  line  in  the fame  pro * 
portion  yiamely  3M.  Wherefore  the  proportions  of  the  lines  If  to  L.and  L  to  M} 
are  one  andy  fame  with  the  proportions  of  the  fides  ©  C  to  C  G3and  DCtoC  E: 
but  the  proportion  of If  to  Mys  compofed  of the  proportions  oflfito  L3<w  L  to  j Demontfr^ 
M:  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  If  to  M3  is  compofed  of  the  proportions  of the  thn. 

Jules  BitoC  Gyfr  EC  to  CD .  And  for  that  as  the  line  ©  C  is  to  the  line  C  Gy 


K 


i 

M 


£ 


dlfo(  hy  the  1  f  of  the fififis  the  Ime  If  is  to  the  line  L3Jq  is  the  parallelogramme 
AC  to  the  parallelogramme  C  H.  Againe3for  that  as  the  line  D  C is  to  the  line 
C  Eyfio  is  the  parallelogramme  C  H  to  the  parallelogramme  C  F :  but  as  the  line 
D  C  is  to  the  line  C E3  fo  is  the  line  L  to  the  lineM:  Wherefore  alfio  (byy  fame) 
as  the  line  L  is  to  the  lint  M  3fio  is  the  parallelogramme  C  H  to  the  parallelo* 
gramme  C  F .  A  n  d for  a f much  as  it  is  proued3that  as  the  line  If  is  to  the  line  L3 
jo  is  the  parallelogramme  A  C  to  the  parallelogramme  C IA3  and  as  the  line  L  is 
to- the  line  My  fo  is  the  parallelogramme  C  FLta  the  parallelogramme  CF  i  then 
fore  of equalitie  (by  the  zz.pfthe fifit)  as  the  line  If  is  to  the  line  M3 fo  is  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  A  C  to  the  parallelogramme  CF  .’But  as  it  hath  before  bene  pro* 
nedythc  proportion  of the  line  If  to  the  line  M3  is  compofed  of  the  proportions  of 

9c&-  i-  tbe 


A 


iAn  other 
demonflration 
after /Inflates. 


jDe/nmftrat'ton 
if thtspropofiri* 
wherein  is  firff 
pressed  that  the 
parallegramme 

EG  is  like  to  the 
whole  parallels- 
grame  ABCD, 


the fides  5$  C  to  CGP  and  •DCtoCE.  Wherefore  alfo  the  proportion  of  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  A  C  to  the  parallelogramme  C  Fjs  compofed  of the  proportions  of 
the  fdes  PiCtoC  G}  and  D  C to  C  E.  Wherefore  equi  angle  parallelogrammes 
haue  the  one  to  the  other  that  proportion  "Which  is  compojed  of  the  proportions 
of  the  fdes  :  "which  "Was  required  to  be  proued. 

F  Inflates  demonftrateth  this  Theoreme  without  taking  of  thefe  three  lines, 
K,L3M,after  this  maner. 

Forafmuch  as(faythhe)  ithathbene  declared  vpon  the  io.  definition  of  the  fife 
booke,  and  fife  definition  of  this  booke  ,that  the  proportions  of  the  extremes  confift  of 
the  proportions  of  the  meanes,let  vs  fuppofe  two  equianglc  parallelogrames  ABGD> 
and  G  E  £  I,  and  let  the  angles  at  the  poynt  G  in  eyther  be  equall .  And  let  the  lines  B  G 
and  G I  be  fet  dire&ly  that  they  both  make  one 
right  line,  namely,  BG  / ,  Wherefore  EG  Dal  fo 
ihall  be  one  right  line  by  the  connerfe  of  the  i  y. 
ofthefirft.  Make  complete  the  parallelogramme 
G  T .  Then  I  fay,that  the  proportion  of  the  paral- 
lelogrammes  A  G  &  G  £  is  compofed  of  the  pro¬ 
portions  of  the  fides  B  G  to  G  I,  and  DG  to  GE. 

For  forafmuch  as  that  there  are  three  magni¬ 
tudes,  A  G,GT,  and  G^,  and  GT  is  the  meaneof 
the  fayd  magnitudes  :  and  the  proportion  of  the 
extremes  A  G  to  G^  confifteth  of  the  meane  pro¬ 
portions  (by  the  5  .definition  of  this  booke)  namely,oftheproportion  o£  A  G  to  G  T, 
and  of  the  proportion  GT  to  G£:  But  the  proportion  of  Ag  to  GT  is  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  with  the  proportion  of  the  fides  B  G  to  GJ  (by  the'firft  of  this  booke) ,  And 
the  proportion  alfoof  GT  to  G'^  is  one  and the  felfe  fame  with  the  proportion  of  the 
other  fides,namely,  D  G  to  GE  (by  the  fame  Propofition)  .  Wherefore  the  proportion 
of  the  parallelogramme  s  G  to  G£  confifteth  of  the  proportions  of  the  fides  BG  to 

G  I,  and  DCtoGE .  Wherefore  equiangle  parallelogrammes  are  the  one  to  the  other 
in  that  proportion  which  is  compofed  of  theyr  fides  :  which  was  required  to  be 
proued* 


fy&The  i8.  Theoreme .  The  24..  Tropojition . 

In  euery  parallelogramme ,  the  parallelogrammes  about  the 
dimecient  are  lyke  ynto  the  whole  And  alfo  ly\e  the  one  to  the 
other. 

Vppofiy  there  be  a  parallelogramme  A  PC  D}and  let  the  dimecient 
j  therofbe  A  C :  and  let  the  parallelogrammes  about  the  dimecient  A 
j  Cfe  EG  and  H  If  T  hen  I fay  that  either  of thefe  parallelogrames 
E  G  and  H  If  is  like  hmto  the  "Whole  parallelogramme  A  PC  ID }  and 
alfo  are  fyke  the  one  to  the  other. E or  forafmuch  as  to  one  of the fides  of the  trian • 
gle  A  ©  Cynamefyyto  ©  C is  drawen  a parallel  fyne  E  Ey  therfore  as  ©  E  is  to  E 
A,fo(by  the  2.  of the fixt )  is  CFtoFA-  Agayne forafmuch  as  to  oneofy fides 


ofSmlides  Elementeu 


Fohiyz, 


s  '  T" 

,  •  ' 

F 

D 


K 


of the  triangle  A  D  Cjiamelygo  C  D  is  drawen  a  parallel  lyne  FG,  therefor t 
(by  the fame)as  C  Fis  to  FA  Jo  is  ID  G  to  G  A. But  as  CF  is  to  F  A  Jo  is  it  pro* 
wed  that  E  E  is  to  E  A-  Wherfore  as  EE  is  to  E  Ay  fo(hy  the  1 1.  of  the  fifth) 
is  l D  G  to  G  A.  Wherfore  by  compofition  (by  the  is.  of  the fifth)as  E  A  is  to  A 
EJo  is  D  A  to  AG.  And  alternately  (by  the  i6.of the  fifth)  as  E  A  is  to  AD, 
fo  is  E  A  to  AG.  Wherfore  in  the  parallelogrammes  AE  C  ID  and  EG y  fides 
yvhich  are  about  the  common  angle  E  A  Dare  proportionall.And  becaufey  line 
G  Fis  a  parallel  It nto  the  lyne  D  C/herfoye  the  angle  AG  F  ( by  the  2  p.  of the 
fir  ft)  is  equal!  Imtoy  angle  ADCy  <&y 
angle  G  F  A  e  quail  Itntoj  angle  DC  A 
and  the  angle  D  AC  is  common  to  the 
two  triangles  ADC  and  A  F  G.  Wher* 
fore  the  triangle  D  AC  is  equiangle 

lento  the  triangle  AG  F.  And  by  the  G  - - ^ - - 11 

fame  reafon  the  triangle  A  EC  is  equi* 
angle  lento  the  triangle  AE  F.  Wher * 
fore  the  lehole  parallelogramme  A E  C 
D  is  equiangle  lento  the  parallelograms 
EG.  Wherfore  as  AD  is  in  proportion 
to  D  CJo  (by  the  4.  of  the fixth)  is  AG 

to  G  F}  and  as  DC  is  to  C  A  Jo  is  GF  to  FA.  And  as  ACistoCEyfois  AF  to 
F E.  And moreouer as  CE is  to E  Ayfo  isFEtoE  A.  And  forafmuch  as  it  is 
prone  d  that  asD  C  is  to  C  A  Jo  is  G  F  to  F A:  but  as  AC  is  to  C  Eyfio  is  AF  to 
FE.  wherfore  of equalitie  (by  the  22.of the  fifth)  as  D  C  is  to  C  EJo  is  G  F  to 
F  E.  Wherefore  in  the  parallelogramm  es  A  EC  D  and  E  Gy  the  fides  lohich 
include  the  equall  angles  are  proportionall.  Wherefore  the  parade  logramme 
'AECD  is  (by  the firH  definition  of  the  fixth)  dike  lonto  the  parallelogramme 
EG.  'ff:' 

And  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  parallelogramme  AECD  is  like  to  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  L\H:  therefore  either  of  thefe  parallelogrammes  £  G  and  If 
H  is  like  lonto  the  parallelogramme  AECD.  EutreSCdine  figures  lohich  are 
like  to  one  and  the  fame  re  Cliline  figure  are  alfo  (by  the  21.  of  the fixth)  like  the 
one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  E  G  is  like  to  the  parallelo* 
gramme  Hlf.  Wherfore  in  euery  parallelogramme }  the  parallelogrammes  a* 
bout  the  dimecient  are  likelmto  the  htholegandaljo  like  the  one  to  the  other* 
Which  leas  required  to  be proued.  .  ^ 

An  other  more  brief  e  demohfiration  after  F Inflates. 

Snppofe  that  there  be  a  parallelogramc  ABG  Awhofe  dimetient  let  be  ^ labour 
which  let  confift  thefe  paiallelogramtnes-E-ftTandT*  />hauing  the  angles  at  thepointes 
J and  G  common  with  the  whole, parallelogramme  ^45  G  D.  Then  I  fay, that  thofe  na- 
fajhilogrammes  £  Tand  T I  are  like  to  the  whole  parallelogramme  'D  B  and  alfo  are 
onr  Qjq.  ij,  like  ” 


That  the  'parat* 
Ida  frame  /<_// 
is  like  f«  the 
■whole  parallel*}- 
gra/nme  A  B~ 
CD. 

That  the par aU 
lehgrammes 
£  G  and 
are  like  the  tmf 
ft  the  other. 


An  other 
Demontfrd- 
tion  after 

fiujjateu 


An  addition 
cf  PelitariHS. 


An  otherad* 
dit'mn  of  Pe- 
iitarms. 


,  f*' 

$  CV 


like  the  one  to  the  other  .  For  forafmuch  a sBD,EK, 
and  T I  are  parallelogrammes,  therefore  the  right  line 
%A ZG  falling  vpon  thefe  parallell  lines  \A  E  B,K ZT , 
and  D 1 G, or  vpon  thefe  parallell  lines  A  K T),E  ^/,and 
BTG,  maketh  thefe  angles  equall  the  one  to  the  other, 
namely, the  angle  EA  C  to  the  angle  KZ  A,  Sc  the  an¬ 
gle  ET^A  to  the  angle  KAZ,  and  the  angle  T ZG  to 
the  angle  ZG  I,  and  the  angle  T  G^f  to  the  angle  IZG, 
and  the  angle  B  $A  G  to  the  angic  <iAG  'D  .-and  finally, 
the  angle  j B  G  <ty£  to  the  angle  DAG .  Wherefore  (by 
the  fiiit  Corollary  of  the  3  2.ofthefirft,and  by  the  34. 

©fthefirft)  the  angles  remayning  are  equall  the  one  to 
the  other,  namely, the  angle  B  to  the  angle  D,  and  the 
angle  E  to  the  angle  K,  and  the  angle  T  to  the  angle  /. 

Wherefore  thefe  triangles  are  equiangle  and  therefore 
likethe  one  to  the  other,namely,the.triangle  ABG  to 
the  triangle  G  D  A,  and  the  triangle  AE  Z  to  the  triangle  £  KA,  Sc  the  triangle  ZT  G 
to  the  triangle  G  IZ .  Wherefore  as  the  fide  iAB  is  to  the  fide  B  G,  fo  is  the  fide  AE 
to  the  fide  EZ,  and  the  fide  ZT  to  the  fide  TG.  Wherefore  the  parallelogramnies 
eontayned  vnder  thofe  right  lines, namely, the  parallelogrammes  ABG  D.EK.Sc  TI, 
are  likethe  one  to  the  other  (by  the  firft  definition  of  this  booke)  .  Wherefore  in  euery 
parallelogramme  the  parallelogrammes.  &c.  as  before.-which  was  required  to  bede- 
monftrated.  [  -  -  .  . 

f  A  Trobkme  added  by  Telitarius. 

Two  equiangle  Parallelogrammes  being  geuen,fo  that  they  be  not  like,  to  cut  of  from 

one  of  them  a  parallelogramme  like  r vnto  the  other. 

Suppofe  that  the  two  equiangle  parallelogrammes  be  ABC  D  and  CEFG,  which, 
let  not  be  like  the  one  to  the  other .  It  is  required  from  the  Parallelogramme  AB  CD, 
to  cut  of  a  parallelogramme  like  vnto  the  parallelogramme  CEFG.  Let  the  angle  Cof 
the  ohe  be  equall  to  the  angle  Cof  the  other.  And  let  the  two  parallelogrammes  befp 
fet, that  the  lines  B  CScCG  may  make  both 
one  right  line, namely, B  G .  Wherefore  alfo 
the  right  lines  D  C and  C  E  fhall  both  make 
one  right  line,  namely,  DE  .  Anddrawea 
line  from  the  poynt  F  to  the  poynt  C,  and 

produce  the  line  PC  till  itcocurre  with  the _ XL _ _ _ Jq 


H 


H  K  parallell  to  the  line  C D  (by  the  3  i .  of 
the  firft) .  Then  I  fay,that  from  the  paralle¬ 
logramme  AC  is  cut  oftheparallelograme 
C7)  H  K,  like  vnto  the  parallelograme  E  G. 

Whrch-thing is  manifeft  by  thys  24*Propo- 

fitioA.  For  that  both  the  fayd  parallelo-  E  ■*  F 

grammes  are  deferibed  about  one  &  the  felfe  fame  dimetient .  And  to  the  end  it  might 
the  more  plainly  be  feene,  I  haue  made  complete  the  Parallelogramme  ABG  L. 


B  iC  C 

\ 

f  An  other  Trobleme  added  hy  Telitarius. 

\\ 

Betwene  two  recUline  Superfcieces,  tofnde  out  a  meant fufcrficics  proportional!. 

:  ''  ■  '  ' 1  c  1 "  . .  :  '•  :•» 

Suppofe  that  the  two  fuperfic-ieces  be  A  and  B,  betwene  which  it  is  required  to 
place  a  meane  fuperficies  proportionall.  Reduce  the  fayd  two  re&iline  figures  A  and  B 
»L  vnto 


into  two  like  parallelogrames  (by  the  1 8  .of  this  booke  )  orifyou  thinke  good  reduce 
eytheroFthem  to  a  fquare,(by  the  laft  of  the  fecond)  .  And  let  the  (aid  two  parallelo¬ 
gram  mes  like  the  one  to  the  other  arid  equall  to  the  CiiperRcieces  Aahd  B,  be  CE)  E  F 
and  FG  H  K.  Andlet  the  angles  F  in  either  of  them  be  equall, which  two  angles  let  be 
placed  in  fftch  fort,that  the  two  parallelogrammes  E'Da.ndH  G  may  be  about  one  and 
the  fclfe  fame  dimetient  C  K  (which  is  done  by  putting  the  right  lines  E  F  and  EG  irt 
fech  fort thatthejf  Beth  make  one  light  line, namely, 

:M'G  ) .  And  make  cBpiete  theparalleiograme  CLKM* 

Then  I  fay ,that  either  of  the  fupplements  F  L  8c  F  Mis 
a  meane proper tionall  betwene  the.fupetficieces,C^ Sc 
F-  jRTjthatiS';  betVeHe  the  fuperficieces  v/  and  B  .•namd- 
ly^as the  flipetdcids &G  istdtbe  fuperficies  ££,.'f6-is 
the  fame  fviperficiep/7  L  to  the  .fuperficies  E  'D.  For  by 
this  24,  Proportion  the  !h?h  tTF-isl to  the  line  ^2),  as 
feline  G  Fi$  to  the  lineFB ^f&t(by  thehriVof  this 
booke)  adthe  line  Af  is  to  theiine  iFi>;  fo  is  the  fu- 
perficies  Hg  to  thg  fa perficies  f  L:  and  as  the  line  GF 
is  to  the  hnne'F£,fo  alfo  (by  the  fame)  is  the  fuperfic&s 
EL  to  the  fuperficies  E  D  .  Wherfore(by  the  1  i. of  the 
fife)  asthe  fuperficies  H  G  is  to  the  fuperficies  FX,fo,is 
the  fame  fupeVficies  F  L  to  the  fuperficies  E  D  :  which 
was  required  to  be  done. 

i-t&The  7.  Trobleme.  The  25.  Tropofition, 


■ . '  H 


Vnto  a  reBihne figure  geuen  to  deferihe  an  other  figure  ly^ 
ibmchfhalaljo  he  equallvntoan  other  reUiline figure  geuen; 

Vppofey  the  re Efdine  figure gene fioherunto  is  required  an  other  to  he 
made  like  be  A  D  C3and  let  the  other  reSHline figure  thereunto  the 
fame  is  required  tobemade3equal  he  D.ISlow  it  /s  required  to  deferihe 

a  reef  dine  figure  like  lento  the  figure  Aid  C3  and  equall  lento  the  fit 
gure  ID.  Vppon  the  line  DC 
deferihe  (by  the  44.  of  the 
firft)a  parallelogramme  D  E 
equall  lento  the  triangle  AD 
Cy  and  by  the  fame  lepon  the  j_ 
line  CEjdefcrihe  the  paralle* 
logramme  C  M  equall  lento 
the  reUtiline figure  D3and  in  A 
the fitid parallelogramme  let 
the  angle  FCE  j  he  equall 
y.nto  the  angle  CD  L.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  angle  FCE 
is  by  conflruffion  equall  to 
the  angle  C  DL3adde  the  an 

gleftC  E  common  to  them  both.  Wherefore  the  angles  LBCatuVBCEare  c 

•if  ?, 


CdtljltHtikto 


Vm§tt/lr4* 

«&er® 


°t\h 


p. 


qudUyntothg  angles  BCE  andE  CF,  but  thecingksL  B  Ceind  BC  E  are  e* 
two  right  angles  (by  tUzywf the  fir fifwffi fire  ajo  the  angles  BCE 
andE  C F  areequall  to  two  right  angles .Wherfore  the  lines  B  C  and  C  F(  by  the 


Demti&r*- 

m*. 


. '  m-v-  J  i 

Jixth )  take  the  meane proportional!  betwene  the  lines  B  C  and  C  Fywhicb  let  be 
G  H.  And  (by  the  18.  of  the jixth)  hpon  the  line  G  Ely  let  there  be  defer  ibe  da 
recdiline  figure  FJHG  like  Tmto  the  reffi  line  figure  A  B  C, and  in  like  forte  ft* 
tuate.ylnd for  that  as  the  line  B  CJs  to  the  line  GH?  Jo  is  the  line  GEL  toy  Uni 
C  F :  bat  if there  be  thre  right  lines  proportional,  as  the firjl  is  to  the  third Jb  is 
the  figure  which  is  deferibed  of the  fir fi  lento  the figure  which  is  deferibed  of the 
fecondyhe jaid figures  being  like  and  in  like fort fituate  (by  thejecond  cor  relict* 
ry  of the  20.  of  the  Jixth)  wherfore  as  the  line  B  C  is  to  the  line  (  CFJogtbetni 
angle  A  BC  toy  he  triangle  dfififi.  But  as  the  UneB  C  is  to  fire  lyneC  F Jo  is 
the  parallelogramme  BE  to  the  paralle  logramme  F  F  (by  the  i. of  the  Jixth)". 
Wherfore  as  the  triangle  yC  W  , 

ter  ■  7  •  ;  &rrr  .  x  r.sw 

Id  Lys  to  the  triangle  J\yri 
fo  is  the  parallelogramme  B 
E  to  the  parallelogramme  E 


-y — > — . — - - 

» — ■  . . . — 

•  •> w  r\  : 

■ 

.....  j 

l  .  -■ 

mm 

••mV; 


■ 


he  16. of  the  fifth)  as  the 
triangle  ABC  is  to  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  BE  ,  fo  is 
tfe,  triangle  F^G  H ,  to 
the  parallelogramme  E  F: 
hut  the  triangle  A f)C  is  e* 
qua!  Imfo  the  pamllelograme 
B  E, wherfore  alfo  the  trian • 
gle  KjG  His '  equally fito  the 
par allelogr amme  E  F :  but  the  parallelogramme  FE  is  equall  Vnto  the  reCtiline 
figure  ID. Wherfore  alfo  the  refill  line  figure  KJG  His  equall  Inito  the  reCiilmt 
figure  D,  and  the  reefii line figure if  G  His  by fuppofition  like  hit  to  the  re  Eli* 
line  figure  A  BC.  wherefore  there  is  deferibed  a  re  fliline  figure  KJG  Hlyfce 
fimto  the  re  Ei  line  figure geuen  y[  B  C,and  equall  Imtothe  other  re  fililine figure 
geuenD :  which  was  required to  be  done.  -  .m  v.U 

y-A  ".  r  Hh-xs  '■  -ykt 

$&The  ip.  Theoreme.  The  16.  firopofition.  '* 


i 


•viri 

1 


,  7-  i.-A 


i  . '"VT/  —  ss-v*' 

common  with  it  hen  is  the  far  allelogr  amme  About  one  and 


Suppofi 


FoLij^ 


Fppofe  that  there  he  a paralleloffamrrk  C:D'i  and' from  fhFpfirfjff 

lelogramme  J.B CDyake aivay a  pdrMelogramnAfl filths imto  the 
par allelogr amme  A  BC D  ymd  in  likijhrt fituate  >  halting  alfotkgrmt* 
gle  DAB  common  with  it.  T, hen  I fay  l  ihdtthe  paraMofirfinmes  jfiCp 
and  A  Fare  both  abotttAmemdtbefelfJfimpfi^  isfihatlhe 

dimetient  yftC  of  the  whole  parallelogramme  Ji  BCD  pajfeth  by  the  angle  F 
of the  par  alle  logt  amme  yCF }  and  is  common  to  either  of  the  para  llelogra  mm  ei. 
For  if JC  do  notpajfe  hyfihepointfifiJ^^^j^^^pi^^ifp^f  by  fame  o* 
they  point }as  AHC  doth „  Flow  then  thedimwient  A  Id  C frail  pit  ejther’tbe 
fide  0  For  the  fide  EF  offiparaMografineylF.  Let  it  cut  y fide  G  Fiji  the 
point  H.  And  (by  the  31.  of  the firfi )  by  file  point  Filet  there  he  dr  a  wen  to.  eh 
they  of thefe  lines  A  D  and  B  Ca  parallel  IhieLi If,  whefforeG  fits  a  parade* 
logr amme  find;  is about  Aifcmd'the  filfefdhie 

dimetient  Witty  parallelogramme  JB  CD.  , . 

And  forafmuch  as  y  paralletogrammes  A  B 
C  D  and  G  If  are  about  one  and  the felffame  & 
dimecient fheifbre  (by  the  24.  ofthefixth)  E 
the  par  allelogr  amme  (ABCD  is  like  Jmto 
the  par aMogr amme  Gif  Wherfore  as  the 
line  D  A  is  to  the  line  .A  Bfo  is  the  line  G  A 
to  the  line  AJf(by  the  connerfion  of the  firfi 
definition  ofthefixth )  .And foftbat  the  pa* 

~s ,L  ^gramrhes  jFB  CDf  and  E  G  are  1 


f  Jn  other  demonfir ation  after  Fluff ates  gtoUchproueth 
thispropofitionfifrmatiuely.  if,.  ■  • 


,A'S 


Bythsdi “ 
metizt  n 
yndettfmd 
here  the  dime¬ 
tient  which  is 
arawen  from 
the  angle  ' 
Schick  is  coni- 
man  to  them 
loth  to  the  op- 
pof >te  angle.. 
Demonftra- 
tion  leading  to 
an  abfurdittet 


fiuppofition )  like jher fore  as  the  line  DA  is  to  the  lyneyi  Bfo  is  the  line G  A  to 
the  line  AE.  Wherfore  the  line  G  ylhath  one  and  the  felfe  proportion  to  either 
of  thefe  hies  A  If  and  A'E;  Wherfore  (by  the  y.of tbefftkfihe  line  ji  If  is  & 
quail  Imtoy  line  A  Eynamelyyy  lejji  to y  greater ywhichis  impoffible.The  felfe 
famejncbnucmence  alfo  will  follow  jf you  put  the  dimetient  AC  to  cut  the  fide 
F E.Wherf ore  J  Qthe  dimetient  of  the  whole parallelogramme  A B  CDpafi 
fieth  by  the  angle  andpoynt  F.  And  therfore  the  parallelogramme  A  E  FGis  a* 
bout  one  and  the felfe  fame  dimetient  withthe  whole  parallelogramme  ABC'D . 
Wherfore  if  from  a  parallelogramme  betaken  away  a  par allelogr ame  lyke,  Jmto 
the  whole  }and  in  lyke forte  jituate failing alfo  an angle  common  with  ttfhen  is 
that  parallelogramme  about  one  and  the felfe  fame  dimetient  with  the  whole; 
which  was  required  to  he proued.  V,  1 C 


a  p 7?H^CPfrarf ' TZmi?e A  B GD Iet £herc  bb taken aVky  the  parallelogramme 
A  E  Z  Klike  and  in  like  forte  fituatc  with  the  whole  parallelogramme  A  B  G  D  %nd  ha- 

“  mfm. 

.  ,  tie  10.  oF 

OJE  iii /•  the 


•  •  - 

•  v.  ;  TW 

■;o  Y.*&vn\sSb 

’  v\  C'At 

'  V 

v  v 

- 

'  ’r,x\  w\ 

V.  H'KV.  Sk 

<■  Su\  VW:1,** 


-1 1-  K  i  * 
fi  ' 


An  other 
Way  after 
flujjates . 


t.  V 


tight  line  A  <3  (by  the  cOrbtlary  added 
Campaneafter  the  ic?t  ofthe  firft)  V^f 
fore  the  angles  B  A  G  andB  C  Fare  equgll 
(by  the  29,  of  the.firft):but  the  angle  H  A-  £ 

Z  ise^'uall  vnto  the  angle  B  A  G  (by  rteafo 
the  parallelogramrnes  are  fuppofed  to  be  G 
like)  wherefore  the. fame  angle  EAZ  is  ,e«, 
quail  to  the  angle  B  CF,  namely,  the  out- . 
ward  angle  to  the  inward  and  oppofite  aft- 


to  one-  and  the  felfefamelyne,  namely,  to 
CF  do  concurre  inthppqint  A.Wheret'ore 


,-Jt* 


A  .  '  \ 

*77  .Vi  i  ..  ,Vh  ...! 

D 

;K^v  v- 

.c>;  l,AVi-  ; 

((-■  ■ 

1  \ 

F'XTTt  W*,  ayyr 

. 

k  ^ 

|  ......  ,  N  .. 

.  .  ,  i*  ■■  k, :  v>  ■. 

\T  1 

iKnn  ,  i.  .*• 

\ 

*  .  ' 

■;\fi  mr,  1  *  \ 

*.  >  »  . 

•f‘  M 

N.  * 

\ 

X. ' 

•r- 

,  ^ 


iu-9 

o 


\o 

'T 

\\ 

lA 


■  :•  \  :  *.U 


they  ard  fet  diredly  the  one  to  the  other/o  that  theyApth  make  one  right  line(by  th|t 
which  was  added  in  the  ende  of  the  3c(j)¥opoXiiioh of  fHe  firft)  wherfofe  the  paralldlo- 
grammes  A  B  GJD,andAE  Z  K are  abOiit  one  and  the  fclfe  fame  dimetierit :  which  #a% 
required  to  be  proued,  ii  '  . 


V!L\ 


The  1 o*  Theorem?.  T he  ij.  Tropoftion. 

f\  ■;  -  A  h .  <  ■  # 

Ofall parauclogrammes  applied  to  a  right  line  y»mtingin fi¬ 
gure  by  parallelogramrnes  litre  and  in  like fbrtjitmte  to  that 
parallelograms  which  isdefcribed  ofthe  halfe  line:  thegrea* 
teff  parailelogramme  is  that  which  it  dejcribed  of  the  half 
line  being  likp  vnto  the  want . 


U 


;.v. r s  vs 


3»  this pnpojltio 
*tre  two  safes 
the  frfi  the  p*- 
tallelogramme 
tempered  to  the 
parallelograms 
defcribed  ofthe 
halfe  l me  ts  de¬ 
fcribed  9po»  a 
line  greater  the 
the  halfe  line: 

In  t  he  fscond 
'vpo  a  line  left. 

The frfl  cafe 
where  the  pa- 
rellelogramme 
compared  name 
Sy  AT  is  defer i- 
ibcd  Span  the 
line  A  Kjphich 
it  greater  then 
the  halfe  line'. 
AC. 

*Vn  \ 

’hi\i 


Et  there  be  a  right  line  A  !&,  and  (by  the  jo. of  the  firjljdeuide  it  in 
tu>o  equallpartes  in  thepoint  C.  And  fmto  the  right  linejf'B  apply 
a  parailelogramme  y[T)  Wanting  in figure  by  the  parailelogramme 
‘Bpehiclf  let  be  like  and  in  like  fort  defcribed  1 mto  the  parallels 
gramme  defcribed  of  halfe  the  line  jdsBftyhich  isJB  C.Then  lfayf 
5  of  au  the parallelogrammes  yphkh  ‘  ' 

M0  h&  applied  y?nto  the  line  A jB  and  r'T  p  s 

ipbichyvdt  in  figure  by.  parallelogrames 

Ukdandin  like fort fitnate  Ornto  the  pa*  G  - 'T~1vfc — —  K 

rallelogramme  (D'B  the  greate ft  is  the 
parailelogramme  A  T).  ForJmto y  right 
line  A  'B  let  there  be  applied  a  parallelo* 
gramme  jiF  wanting  in  figure  by  the 
parailelogramme  FBX lohtch  let  belike 
and  in  like  fort  Jituate  into  the  paralle* 
logramme  0rB  .  Then  I  Jay,  that  the 

paradelogramme  A  0  is  greater  thmtj?e  parailelogramme  A  F.  Forfirafmiich 


1 

. . - A. 

fV. 

V 

Va 

\ 

:  •  “  •  ^ 

\ 

'  fir  ■  1  ii  t  t 

. ---N 

K 


R 


as 


a 


•  Fol,  ijft 

as  the paraMehgrmmeD  Bis  like  into  thparalkloghdmmeFB  ^  they  fore  ( by 
the  26. of  thefixt )  they  are  about  one  and  the  felfe Jame  dimetient .  Let  their  du 
met  tent  he  DB,  and  make  complete  the  figure.  Now forafmuch  as(  by  the  43. 
of)  firft  )the fiupplement  F  C  is  e  quail  into  the j'upplement  FEtadde  the  figure 
F  B  common  to  them  both .  wherefore  the  Mb  ole  figure  Cft  is  equal!  into  the 
> hole figure  ftE .  (But  the  figure  C  is 'equall  into  the  figure  C  G  (  by  the  3  6. 
of  the  firft)  for  that  the  bafe  A  C  is  e  quail  into  the  baft  CB.  Wherefore  the  fi¬ 
gure  GC  is  eqUallinto  the  figure  fifth .  Adde  the  figure  CF  common  into  them 
both  .  Wherforethe  lehole figure  AF  is  equallinto  the  l»hole  Gnomon  L  MN , 
Butt  hellhole  parallelogramme  D  B  is  greater  then  the  Gnomon  L  MN  (  by 
the  3.  common Jen  fence ) .  Wherefore  alfo  it  is  greater  then  the  parallelogramme 
A  F .  But theparallelogramme  AID  is  equal!  into  the  parallelogramme,  ID (B 
(by  the  3  6. of  the firfi ) .  wherefore  the  parallelogramme  A  D  is  greater  then 
theparallelogramme  A  F.  Wherefore  of all  parallelogrammes  applied  to  aright 
line  Wanting  in  figure  by  parallelogrammes  like  and  in  like  fort  fituatep  that 
parallelogramme  lohich  is,  defcribed  of)  halfe  line, the  greateft parallelograme  is 
that  Orhicb  is  defcribed  of  the  halfe  of the  line,  being  like  into  the  leant :  lohich 
leas  required  to  be proued. 

Jgameft  A  IB  be  deuidedinto  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  C  ,  and  let  the 
parallelogramme  applied  ipon  the  halfe  line  be  A  L,  Wanting  in  figure  by  the 
parallelogramme  LB,  lohich  let  be  like  and  in  like fortfituate  into  the  parallel 
togramme  ML .  Again  e  into  the  line  A  B  let  there  be  applied  an  other  parable* 
logramme  MB  leant  ingin  figure  by)  pa* 
rallelograme  E  B  being  like  and  in  like  fort 
jituate  into  the  parallelograme  L  B  lohich 
is  defcribed  ipon  halfe  of  the  line  A  B.  The  h 
1 fay, that  the  parallelogramme  A  L  apfli * 
ed  into  halfe  the  line  is  greater  then  the 
parallelogramme  ME.  For  forafmuch  'as 
theparallelogramme  EB  is  like  into  the 
parallelogramme  L  B,  they  are  (by  the  26. 
of  thefixt )  about  one  and  the  fame  dimetu 
ent .  Let  their  dimetient  be  E  B,and  make 
complete  the  lohole figure ,  andfor  that  the  figure  LFis  equallinto  the  figure 
L  EL  (by  the  3  6.  of the  firft)  for  the  haft  EG  is  equalling  the  haje  GFLfthfe* 
fore  the  figure  L  F  is  greater  then  the figure  ftft .  Buf the figure L  F is  equall 
into  the figure  DL  (by  the  43.0ft  t^ej^{.whfifftrfthe  figu$;W£:h 
greater  then  t  he  figure  KfE :  put  thefiftire  ftJD  common  to  them  hotffWheL 
fore  the  lohole  parallelogramme  A L  is greater  then  the  Mhole  par alldogr amine 
4E:  lohich  leas  required  to  he proued. 

k  v. 


£+  k.- 

r  V  .  - 

H 

\ 

l 

u  .  . , :  .1 

V  \  ■ 

S 

\ 

A 


p  c 


B 


TO 


s\  My 


V  man) Ha¬ 
tton  oft  hi  A 

Sf.jS-, 


The  fecond 
cafe  where  the 
partite  lo- 
gramme 
compared 
namely  x/ZTL 
is  defcribed 
ypon  the  tine 
A  D  which  is 
lege  then  the 
hne  A  Ci 
Demon ftrati-^ 
on  of  the  ft- 
tend  cafe. 


•mxt 


5 &*Ihe%JProblme>  The  z8. Trepofition. 

Vpon  aright  linegeuen,  to  apply  a  parallelogramme  e quail 
Wa.  reBiline figure geuehfy  wanting  in  figure  by  a  paralle - 
logramme  like  vnto  a parallelograme  gcuen.  ffifm  it  beho* 
ueth  that  the  reBiline  figure geuen,  w hereunto  the  par  allele* 
grams  applied  mufl  be  equalise  not  greater  the  that  paralle* 
logramme,  which  fo  is  applied vpon  the  halfe  lyne,  that  the 
defeBesfhall  be  lifanamely,  the  defeB  of the parallelograme 
applied  vpon  the  halfe  line,  and  the  defeB  of  the  paralle  lo‘ 
gramme  to  be  applied  fwho/e  defeB  is  required  to  be  li^e  vnfi 
to.fheparallelog ramme  geuen'). 


V 


VJl  J5 
*'«.  fl 

A '  .  i  ^  ' 


ConlmiHian. 


readme  figure  be  C , "Which figure  CJet  not  be  greater  then  that  pa* 
raMggmefflnch  isfo  applied ypon  the  halfe  line ,  that  the  defeSIes 
jhallhe  like ,  namely  y  the  defied  of  the parallelogramme  applied  "Upon  the  halfe 

aralle logramme  to  he  applied  ("Whofie  defied  is  requi* 


i  aa 


be  defect  of 


V  F 


T wo  tafes  in 
this  Fropofi- 
tion . 


red  to  he  like  into  thegarallelogrammegeue).  And  let  the  figure  thereunto  the 
defccdor  "Want  of  the  parade  logramme  is 
required  to  he  like  he  -D.Now  it  is  requi* 
red  jppoy  right  line  gene  A  Eytodefcribe, 

7>ntb  the  re  tdi  line  figure  geuen  C,  an  e* 
qua l  parallelogramme  "Wanting  in  figure 
by  d paraljmgrammi  like  Wnto  fD.  Let 
t  he  line  AE  (by  the  j/o.  of  the  fir fi)  he 
deuided  into  two  e quail partes  iny  point 
E.  find  (by  the  18.  of  the  fixth)  "rppon 
the  line  E  E  defcrihe  a  re  ffiilme figure -E 
LEG  hke  yntothepaxadelooy\ammeLy 
and  in  like  fort fituate,  "Which fall  alfo 
te  a  parallelograme.  And  inake  com  *  ' 


o 

V 

p  \ 

A 

,  \  £)! 


s  » 


fheq oaxaflelogrambfiJfG.  Now  then  D _ 

theparfidelogrmmjf  G  is  either  equal 

mB  rfilinyfmL  °tMM  IS 

then  it  vy  juppofition.  If  the  paralleled 

n-Y/imYna  //  G  Ik>  patirtl 'Xnto  the  reEdme  figure  C,  then  is 


M 


K 


‘SW: 


gramme  A  G  be  equal  finto  the  reffiline figure  C,  then  is  that  done  "Which  we 
Thefrfl  cafe.  JmtghtforEor  then  Wpo  the  right  line  A  E  is  deferihed  Wnto  the  readme  figure 
:;v‘  A  1  geuen 


ofSuclides  Element eu  FoL  ijS* 

geuen  C  an  equal  parallelogramme  A  G  "banting  in  figure  by  the  parallelograms 
G  Bfbhich  is  like  imto  the  parallelogramme  ID.  ’But  if  AG  be  not  equalimto  C 
then  is  A  G greater  then  Cfiut  A  G  is  equallimto  GB  (by  the firfi  of  the fixt f 
Wherfore  alfo  G  B  is  greater  then  C.  fake  the  excejfie  of  the  re  Bi  line  figure  B 
G  ahoue  the  reciiluie  figure  C  (by  that  Mnch  ' Pelitarius  addeth  after  the  4/.  of 
the  firfi )  And  Unto  that  excejfie  ( by  the  is. of the fixt )  dejcribe  an  equall  reciv* 
line  figure  If  LMN  like  and  in  like  fort  fitnateimto  the  reffiiline figure  D. 
But  the  re  hi iline figure  D  is  like  imto  the  re&iline  G  Byte  her  fore  alfo  the  recAi* 
line  figure  I\E  MM  is  like  imto  the  re  tfiline  figure  GB(by  the  2  s.ofi the fixt) 
Mow  then  let  the fides  ifiE  and  G  E  be  fides  of  like  proportion ,  let  alfo  y fides 
E  M  and  GF  be  fides  of  like  proportion.  Andforajmuch  as  the  parallelograms 
GBis  equal  imto  the  figures  C  and  If  M}  therfore  the  parallelogramme  G  B  it 
greater  then  the  parallelogramme  JfiM.  V/herefore  alfo  the  fide  G  E  is  greater 
then  the fide  KjE}  and  the fide  G  F  is  greater  then  the fide  E  My  Imto  the  fide 
KJE  put  an  equall  line  GO  (by  the  2.  of the firfi)  and  likewfe  Imto  the  fide  E 
M put  an  equall  line  G  B.  And  make  perfect  the  parallelogramme  OGB  X. 
Wherfore  the  parallelogramme  G  X  is  equal  w  like  Imto  the  parallelogramme 
KfM.  But  the  parallelogramme  JffiM  is  fyke  Imto  the  parallelogramme  G  B« 
Wherfore  alfo  the  parallelogramme  G  X  is  like  Imto  the  parallelogramme  G  B. 
Wherfore  the  parallelogramme  s  G  X  andG  B  are  ( by  the  26.  of the fixt)  about 
one  and  the Jeff  fame  dimecient.  Let  their  dimecient  be  G  B}and  make  complete 
the  figure.  Now forajinuch  as  the  parallelogramme  B  G  is  equallimto  the  retfi* 
line figure  Chanel  Imto  the  parallelogramme  I\M}  and  the  parallelogramme  G 
X}Mnch  is  part  of  the  parallelogramme  G  Bys  equal  'imto  KJiF.Wherfore  the 
Gnomon  remayning  T QEfi is  equall  'Vnto  the  re  Bilme figure  remaynmg y  name* 
lyyo  C.jfnd for aj much  as  the Jupplement  B  Bjs  equallimto  the fupplement  0 
Syput  the  parallelogramme  X  B  common  imto  them  both.  Wherfore  the  Miole 
parallelogramme  B  B  is  equallimto  the  Mole  parallelograme  0  B.But  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  0  Bis  equalimto  the  parallelogramme  E  E  by  the  1.  of the fixt f 
(for  the fide  A  E  is  equalimto  the fide  E  B)  Wherfore  the  parallelogramme  T 
E  is  equalimto  the  parallelogramme  B  B.  But  the  parallelogramme  OS  com* 
mon  to  them  both. Wherfore  the  Mole  parallelogramme  T  S  is  equall  Imto  the 
Miole gnomon  I OV.  But  it  is  proued  that  the  gnomon  I  fjfi  is  equal  "imto  the 
retfilme figure  C.  Wherfore  afo  the  parallelogramme  T  S  is  equal  "onto  the  re* 
Biline  figure  C.  Wherfore  "Upon  the  right  line  geuen  MB  is  applied  a  parallelo * 
gramme  T  S  equal  imto  the  retfiline figure geuen  C3and  Wanting  in  figure  by  a 
parallelogramme  X  B  Mnch  is  like  imto  the  parallelogramme  geuen  D for  the 
parallelogramme  X Bis  like  imto  the  parallelogramme G  X :  Mnch  ivas  re* 
quired  to  be  done. 

f  A  Corollary  added  by  Flujfates. 

Hereby  it  is  manifest ,t hat  if  vpon  a  right  line  be  applied  a  parallelogramme  wantyng 

in 


Ihefetmi 

Cafe* 


A  Corollary  ad¬ 
ded  by  Hujjas 
tes,  and  is  fat 
ofT heart  as' an 
afumpt  before 
the  IJ  .propofi- 
t ton  of  the  tcth 
boolre:  which 
for  that  it  fallo¬ 
ut  eth  of  this 
proportion  / 
thought  it  not 
arntfe  here  to 
place. 


The fixth^Bookp 

m  figure  by  a  fquareyhe  parallelogramme  ap~ 
filed  (hall  be  equal  l  to  the  re  El  angle  fgure 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  fegmcnts  oft  he 
hnegeuen  which  are  made  by  the  application. 

For  the  reft  of  the  line  is  equall  to  the  o- 
therfide  of  the  parallelogramme  applied . 

For  that  they  are  (ides  of  one  &  the  felfe  A 
lame  fquare.  a  s  the  parallelogramme  A  G 

is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B5or  D  G  whieh  is  equall  to  D  B. 

he  9.  Trobleme.  fthe  29.  Tropofition. 

Vpon  a  right  hnegeuen  to  apply  a  parallelogramme  equall 
ynto  a  reUilme  figure  geuen,  and  exceeding  in  figure  by  a  pa* 
t  attogramme  hkg  nmto  a  parallelogramme  geuen. 


rs 


I WMfypofe  tfo  right  Hnegeuen  to  be  JB,  and  let  the  retfiline  figure geuen 
thereunto  ir  required  pponthe  line  A  B  to  apply,  an  equall  parallels 


Conft-rntthti* 


^  gramme  he  C :  let  alfo  the  par allelogramme  fo  her  unto y  excejje  is  requiz 
red  to  he  like, be  D .  ISiow  it  is  requh 
redypon  the  right  line  ^AB  to  apply 
a  f  dr. allelogramme  equall  lento  the . 
re Adine  figure  C , and  exceeding  in  fi= 
gure  hy  a  parallelogramme  like  lento 
the  parallelogramme  ID .  Let  the  line 
fi  B  he  ( by  the  ro.  of  the firft )  deui * 
ded  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point 
B.  Jndlep  on  tire  line  EB  (  by  the 
■18.  of  the  jixt  pdeferihe  a  parallelo - 
gramme  B  F  like  lento  the  figure  D  } 
ruidmltkc fort ft  ante.  Andlonto  both 


■  'y  K.  \ 

»-  -v  . , ‘Xi 
-  .  * .  » 


t 

o/Suclides  Elements.  FoL  177® 

thefe figures  FF  and  C,  defer ibe  an  equall  rebfdine figure  C  M  like  ynto  the 
figure  D  and  in  like fort fituate  (by  the  2  s. of  the fixt ).  wherefore  the parade* 
logramme  GH  is  (by  the  21.  of  the fixt )  likeTmto  the  parallelogramme  F  F. 
Let  the  fides  KJFi  andFL  be  (ides  of  like proportion  ,  and  fo  alfo  let  the  fides 
Kf}  and  FE  be.  And  forafmuch  as  the parallelogramme  GFlis(by  conftruffii* 
on) greater  then  the  parallelogramme  FF  }  therefore  the  line  KJA  is  greater 
then  the  line  FL  3  and  the  line  F\G  is  greater  then  the  line  F  E .  Extend  the 
lines  F  L  and  F  E  to  the  pointes  M N}and  ynto  the  line  KfH put  an  equall 
line  F L  M}  and  hkewife  ynto  the  line  JfG  put  an  equall  line  FEN:  and 
make  per  fell  the  figure  MN  .Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  MN  is  equall 
and  like  lento  the  parallelogramme  G  H.  Fut  the  parallelogramme  G  H  is  like 
Imto  the  parallelogramme  EL.  Wherefore  alfo  the  parallelogramme  MN  is 
like  ynto  the  parallelogramme  EL .  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  s  E  L  and 
MN  are  (by  the  26.  of  the fixt)  about  one  and  the  fame  dimetient .  Let  the 
fayd  dimetient  be  FO  >  and  make  per  fell  the  figure .  Now  forafmuch  as  the  pa * 
rallelogramme  G  H  is  equall  ynto  the  figures  E  L  andC.  Fut  by  confiruHion 
the  parallelogramme  G  H  is  equall  ynto  the  parallelogramme  Ml L .  Wherfore 
the  parallelogramme  MN  is  equall  ynto  the figures  ELandC.  Take  away 
the  figure  E  L  "which  is  common  to  them  both .  Wherefore  the  Gnomon  remay* 
nmg3namely ;  VEX  }  is  equall  ynto  the  relliline  figure  C.  And  forafmuch  as 
the  line  ME  is  equall  Imto  the  line  EF3  therefore  the  parallelogramme  AN 
is(bythi  36  of  the fiAl)  equall  ynto  the  parallelogramme  N  Fy  that  is?  Imto 
the  parallelogramme  L  F,  "Which  (by  the  43.ofthefirfl)is  equall  lento  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  N  F .  Adde  the  parallelogramme  F  0  common  to  them  both. 
Wherefore  the  "Whole  parallelogramme  A  0  is  equall  ynto  the  Gnomon  VEX. 
Fut  the  Gnomon  VEX  is  equallynto  the  relliline  figure  C.  Wherefore  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  AO  is  equall  ynto  the  relliline  figure  C .  Wherefore  ypOn  the 
right  linegeuen  A  F  is  applied  the  parallelogramme  A  0  equallynto  therein* 
line  figure geuen  C3  and  exceeding  hi  figure  by  the  parallelogramme  fVF  ■which 
is  like  ynto  the  parallelogramme  geuen  F>  .For  the  parallelogramme  ID  is  like 
ynto  the  parallelogramme  F  F  :  and  the  parallelogramme  FF  is  like  y  nto  the 
parallelogramme  F  for  they  are  about  one  and  the  felfe  fame  dimetient : 
"Which  "Was  required  to  be  done. 

Vr  '  T*  •'  ■  ■:  -  ;  •.  *,•-  1  ;  •*•*«*: '  •  r *.  '>  'i  -  .  -  .■  .  •.  ;•  -  .  •  •  '  V-  • 

teThe  10.  Trobleme .  The  50.  Trofofition* 

Todeuide  a  right  line  geuen  by  an  extreme  and  meane  pro^ 
portion - . .  T  , 

■  .  '  ■  V-  ■ .  \  , 

Vppofethe  right  linegeuen  to  be  A  F  .  It  is  required  to  deuide  the  line 
A  F  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion.  Vpon  the  line  AF  deferibe 
(by  the  46-  of thefirfi  )  afquareF  C .  And  ypon  the  line  AC  (by  the 

Fgj.  29. of 


Demotiftra* 

tmu 


Cmlruftio*. 


Tkimuftr*- 


An  other 

Tvaj, 


a'.',*; 


e 


V3 


0, 


i\ 


<4 


3 


29.  ofthe  fixt )  applie  a  parallelogramme  C  T>  equalhnto  thefqnare  T  C3and 
exceding  in  figure  by  the  figure  AT)  like  T>nto  the  figure  TC.  N&w  TC  is  a 
fqiiare .  Wherefore alfio  AT)  is afquare .  Andforafmuchas  T C  is  eqnall^nto 
C  T),  take  a  way  the  figure  CElehich  is  common  ~  ' 

to  them  both.  Wherefore  the  figure  remayningy 
namely  }TF \)  is  equall  to  the  figure  remdyning, 
namely  yo  A  T)3  and  the  angle  E  of  the  one  is  e° 
quail  hmto  the  angle  Eof  the  other .  Wherefore 
( by  the  2.  definition  of  the  fixt 3  and  by  the  14.  of 
the fixt)  the Jides  of  the  figures  TF  andT)  A} 

"Which  containe  the  equall  angles 3are  reciprokall. 

Wherefore  as  the  fide  F  E  is  to  the  fide  ED  Jo  is 
the  fide  AE  to  the fide  E[ B.  Tut  the  JideFE 
is  equal h?nto  the  line  A  C}  that  is 3  ynto  the  line 
A  T?  and  the  fide  E  T  is  equall  ymto  the  line 
AE(  by  the  34-  ofthefirfi).  Wherefore  as  the 
line  T  A  is  to  the  line  AE3fo  is  the  line  A  E  to 
the  line  ET.  Tut  the  line  AT  is  greater  then 
the  line  A  E.  Wberfore  alfo  the  line  A  E  is grea* 

ter  then  the  line  E  S  Wherefore  the  right  line  A  T  is  deuided  by  an  extreme 
and  meane proportion  in  the  point  E:and  the  greater  figment  thereof  is  AEt 
Which  "Was  required  to  be  done. 


p  - 1 

>-/  ■ 

.•i’ll  J 

■ 

E  '  ' 

' 

. 

L  _ . :  v - 

W »  O'VivV 


#An  other  way. 


Suppofe  the  right  linegeuen  to  be  AT.  It  is  required  to  deuide  the  line  A  T 
J?yanextreme  a?id  meane  proportion. Teuide  the  line  AT  in  the  point  C(by  the 
Ji.of the fecond )  in  fitch  fort  that  the  reSIangle figure  comprehended  t>nder  the 
lines  A  T  and  TC  may  he  equall  Jm to  thejquare  de* 
fcribcd  of  the  line  C  A .  And  forafimuch  as  that  "which  &  c  rj  A  t 

is  comprehended  ynder  the  lines  ATtsr  T  Cfis  equall  ~  f 

Imto  thefquare  made  ofthe  line  A  therefore  as  the 
line  T  A  is  to  the  line  AC3fo  (by  the  17. of  the fixt )  is  the  line  A  Q  to  the  line 
C  T.  Wherfore  the  line  A  T  is  deuided  by  an  extreme  isr  meane proportion  in 
the  point  C .  "Which  ho  as  required  to  be  done. 

faffhe  11.  Theoreme .  7  feep,  ffrofiofition* 


<»  Vi 


fnreB angle  triangles  the  figure  made  ofthe  fide  fuht ending 

$rMi  f. — Ik  —  i 


n 


ingmeng 


nto 


e. 


ejtaesco - 


mres 

like 


he 


ofSuclides  Elementes , 


FqLijS, 


tkeimae, 


,  A  S 


Vppofe  that  there  he  a  triangle  ABC,  *t vhofe  angle  B  AC  let  be  a 
right  angle. T  he  I fay  that  the  figure  yvhich  is  defier  i bed  of the  lyne  B 
C  is-  equall^nto  the  two figures  lohich  are  deferibed  of  the  lines  B  A 
A  C,the fiaid  thre  figures  being  like  the  one  to  the  other, and  in  like 


fort  deferibed. From  the  point  A  (by  the  12.  of  the  firfi)let  there  be  drawne 
to  the  line  BC  a  perpendiculer  line  AID  JSLow  ford fmuch  as  in}  rebiangle  trian * 
gle  ABC  is  drawen  from  the  right  angle  A  Imto  the  bafie  BC  a  perpendicular , 
line  A  -Dither fore  the  triangles  A  BD,and  A DC fet  ypon  the  perpendiculer 
line/ire  like  l?nto  the  lehole  triangle  A  B  C,and  alfolike  the  one  to  the  otherfby 
the  8. of the fixt).  And  forafinuch  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  like  T? nto  the  triangle 
A B  D,therfore  as  the  line  C B  is  to  the  line  B  A,  fo  is  the  line  AB  to  the  lyne 
B  ID.  Blow  for  that  there  are  three  right  lines  proportional  fiber  fore  (by  the  2. 
correllary  of the  20.  of the fixth )  as  the firfi  is  to  the  third,  fo  is  the  figure  made 
of  the firfi,  to  the figure  made 
ofthefecond,  the f aid  figures 
being  like  and  in  like  forte  de* 
fieri  bed.  JVherefore  as  the  lyne 
B  C  is  to  the  line  B  Dfio  is  the 
figure  made  of the  line  BC  to 
the  figure  made  of  the  line  B 
A,  they  beyng  like  and  in  lyke 
fort  deferibed.  And  by}  fame 
reafon  as  the  line  B  C  is  to  the 
lyne  C  Dfio  is  the  figure  made 
of  the  line  BC  ,  to  the  figure 
made  of  the  line  C  A,  they  be* 
ing  like  and  in  like  fort  deferu 
bed.  Wherfore  as  the  line  B  C  is  to  the  lines  B  D  and  D  Cfio  is  the  figure  made 
of  the  line  BC  to  the  figures  made  of the  lines  B  A  and  A  C,  they  being  like  and 
in  like fort  deferibed.  But  the  line  BC  is  equalhmto  the  lines  B  D  and  DC, 
loherfore  the  figure  made  of the  lyne  B  C  is  equall  Tvnto  the  figures  made  of  the 
lines  B  A  and  A  C,they  being  like  and  in  like fort  defcribed.Wherfore  in  redan* 
gle  triangles  the  figure  made  of the fide fubtendang  the  right  angle  is  equall  lanto 
the  figures  made  ofthefides  comprehending  the  right  angle fio  that  the faid  thre 
figures  be  like  an  d  in  like  fort  deferibed :  Tv hich  leas  required  to  beproued » 

<iAn  other  way. 

Forafinuch  as(hy  the  firfi  correllary  of the  20.  of the fixthfiike  rediline fi* 
gures  are  in  double proportion  to  that  that  the  fides  of  like proportion  are ,  ther* 

fir.  ij .  fore 


Conjlruttion 


Dmonjlra* 
tion . 


*¥]  *T  he fixth^oofy  5 

,  we  the  reBiline  figure  made  of the  line  SC  is  Tpnto  the  reBiline  figure  made  of 
the  line  8  A  in  double  proportion  to  that  that  the  line  C8  is  to  the  line  (8  A>  and 
(by  the  fame )  thefquare  alfo  made  of  the  line  8  £  is  Tmto  the fquare  made  of the 
line  8  A  in  double  proportion 
to  that  that  the  line  C  8  is  yn* 
to  the  line  8  A.  Wherfore  alfo 
as  the  re  Sit  line figure  made  of 
the  line  C  8  is  to  the  reBiline 
figure  made  of the  line  8  A  Jo 
is  the  fquare  made  of  the  lyne 
C8  to  the  fquare  made  of  the 
line  8  A.  (find  hy  the  fame  re  a 
fin  alfoyts  the  reciilme figure 
made  of  the  line  8  C  is  to  the 
reBiline  figure  made  off  line 
C  A,  fo  is  the fquare  made  of 
the  line  8C  to  the  fquare  made 

of  the  line  (JA.Wherfore  alfo  as  the  reBiline  figure  made  of  the  line  1 8  C  is  to  the 
reBiline figures  made  of  the  lines  8  A  and  JfC}fois  the fquare  made  of  the  line 
8  C  to  the  Jquares  made  of  the  lines  8  A  and  C.  8ut  the  fquare  made  off  line 
8  C  is  equall  ynto  the jquares  made  of the  lines  8  A  and  AC  (by  the  47.  of the 
firft)  Wherefore  alfo  the  reBiline  figure  made  of the  line  8  C  is  equall  ynto  the 
reBiline  figures  made  of the  lines  8  A  and  A,Cjhe faid  three  figures  beyng  fyke 
and  in  like  fort  defer ibed. 

T  he  comerfe  of this  Tropofition  after  Campane. 

The  comerfe  if  the  f ?ure  defer  ibed  of  one  of  the ftdes  of  a  triangle  be  equall  to  the  figures  which  are 

oftbeformer  deferibed  ofthe  two  other fides  jbe  fay  d figures  being  like  and  in  like  fort  deferibed,  thetri- 
propojnsGti.  tyigle fall  be  a  r ell  an  fie  triangle . 

Suppofe  that  A  B  C  be  a  triangle, and  let  the  fi¬ 
gure  deferibed. of  the  fide  BC  beequalljtothe 
two  figures  deferibed  of  thefides  AB  andAC, 
the  faid  figures  being  like.and  in  like  fort  defen¬ 
ded-  Then  l  fay  that  the  angle  A  is  a  right  angle. 

Let  the  angle  C  A  D  be  a  right  angle, and  put  the 
line  A  D  equall  to  the  line  A  B,  and  drawe  a  lync 
Irofti  I)  to  C.Nowthen  by  this  3 1 .  propofition, 
the  figure  made  of  the  line  CD  is  equall  to  the 
two  figures  made  ofthe  lines  A  C  and  A  D,  the 
faid  figures  being  like  and  in  like  fort  deferibed. 

Wherefore  alfo  it  is  equall  vnto  the  figure 
made  ofthe  line  B  C,  which  is  by  fuppofition  e- 

ejpal  to  the  two  figures  made  ofthe  lines  AC  and  AD  ffor  the  line  A  Dis  put  equall  to 
the  line  A  B)  wh  erfore  the  line  D  C  is  equall  to  the  line  B  C .  Wherfore  (  by  the  8  .of  the 
fiift)  the  angle  B  A  C  is  a  rightanglc,  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

The 


y'yThz  iXiTheoreme*  Tfhi  32, fPropofitibti* 

If  two  triangles  befit  together  at  one  angle  Jiauing  two  fide  $ 
of  the  one  proportional!  to  two  fides  of  the  other,  Jo  that  their 
fides  eflifye  proportion  be  alfo parallels :  then  the  other  fides 
remayning  ofthojetrian  * 


ne* 


in  onen 


Vpphffi  the  two  triangles  to  he  AB  C,  and  D  CE,and  let  two  of  their 
fides  A  CeyDC  make  an  angle  .ACS)  find  let  the  fetid  triangles  have 
two  fides. of the  one , namely  >  B  A  and  AC  proportionally  two  fides  of 
the  other  yiamely }  to  D  Cand  ID  EJoy  as  A  l Bis  to  A  C,fo  let  DC  he  to  DE. 
And  let  AB  be  a  par allell  lent o  D  C,and  A  C  a  paralleihmto  D  E.  Then  I  fay, 
that  the  lines  rB  C  and  C E  are  in  one  right  line .  For  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B 
is  a  par  allell  lento  the  line  D  C,  and 
Tepon  the  lighted?  a  right  line  A  Cl 
therefore  (by  the  29.  of  the firftfihe 

alternate  angles  B  A  Cand  A  CD  /  ;  $ 

are  equall  the  one  to  the  other  *  And 
hy  the fame  reafon  the  angle  CD  E  A  \ 

is  equall  lent oy  fame  angle  A  CD, 

Wherefore  the  angle  B  AC  is  equall 
Imto  the  anfie  CDE *  And  for  a  f 

■■  ,  A  '  t  1  ..  . .  . 

much  as  there  are  two  triangles 

ABC  and  D  CE}  hauing  the  angle  A  of the  one  equall  to  the  angle  D  of the 
other,  and  the fides  about  the  equall  angles  are  (by  fuppofition  )  proportionally 
that  is  ,as  the  line  BA  is  to  the  line  A  CJo  is  the  line  CD  to  the  line  D  E fiber* 
fore  the  triangle  ABC  is  (by  the  6.  of  thefixt )  equiangle  l>?ito  the  triangle 
DCE.  Wherefore  the  angle  ABC  is  equall  lento  the  angle  DCE.  And  it  is 
prouedy  that the  angle  A  CD  is  equall  lento  the  angle  BAG.  Wherefore  the 
yckole  angle  ACE  is  equall  lento  the  two  angles  ABC  arid  BA  0  But  the  an* 


and  C  B  A}  are  (by  the  3 2, of  thefirft)  equall  lento  two  right  angles .  Wherefore 
alfo  the  angles  ACE.  and  AC  Bare  equall  to  two  right  angles.  Now  then  Ini* 
to  Ac  right  line  AC,  and  Imto  the  point  in  it  C,  are  drawcn  two  right  lines  BC 
and  C  Ey  not  on  one  and  t  he  fame fide  ,ma  king  the fide  angles  ACE.  ACB 
equall  to  two  right  angles .  Wherefore  the  lines  B  C  and  C  E  (  by  the  14.  of  the 
fift)  arefit  direftly  and  do  make  one  right  line .  If  therefore  two.  triangles  be 
fet  together  Aypepngle  haufig  two fides  of  the  one  proporiimMhhyiPofdts 

J  P&fE-L  1. P  T  ■*  P  I  -  Pi:  t  .  -•  '1  is*  A 


si* 


Although 


rediline  figures,  as  he  did  oflines  in  the  i  o.Propofitio  of  this  Booke,  and  in  the  3. 
following  it ,  yet  as  F Inflates  noteth,  is  that  not  hard  to  be  done  by  the  22,  of  thys 
Booke .  For  two  like  rediline  figures  being  geuen  to  finde  out  a  third  'proportion 
nail  :  alfo  betwcne  two  rediline  fuperficiec-es  geuen  to  finde  out  a  mean  e  propor¬ 
tional!  (  which  we  before  taught  to  do  by  Pditarws  after  the  24.  Propofition  of 
this  booke  )  :  and  moreouer  three  like  rediline  figures  being  geuen  to  finde  out  a 
fourth  proportional!  like  and  in  like  fort  defcribed,and  fuch  kinde  of  proportions, 
are  eafie  to  be  found  out  by  the  proportions  oflines.  As  thus.  Ifvnto  two  fides 
oflike proportion  we  lhould  find  out  a  third  propordonall  by  the  n.of  this-boke: 
the  rediline  figure  deferibed  vpon  that  line  ihall  be  the  third  rediline  figure  pro- 
portionall  with  the  two  firft  figures  geuen  by  the  22.  of  thys  booke  .  And  ifbc- 
twene  two  fides  of  like  proportion  be  taken  a  meane  propordonall  by  thereof 
thys  Booke :  the  rediline  figure  deferibed  vpon  the  fayd  meane  ihall  likewife  be  a 
ineane  proportionail  betwene  the  two  rediline  figures  geue  by  the  lame  22..of  the 
fixt  i'Artd  fo 'ifvnto  three  fides  geuen  be  found  but  the  fourth  fide  propordonall 
(by  the  12. ofthis booke)  thdrc&Uinc  figure  deferibed  vpon  the  fayd  fourth  line 
fhall  be  the  fourth  rediline  figure  propordonall .  For  if  the  right  lines  be  proporti¬ 
onal!,  the  rediline  figures  deferibed  vpon  them  Ihall.  alfo  be  propordonall ,fo  that 
the  faid  rediline  figures  be  like  &  in  like  fort  deferibed  by  the  faid  22. of  the  fixt. 

*r&The  22.  Theoreme .  The  33.  Tropoftion. 


That  the 
glesattbe  ce- 
ter  are  in  pro  - 
portio  the  one 
to  the  other ><ts 
thecircumfe - 
rentes  tv  heron 
they  are. 


yn  equal  circles  j  he  angles  haue  one  and  the  felfe fame  pro* 
portion  that  the  cir cum  femes  haue ,  wherin  they  coJiJl3  whe^ 
ther  the  angles  be  fet  at  the  centres  or  at  the  circumferences • 
1  ike  fort  are  theJeSors  which  are  deferibed  yppon  the 


centres,-: 

k  v.  I  '•  v 

c  v  \  *xr\ 


\  \ 


Yl'y-MSii 


J  'iUV  XX  t>\  f  v  ‘i.  .  /  . 

EppcfcheXqualtcirclesmhe  A  B  C3and  fD  E  Fflfrhofe  centres  let  be  G 
mdHjmdlet  the  angle  fet  at  their  centres  G  and  Hflbe  B  G  Cyind  E 
HE:  dnd'kt'the  angles  fet  at  their  circumferences  be  ByfC  and  EJD 
E,  Ehen  l  fly  that -as  the  circumference  B  C  is  to  the  circumference  EE fo  is 
the  angle  BGC  to  the.augle  EH  F:  and  the  angle  B  AC  to  the  angle  E  !D  F, 
and  moreouer  the  feffor  GBC  to  the  fed? or  HEF.  Vnto  the  circumference 
B  C(by  the  28.  of  the  third)  put  as  many  e  quail  circumferences  in  order  as  you 
?tyill3namely>f  Efland IfEpmd'Pitto  the  circumference  E  F put  alfo  as  many  t* 
quail  circumferences  in-number  as  you  Svilfnamely  flE  M}and  ETTSL.And  dr  A 
"<  ihefe  right  lines  G  if-  G  L3  H M3and  H  H.  ISlow  for af  nuch  as  the  circumfe * 
rences  B  f  fflf^and  KJL  are  equatl  the  one  to  the  other flthe  angles  alfo  B  G  f3 
cyidQG  jf3andifG  E  are  (by  the  27.  of  the  third)  equall  throne  to  the  other, 
Efeforehytpyml.tiplex the  circumference  B  E  is  to  the  circumference  B  Q  fo 
multiplex  isEanple  BX}  E .to  the  ano-leB  G  EtAndbvv  fame  r'edfon alfo ,  / 

the 


0, 


FoL\$0, 


angle  PLFlE  to  the  angle  E  HF Wherfore  if the  circumference  (BE  be  equal 
hnto  the  circumference  EPL,the  angle  BG  E  is  equa.ll  "unto  the  angle  E  PL  PLd 
and  if the  circumference  B  E  be  greater  then  the  circumference  E  PI ,  the  angle 
BG  L  is  greater  then  the  angle  PL  HE,  and  if the  circumference  be  leffe,  the 
angle  is  leffe.  Plow  then  there  are  four  e  magnitudes,  namely,  the  two  circumfe * 
rences  B  QandE  F,and  the  two  angles  that  is,B  G  f,  and  E  HE,  and  to  the 
circumf  erence  B  f  und  to  the  angle  B  G  C,that  is,  to  thefrjl  and  third  are  take 
equemultiplkes ,» namely , the  circumference  B  L,and  the  angle  BGE,  and  like * 
ixnfe  to  the  circumference  E  F,and  to  the  angle  E  HE, that  is, to  the  fecondand 
fourth, are  taken  ceriayne  other  equemultiphces, namely, the  circumference  E  PL 
and  the  angle  E  HPL.  And  it  is  proued,  that  if  the  circumference  B  Lexceede 
the  circumference  E  PL, the  angle  alfo  BG  E  exceedeth  the  angle  E  H  PL.  And 
if the  circumference  be  equally  he  angle  is  e  quail,  and  if the  circumferece  be  leffe , 
the  angle  alfo  is  lefie.  Wherfore  (by  the  6. definition  of ibe fifth  fas  the  circumfe* 
rence  B  C is  to  the  circumference  E  Ffr  is  the  angle  B  GQto  the  angle  E  HE, 


Gi 


“LUO  G 


-  But  as  the  angle  B  G  Qis  to  the  angle  EH  E,fo  is  the  angle  BAC  to  the 
angle  E  £>  Ffror  the  angle  BG  C  is  double  to  the  angle  BAG, and  the  angle  E  gksatthetie* 
H  F  is  alfo  double  to  the  angle  E  D  F  (by  the  20.  of  the  third)  Wherfore  as  the  cumf^»pet 
circumference  B  C  is  to  the  tiyomfierenwEf,  F, fio  is  the  angle  B  G  C  to  the  angle  a^°‘ 

E  HF, and  the  angleB  A  Cto  the  angle  E  D'F Wherfore  in  equal  circles  the 
angles  ewe  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  proportion  that  their  circumferences  are, 
whether  the  angles  be  jet. at  the  centres, or  at  the  circumferences :  iehicb  leas  re? 

■qtared  to  be  proued.  , 


I ftymoreouer  that  as  tffi  circumference  !Bt  is  to  the  circumference  EPffb  That  the  fit '* 
is  the.feciforGBC.to  the  feffor  HEF.  Draw  thefe  lines  BG  and  CEfr An f  unrtmfi 
in  the  circumferences  BGahdC Intake pointes  at  all  aduentures ,namely  fP  imd 
0 .  And  draw  lines  from  %  to  B ,an  dfromB  to  Efrrom  C  to  0, and  from  0  to  jfi. 
Jndforafmuch  as  (by  the  iu  definition  of  the  firft)  the  two  fines  BGanAGC 
are. equal  "unto  the  two  limes  G  G  andG  E^atid  they  alfo  comprehend  equal  an* 


.'i  r 

«SrA^t 


gksyherfore  ( by  the  4.  of the fir  ft)  the,  baft  B  C  is equall  0> nto  the  bafe  C  Jfgjr 
ifie triangle  G  B  C  is  equall lento,  the  triangle  G  CJfAndftmg  thatthe  circum 
ference  B  ('is  equalllmto  the  circumference  Clf,  therefore  the  circumference 
remayning  of  the  ~tohole  circle  AB  C yiamely ythe  circumference  BL  A  IfO  C> 
is  equall  "unto  the  circumference  remayning  of  the  felfe  fame  circle  A  B  Cyianie * 
lyyto  the  circumference  CB  BLAJf  Wherfare  the  angle  B  B  C is  equall  1 mto 
the  angle  CO  If  (by  the  27. of  the  third)  Wherfore  (by  the  10 .  definition  of  the 
third)  the figment  BBC  is  like  tmto  the figment  (f  0  If  .and  they  are fit  hpon 
equall  fight  lines  B  C  and  Iff.  But  liktfigmentes  of  circles  "it1  hich  con fift  ypon 
equall  right  lines  are  alfo  equall  the  one  to  the  other  (by  the  24.  of  the  third). 
Wherfore  the  fegment  B  B>  fits  equall  "onto  the  figment  QO  If  find  the  trim * 
gle  GBff  is  equall  "onto  the  triangle  GC  If  Wherfore  the fettor  G  Bt  is  equall 
lento  the  fettor.  GCIf.  And  hy  the  fame  reafon  alfoy  the  fictor  G  If  L  is  e* 
quail  lento  either  of the fettor s  GBC  and  G  Clf.  Wherforey  three fi  Hors  G 
B  C  and  G  C  Jfyand  G  JfL,yare  equally  one  toy  other.  And  by  the  fame  reafon 
dlfithe fittors  HEP  and  H  EM /aid  HMN  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 
Wherefore  how  mult  flex  the  circumference  B  LI  is  to  the  circumference  B  Cfo 
m  ultiplex  is  the  fettor  G  L  B  to  the fettor  G  BC.Andby  the  fame  reafon  how 
multiplex  the  circumference  N  E  is  to  the  circumference  E  Effi  multiplex  isy 
fit  lor  MEN  to  the  fettor  H  E  FJftherfore  the  circumference  B  L  be  equall 
yntoy  circumference  E  Nyy fettor  alfo  B  Gluts  equall  intoy fittor  E  IAN. 
■Andif  the  dr  cumf erect  B  L  excedey  circumference  E  Ny  y  fettor  dlfi  B  G  L 
excedeth  the fettor  EHN.  And  if the  circumference  be  lefiey  the  fitter  alfo  is 
lejfi.  Nole  the  there  are  foure  magnitudes yiamelyy  the  two  circumferences  B  C 
dndE  ft  And  the  two  Bettors.  GBCAsEAE  E.and  to  the  circumference  BC.ts* 
to  the jettor  G  BLynamelyyto  the  fir  ft  and  the  thirdly  taken  equemultiphces y 


of  Sue lidcs  Elementes*  FoL  181. 

tor  fi  E  EL,  And  it  is proued  that  if  the  circumference  L  excede  the  circumfe* 
rence  E1SL }  the  feSfor  alfo  tBGL>  excedeth  the  feffor  EH  El.  And  if  the ' 
circumference  he  equally  the  ferment  alfo  is  equally  and  if  the  circumference  he 
lefCythe fegment  alfo  is  lejfe.  Wherfore  fhy  the  corner f on  of the fixt  definition 
of the  fifth)  as  the  circumference  C  is  to  the  circumference  EFyfo  is  y  feffor 
Gfti  1)7  it  o  the fief  or  H  EF;  1 vhich  is  all  that  leas  required  to  he  proued * 

Corollary . 

<*And  hereby  it  is  manifiefi  float  as  the  feBor  is  to  the  Jector $ 
Jo  is  angle  to  angle  by  the  n.  of the  fifth. 

Flujfates  here  addeth  fiue  Propofitions  wherof one  is  a  Probleme  hauing  three 
Corollaryes  following  of  it,  and  the  reft  are  Theoremes :  which  for  that  they  are 
both  witty,  &  alfo  feme  to  great  vfe,  as  we  fhall  afterward  fee,  I  thought  not  good 
to  omitte ,  but  haue  here  placed  them  :  but  onely  that  I  haue  not  put  them  to  fob 
lowe  in  order  with  the  Propofitions  of  Euclide  as  he  hath  done. 

f  T  he  first  Eropoftion  added  by  Flujfates. 

T  o  deferibe  two  rethhnefigures  e  quail  md  like  vnto  a  reclilinefgure  gtuen  and  in 
like fort fituate,  which fhall  haue  alfo  a  proportion  geuen. 

Suppofe  that  the  rediline  figure  geuen  be  A  B  H.  And  let  the  proportion  geuen  be 
the  proportion  of  the  lines  G  C  and  C  I>.  And(by  the  i  o.of  this  booke)deuide  the  line 
A  B  like  vnto  the  line  GD  in  the  poynt  E  (fo  that  as  the  line  G  C  is  to  the  line  CD,  Co 
let  the  line  A  E  be  to  the  line  EB).  And  vpon  the  line  AB  deferibe  ztevnicixclz  A F B . 
And  from  the  poynt  E  ered  '(by  the  1 1  .of  the  firft)  vnto  the  line  cA  X  a  perpendicular 
line  E  F  cutting  the  circumference  in  the  poynt  F.And  draw  thefe  lines  AF  and  F  2* 
And  vpon  either  of  thefe  lines  deferibe  rediline  figures  like  vnto  the  rediline  figure 
AH  B  and  in  like  fort  fituate  ( by  the  1 8. of  the  fixt) :  which  let  beAKF,8cFlB.Then 
1  fay, that  the  rediline  figures  A  KF,  and  FJB, 
haue  the  proportion  gcue(namely,the  propor¬ 
tion  ofthe  line  <7  C  to  the  line  CCD)  and  aree- 
qualltothe  rediline  figure  geuen  AB H  vnto  ^ 
which  they  are  deferibed  like  and  in  like  fort  fi¬ 
tuate  ,  For  forafinuch  as  A  F  TO  is  a  fcmicircle, 
therefore  the  angle  a AF  B  is  a  right  angle  (by 
the  3 1  .of  the  third)  and  FE  is  a  perpendicular 
line.  Wherefore  (  by  the  8,of  this  bookej  the 
triangles  A  EE  and  F  BE  are  like  both  to  the 
whole  triangle  nAFE-and.  alfo  the  one  to  the 
other.  Wherefore  (by  the  4.ofthisbooke)as 
the  line  AF  is  to  the  line  FB,  fo  is  the  line  A  E 
to  the  line  E  F ,and  the  line  E  F  to  the  line  E  Bt 
which  areafides  cotayning  equall  angles.  Wher¬ 
fore  (by  the  2  2. of  this  booke)  as  the  re  diline  fi- 
‘  ure  deferibed  of  the  line  A  F  is  to  the  rediline 
gure  deferibed  of  the  line  FB,  fo  is  the  redi- 
Jin  e  figure  deferibed  of  the  line  AEto  the  redi- 
line  figure  deferibed  of  the  line  E  F,  the  fayd  rediline  figures  being  like  and  in  like  fort’ 

fituate* 


CouHyutUon 
ofthe  Fra- 
blerne • 


Demoft/lrfr 
tion  ofthe 
fame. 


The  firft  Co¬ 
rollary, 


The  fecond 
Corollary. 


The  third 
Corollary , 


fituate.  But  as  the  redilitie  figure  deferibed  of the  MnetsAE  being  the  firft,  is  to  the 
rediline  figure  deferibed  of  the  line"  E  F  being  the  fecond,fo  is  the  line  a^fE  the  firft, to 
the  line  E  B  the  third  (by  the  2  .Corollary  of  the  2  o  .of  thys  booke)  .Wherforc  the  redi- 
line  figure  deferibed  of  the  line  A  F is  to  the  rediline  figure  deferibed  of  the  line  FBy 
as  the  line  tA  E  is  to  the  line  E  B.  But  the  line  *A  E  is  the  line£F  (by  conftrudion) 
astheline  <jC  is  to  the  line  C‘D  .  Wherefore(by  the  n.ofthefift)  as  thelineGCisto 
the  line  CZ),foistheredilinefiguredefcribedofthe  line  *AF  to  the  rediline  figure 
deferibed  oftheline  FB,  the  fayd  rediline  figures  being  like  and  in  like  fort  deferibed. 
But  the  rediline  figures  deferibed  of  the  lines  AF  and  FB>  are  equall  to  the  rediline 
figure  deferibed  oftheline  A  B ,  vnto  which  they  are  (by  conftrudion)  deferibed  lyke 
and  in  like  fort  fituate  ♦  Wherefore  there  are  deferibed  two  rediline  figures  KF  and 
FIB  equal!  and  like  vnto  the  rediline  figure  gcuen  *A  B  H  and  in  like  fort  fituate, and 
they  haue  alfo  the  one  to  the  other  the  proportion  gcuen,  namely,  the  proportion  of 
the.line  GC  to  the  line  CD;  which  was  required  to  be  done, 

f  T  he fir  ft  Corollary. 

Torefeluea  reCliline  figure  gtue  into  two  like  reEliline figures  Which  Jhall  haue  alfo'a  proport  io ge¬ 
ne.  For  if  there  be  put  three  right  lines  in  the  proportio  geue,and  if  the  line  A  B  be  cut 
in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  firll  line  is  to  the  third  ,  the  rediline  figures  deferibed 
of  the  lines  zA  FandFS  (whichfigureshaue  the  fame  proportion  that  the  lines  AE 
and  E  B  haue)  Ihall  be  in  double  proportion  to  that  which  the  lines  AF  and  F  B  are(by 
the  firft  Corollary  of  the  ao.of  this  booke)  .Wherefore  the  right  lines  zA  F  and  F  2? 
are  the  one  to  the  other  in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  firft  of  the  three  lines  put  is  to 
the  fcco  id .  For  the  firft  line  to  the  third,namely  ,the  line  AEto  the  line  E  B  is  in  dou¬ 
ble  proportion  that  it  is  to  the  fecond,  by  the  xo.definition  ofthefifr, 

y  The  fecond  Corollary. 

Hereby  mayWelearnc,how from  arethlinc  figure  geuen  to  take  away  a  fart  appointed,  leaning 
the  refi  of iherctliline figure  like  vntvtheWhole.  Foriffro  the  right  line  AB  be  cut  of  a  part 
appQynted,namely,£2?  (by  the  p.ofthis  booke)  as  the  ImzAEis  to  the  line  E  B,  fo  is 
the  rediline  figure  deferibed  of  the  line  AF  to  the  rediline  figure  deferibed  of  the  line 
FB  (the  fayd  figures  being  fuppofed  to  be  like  both  the  one  to  the  other  and  alfo  to  the 
rediline  figure  defcribed  oftheline^F,and  being  alfo  in  like  fort  fituate,).  Wherfore 
taking  away  from  the  rediline  figure  deferibed  of  the  line  AB,  the  rediline  figure  de- 
fenbed  of  the  line  F  Z?,the  refidue, namely,  the  rediline  figure  deferibed  of  the  line  A  F 
(hall  be  both  like  vnto  the  whole  rediline  figure  geuen  deferibed  ofthe  line  a^2?,and 
in  like  fort  fituate. 

fj'  T he  third  Corollary. 

T 0  compofe  two  tike  rcEHline figures  into  one  reEliline  figure  like  and  eqttall  to  the  fame  figures. 
Let  their  fides  of  like  proporti  obe  fet  fo  that  they  make  a  right  angle,as  the  lines  zA  F 
and  FB  are .  And  vpo  the  line  fubtending  the  faid  angle,namcly,the  line  A  £,defcribe 
a  rediline  figure  like  vnto  the  rediline  figures  geuen  and  in  like  fort  fituate  (by  the  1 8. 
of  this  booke)and  the  fame  (hall  be  equall  to  the  two  rediline  figures  geuen(by  the  31* 
of  this  booke) . 

f  The  fecond  Tropofition. 

jf two  right  lines  cut  the  one  the  other  obtufeangled  wife,  and  from  the  endes  ofthe 
lines  which  cut  the  one  the  other  be  drawen  perpendicular  lines  to  either  line:  the  lines 
which  are  betwene  the  endes  and  the  perpendicular  lines  are  cut  reciprokally. 

-  Suppofe 


of Buc tides  Ekmentes. 


Fol.iStt 


Suppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  AB  and  GT)  cutting  the  one  the  other  in  ch£ 
point  E,  and  making  an  obtufe  angle  in  the  fection  £.  And  from  the  endes  of  the  lines, 
namely,  A  and  G,  let  there  be  drawen  to  either  line  perpendicular  lines,  namely,  from 
the  point  A  to  the  line  G  Awhichlet  be  A  £>,  and  from  the  point  G  to  the  right  line 
A  B:  which  let  be  (?£,' Then  I  fay, that  the.  r  i  v  ,  ^ 

rightlines  £  and  <?  £  do ,  betwenethe 
end  A  and  the  perpendicular  £,andthe  v 
end  G  and  the  perpendicular  T),  cut  the 
one  the  other  reciprokally  in  the  point  E: , 
fo  that  as  the  line  AE  is  to  the  line  £  A, 
fo  is  the  line  G E  to  the  line  E  £.Forforaf- 
much  as  the  angles  AT)  E  and  G  BE,  are 
right  angles, therfore  they  are  equall.  But 
the  angles  A  ED  and  GEB  arealfo  e- 
quall  (by  the  1 5. of  thefirft)  .  Wherefore 

the  angles  remayning, namely, £  A  D,&  E  G  B,  are  equall  (  by  the  Cbrollary  of  the  35. 
of  the  firft )  .  Wherefore  the  triangles  A  E  D  and  (?££,  are  equiangle.  Wherfore  the 
iides  about  the, equall  angles  (lull  be  proportional!  (by  the  4.ofthefixt)  *  Wherfore  as 
the  line  AE  is  to  the  line  ££>,  fo  is  the  line  G  E  to  the  line  E  B  ,  If  therefore  two  right 
lines  cut  the  one  the  other  obtufeangled  wife.&c  ;  which  was  required  to  be  proued* 


ff  The  third  (Propojitton* 

If  two  right  lines  make  an  acute  angle ,  and from  their  endes  be  drawen  to  ech  line 
perpendicular  lines  cutting  them :  the  two  right  lines  geuen fall  be  reciprokally  pro * 
portionqll  as  the  fegmentes  which  are  about  the  angle, 

vxnt  or!  v  labn ;  h'^tvn.^  *  o-reg?*  ar§ os.f;  1  sifh  (fcii  Jt 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  AB  and  GB,  makingan  acute  angle  AB  (?. 
And  from  the  poyntes  A  and  let  there  be  drawen  vnto  the  lines  and  ^^per¬ 
pendicular  lines  AC  and  G  Ei  cutting  the  lines  AB  and  G  B  in  the  poyntes  E  and  C, 
Then  I  fay,that  the  lines,nameiy,^  £  to  G are  reciprokally  proportionally  the feg- 
mentes,  namely,  C£  to  EB  which  are  about  the  acute  n 

angle  B  .  For  forafmuch  as  thearight angles  AGB  and 
GEB  are  equall ,  and  the  angle  ABG  is  common  to  the 
triangles  A B  C,  and  G B  £  .*  therefore  the  angles  re-  ' 
mayning  'B  AC  and£G’£  are  equall  (by  the- Corolla¬ 
ry  of  the  3  2  a  ofthe  hrft) .  Wherfore  the  triangles  orf  BC 
and  QBE  are  equiangle  .  Wherefore  the  (ides- about 
the  equal!  angles  are  proportionaH^by  the 4.oftheiixfi)^ 
fo  that,  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  £  C,fo  is  the  line 
GB  to  the  line  ££,  Wherefore  alternately  as  theline  i 
A  B  is  to  the  line  G  B>  fo  is  the  line  CB  to  theline  £  £. 

If  therefore  two  right  lines  mate  an  acute angle*  &ci 
which  was  required  to  be  proued,  .  00 :  ' b 


B 


st ton. 


« 

> 


if  in  a  circle  be  drawen  two  right  lines  cutting  the  one  the  other  fhe petitions  ofthe  one 
to  the potions  ofthe  other  fall  be  reciprokally  proportionall. 

■  .  •  ■ 

In  the  circle  AG  B  let  thefe  two  right  lines.  A  B  and  G  D  cut  the  one  the  other  in 
the  poynt  £ .  Then  I  fay,  that  reciprokally  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  fine  ££,  fo  is  the 
line  GE  to  the  line  ££  .  For  forafmuch  as  (by  the  3  5 ,  of  the  third  )  the  re^angle  fi¬ 


gure 


Vemnflra* 
tton  of  this 
ptopojitsottt 


DemnSlro* 

tionofthis 

proportion) 


Demon  ft  rati* 
on  of  this  pro* 
pofttton. 


<a 


Dsmonftrati- 
on  of  the  fit  ft 
part  of  this 
propofimn* 


*Vw 


r*i.  \ 

e 


.3!  •■>  v 


gure  contayned  vnder  the  lines  *AE  and 
EB  is  equal!  to  the  redangle  figure  contay¬ 
ned  vnder  the  lines  G  £  and  £’2),  but  in  e- 
quail  rectangle  parallelogrammes  thefides 
about  the  equall  angles  are  reciprokall  (by 
the  14.  ofthefixt)  »  Therefore  the  line  AE 
is  to  the  line  ££>  reeiprokally  as  the  line 
G  £  is  to  the  line  ££  (by  the  fecond  defi¬ 
nition  ofthefixt)  *  If  therefore  in  a  circle 
be  drawen  two  right  lines.  &c:  which  was 
required  to  beproued. 

yf  T  he fift  Trofto/ition. 


4r. 


if  from  a  poyntgeuen  be  drawen  in  aplaine 
fuperfciestwo  right  lines  to  the  concaue  circumference  of  a  circle  :  they  fhall  be  r ecu 
prokally  froporttomll  with  their partes  take  without  the  circle.  And moreouer  a  right 
line  drawen  from  the  fay d poynt  &  touching  the  circle,  fhall  be  a  meane  proportionaU 
betwene  the  whole  line  and  the  vtter  fegment . 


Sl'C'jt 


Veptonftra- 
tiduof  theft • 
cond part* 


Suppofe  that  there  be  a  circle  a ABfD,  and  without  it 
take  a  certayne  poynt,nanVely,  G ,  And  from  the  point  G 
drawe  vnto  the  concaue  circumference  two  right  lines 
GB  and  CD,  cutting  the  circle  in  the  poyntcs  Cand£. 

Andlet  the  line  G  A  touch  the  circle  in  the  point  A. The 
2  fay,  that  the  lines,  namely,  GB  to  GD  are  reeiprokally 
as  their  parts  taken  without  the  circie,namely ,  a  sGC  to 
G  £ ,  For  forafmuch  as  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  3  6, of  the 
third)  the  redangle  figure  contayned  vnder  thehnes  GB 
.and  GE  is  equall  to  the  redangle  figure  contayned  vn- 
-der  the  lines  GD  and  CjC,  therefore (  by  the  i4.ofthe 
jSxt)  reeiprokally  as  the  line  GB  is  to  the  line  £?£>,fo  is 
the  fine  G  C  to  the  line  <?£,  for  they  are  fides  contayning 
equall  angles.  I  fay  riiorcouer,that  betwene  the  lines  GB 
and  C?  £,  or  betwene  the  lines;  G  2>and(?  Cthc  touch  line 
G  A  is  a  meane  proportionall  .  For  forafmuch  as  the  rc- 
danglc  figure  comprehended  ynder  the  lines  GB  and 
GE  is  equall  to  the  fquare  made  o£  the  line  G  (by 

the  3  6.  of  the  third )  it  followfeththat  the  touch  line  GA  is  a  meane  propor¬ 
tionall  betwene  the  extremes  GB  and  G  £  (by  the  fecond  part  of  the  17. of 
the  fixt )  for  that  by  that  Propbfition  the  lines  G  B,  G  A,  and  GE  arc 


poynt  gcuen,&c ;  which  was  required  to  be 
demonftrated. 


nt 

<■  i> 

til 

-  u 


Theendof the  fixdi  booke 

ofEucIides  Hlementes. 


;•  ?  ■  ? 


elides  Elementes. 


Et.ii  eito  in  t  h  e  sixe  bookes  before  hath 

Eudide  paffed  through,  and  entreated  of  the  Elementes  of  Geome-* 
v  trie, without  the  ayde  and  fuceor  of  nomber  .But  the  matters  which 
ff  remayne  to  be  taught  and  to  be  fpoken  of  in  thefe  his  Geonietri- 
‘  call  bookes  which  follow  as  in  the  tenth,eleuenth,  and  fo  forth,  he 
could  by  no  mealies  fully  and  clearely  make  plaine  &s  demoniirate. 
Without  the  helpe  and  ayd  of  nombers  .  In  the  tenth  is  entreated  of 
lines  irrationall  and  vncertaine,and  that  of  many  &  fondry  kindest 
and  in  the  eleuenth  &  the  other  following  he  teacheth  the  natures 
of  bodyes,and  compareth  theyr  fides  and  lines  together.  All  which 
y  (X  for  the  moil  part  are  alfo  irrationall.  And  as  rationall  quamites,and 
the  companions  and  proportions  of  them,  cannot  be  knowen,  nor 
exadly  tried ,  but  by  the  meant  of  nomber ,  in  which  they  are  firft 
fene  and  perceiued  :  euen  fo  likewife  cannot  irrationall  quantities 
e  knowen  and  found  out  without  nornber.As  ftraightnes  is  the  triallofcrokednes,  and  inequalitie  is 
led  by  equalitie  :  fo  are  quantities  irrationall  perceiued  and  knowen  by  quantities  ratienall :  which 
are  firfi  and  chiefely  found  among  nombers .  Wherefore  in  thefe  three  bookes  following ,  being  as  it 
were  in  the  middell  of  his  Elementes ,  he  is  compelled  of  neceffitie  to  entreate  of  nombers ,  although 
not  fo  fully,  as  the  nature  of  nombers  requireth  ,  yet  fo  much  as  fhall  feme  to  be  fit,and  fufficiently  to 
J~er  ue  for  his  purpofe.Wherby  is  fene  the  necelfi  tie, that  the  one  Arte,namely,Gecmetrie,  hath  of  the 
other, namely  ,of  Arithmeticke.  And  alfo  ofwhat  excellecy  and  worchines  Arirhmcticke  is  aboue  Geo¬ 
metric:  in  that,  Geometrie  boroweth  of  it  principles,ayd,and  fuccor,  and  is  as  it  were  maymed  with 
out  it.  Whereas  Arithmeticke  is  of  it  felfe,fufficient  and  neadeth  not  at  all  any  ayde  of  Geometrie, but 
is  abfolute  and  perfit  in  it  felfe,and  may  well  be  taught  and  attayned  vnto  without  it.  Agayne  the  mat¬ 
ter  or  fubieft  where  about  Geometrie  is  occupied,which  are  lines, figures,and  bodyes  ,  are  fuch  as  of¬ 
fer  them  felues  to  thefences,as  triangles,iquares,circles,  cubes,  and  other  are  fene  &iudged  to  be  fuch 
as  they  are,by  the  light1,  but  nomber ,which  is  the  fubiedt  and  matter  of  Arithmeticke,falleth  vnder  no 
fence,norisreprefented  by  any  fhape.forme,  or  figure  :  and  therefore  cannot  be  iudged  by  any  fences 
but  only  by  conlideration  of  the  minde,and  vnderllanding.Now  thinges  fenfible  are  farre  vnder  in  de¬ 
gree  then  are  thinges  intelledtuall  :and  are  of  nature  much  more  grolfe  then  they  .Wherefore  nomber, 
as  being  only  intellefiuall,  is  more  pure,more  immateriall,and  morefubtile,  farre  then  is  magnitude: 
and  extedeth  it  felfe  farther.For  Arithmeticke,not  onely  aydeth  Geometrie :  but  minillreth  principles, 
and  groundes  to  many  other,nay  rather  to  all  other  fciences  andartes.As  to  muficke,  Aftronomy,  na- 
turall  pIulofophy,perfpectiue,with  others.  What  other  thing  is  in  muficke  entreated  of , then  nomber 
contracted  to  found  and  voyce?  In  Aflronomie ,  who  without  the  knowledge  ofnomber  can  doo  any 
jfuhg ,  either  in  fearching  out  of  the  motions  of  the  heauens,  and  their  courfes ,  either  in  iudging  and 
forefiiewing  the  effe&es  of  thcmPln  natural  philofophie,it  is  of  no  fmall  force.The  wifeft  and  belflear- 
xied  philofophers  that  haue  bene, as  Pithagoras,  Timcus,  Plata, and  their  followers,  found  out  &  taught 
moll  pithely  and  purely,  the  fecret  and  hidden  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  condicion  of  all  thinges, 
by  nombers, and  by  theproprietiesand  palfions  of  them.  Ofwhat  force  nomber  is  in  perfpe&iue  ^let 
him  declare  and  iudge,who.  hath  any  thing  traueled  therein.Yea  to  be  lhort,what  can  be  worthely  and 
with  prayfe  pradlifed  in  common  life  of  any  man  of  any  condition,wichout  the  knowledge  ofnomber. 
Yeaithath  bene  taught  of  the  chiefeil  amongll  philofophers,  that  all  natural!  thinges  are  framed ,  and 
Baue  their  conftitucion  of  nomher.Bcetius  fayth  Hoc fait principal?  in  ammo  cotiditorts  exemplar  .-Nomber 
fTayth  he  )  was  the  principall  example  and  patron  in  the  minde  of  the  creator  of  the  world  .  Doth  not 
that  great  philopher  Timaus'm  his  booke,&  alfo  Plato  in  his  r/iwf<»,followinghim,ihew  how  the  foule 
is  compofed  of  harmonicall  nombers ,  and  confonantes  ofmuficke .  Nomber  compafeth  all  thinges, 
and  is  (after  thefe  men)  the  beirg  and  very  effence  of  ail  thinges ,  And  minillreth  ayde  and  helpers  to 
aUother  knowledges,fo  alfo  no  fmall  to  Geometrie  .  Which  thing  caufeth  Euclide  in  the  midell  of  his 
booke  of  Geometrie,to  inferte  and  place  thefe  three  bookes  of  Arithmeticke.:  as  without  the  ayde  of 
which,he  could  not  well  palfe  any  father. 

In  this  feuenth  booke ,  he  firllplaceth  the  generall  principles ,  and  firll  groundes  of  Arithmeticke, 
and  fetteth  the  diffinitions  of  nomber  or  multitude  and  the  kinds  therof:  as  in  the  firll  boke,  he  did  of 
piagnimde  and  the  kindes  and  partes  thereof .  After  that  he  entreateth  ofnombers  generally ,  and  of 
•theyr  partes  J  and  fearcheth  and  demonfirateth  in  generall  the  moll  common  paffions  and  proprieties 
of  the  fame,  and  chiefely  of  nombers  prime  or  incommenfurable ,  and  of  nombers  compofed  or  com- 
menfurable  and  i?f  their  proprieties  and  partely. alfo  of  the  comparifon  or  proportion  of  one  nomber 
to'an  other,  .  • 

-i  .  Sf.j.  Definitions 


Why  Euclide 
in  the  middeft 
cfhis  worses 
Was  compelled 
to  adde  thefe 
three  looses  of 
numbers, 
atrethmetilg  of 
mere  excellency 
then  Geometry  . 

T kings  intellect 
t  stall  of  more 
worth  sues  then 
things  fenfible. 
uQrithmetikc 
min  if  ret  h  grin 
ciplesand 
groundes  in  <t 
manor  to  all 


gnt  f deuces. 


£  oetius:  Cap 
Lib. prim, 
airithmeti . 
Timaus. 


The  argument 
of  the  feuenth 

bodg. 


T  he fir  ft  defi¬ 
nition. 


Without  Vnitj 
jhould  be  confu- 
fion  of  t hinges, 

Boetiusin  hrs 
book!  de  insta¬ 
te  (ft  9no, 

^In  other  stefi- 
rsstion  ofvnirj' 


T  he  ficond  de¬ 
finition. 


difference  be- 
twene  a  point 
dndbnitj. 
Bee  tins. 


sin  other  defi¬ 
nition  of  num¬ 
ber, 

lordane, 
sin  other  defi¬ 
nition  of  num: 
bers. 

Vnity  hath  in 
it  the  ^ertue 
and  power  of  all 
numbers. 
Number  confi- 
dered  three  ma¬ 
tter  ofwajes. 


definitions . 

1  Vnitie  is  that fitohereby  euery  thing  that  isjs  fajd  to  he  oil 

As  a  point  in  magnitude's  the  leaft  thing  in  magnitude, and  no  magnitude  at  all,  &  yet  the  ground 
and  beginning  of  all  magnitudes  :e»en  fo  is  vnitie  in  multitude  or  nomber,  the  leaf!  thing  in  nomber, 
and  no  non)  ber  at  all,and  yet  the  ground  and  beginning  of  all  nombers.And  therefore  it  is  here  in  this 
place,of  Euchde  firft  defined: as  in  the  firll  booke,for  the  like reafon  and  caufe  Was  a  point  firfi  defined. 
Nnitsefizyih  Estclsdejs  that  whereby  euery  thing  is  fayd  to  be  onei  that  is,  vnitie  is  that,  whereby  euery  thing 
is  deuided  and  feperated  from  an  other,and  remayneth  on  in  it  fclfe  pure  and  diihndifro  all  others. O- 
therwife,were  not  this  vnitie.whereby  all  thinges  are  feioyned  the  on  from  the  other,all  things  fhould 
fuffer  mixtion  and  be  in  confufion.  And  where  confulion  is,thereis  no  order ,  nor  any  thing  can  be  ex¬ 
actly  knowen,either  what  it  is, or  what  is  the  nature, and  what  are  the  properties  thefeof.Vnitie  there¬ 
fore  is  that  w'hich  maketh  euery  thing  to  be  that  which  it  is  .  Boetius  lay  th  very  aptly  :  Vnum  <juod<js  idee 
eft^ui* Swum  numero  eft,t hat  is  euery  thing  therfore  is(that  is,therefore  hath  his  being  in  nature, and  is 
that  it  is)  for  that  it  is  on  in  nomber.  According  whereunto  lordane  (in  that  moft  excellent  and  abfo- 
lute  worke  of  Arithmeticke  which  he  wrote)defineth  vnitie  after  this  maner, 

V nst  as, eft  res  per  fe  dsjeretio:  that  is,  vnitie  is  properly  ,and  of  it  felfe  the  difference  of  any  thing,  Thas 
is, vnitie  is  that  whereby  euery  thing  doth  properly  and  eflcnriaily  differ ,  and  is  an  other  thing  from 
ail  others  . Ceruunely  a  very  apt  definition  and  it  roaketh  playne  the  definition  here  fet  of  Esschde. 

2  Number  is  a  multitude  comfiofed  of  Unities. 

As  the  number  of  threc,is  a  multitude  compofed  and  made  of  three  vnities  .  Likewife  the  number 
offiueis  nothing  elL, but  the  eompofition  &  putting  together  of  fiue  vnities.  Although  as  was  before 
fayde,  betweneapoyntin  magnitude,  and  vnitie  in  multitude ,  there  is  great  agreement  and  many 
thinges  are  common  to  them  both,  (  forasapoyntis  the  beginning  of  magnitude,  fo  is  vnitie  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  nomber.  And  as  apoynt  in  magnitude^  indiuifible,  fo  is  alfo  vnitiein  numberindiuifible) 
yet  in  this  they  differ  and  difagree.There  is  no  line  or  magnitude  madeofpointes,as  of  his  partes.  So 
that  although  a  point  be  the  beginning  of  a  lyne,yet  is  it  no  part  therof.  But  vnitie,  as  it  is  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  number, fo  is  it  alfo  a  part  therof,  which  is  fomewhat  more  manifeftly  fet  of  Boetiusin  an  other 
diffinition  ofnurn  ber  which  he  geueth  in  his  Arithmetike,which  is  thus. 

Niimerus^H  quar.titatss  aceruus  ex  'bnitatibusprofufus ,  that  is.  Number  is  a  maffe  or  heape  of  quanti¬ 
ties  produced  of  vnities -.which  diffinition  in  fubltanceis  all  one  with  the  firfi,wherin  isfaidmoft  plain 
Iy,thac  the  heape  or  maffe,  that  is,the  whole  fubftance  of  the  quantitie  ofnumberis  produced  &  made 
of  vnities.5o  that  vnitie  is  as  itwere  the  very  matter  of  number.  As  foure  vnities  added  togetherare 
the  matter  wherof  the  number  4.  is  made,&  eche  of  thefe  vnities  is  a  part  of  the  number  foure,  name¬ 
ly^  fourth  part, or  a  quarter .Vnto  this  diffinition  agreeth  alfo  the  definition  gcuen  of lordane, which  is 
thus.  Number  is  a  yuantitse  which  gathereth  together  thinges  feuered  a  fonder .  As  fiue  m  en  beyngin  them- 
felues  feuered  aud  diftin<ffe,are  by  the  number  fiue  brought  together,as  it  were  into  on e  maffe, and  fo 
of  others.  And  although  vnitie  be  no  number, yet  it  contayneth  in  it  the  vertue  and  power  ofaUntsra- 
bers,and  is  fet  and  taken  for  them. 

In  this  place  (for  the  farther  elucidation  of  thinges,partly  before  fet,and  chiefiy  hereafter  to  be  fet, 
becaufe  Eucltde  here  doth  make  mention  of  diuers  ky  ndes  of  numbers,  and  alfo  defineth  the  famej  is 
to  be  noted, that  number  may  be  considered  three  maner  of  wayes.  Firll,  number  may  be  confidered 
abfolutdy,without  comparyng  it  to  any  other  number ,or  without  appliengit  to  any  otherthing,one- 
ly  vewing  and  payfing  what  it  is  in  it  felfe, and  in  his  owne  nature  onely,  and  what  partes  it  hath,  and 
what  proprieties  and  paffions  .As  this  number  fixe, may  be  confidered  abfolutely  in  his  owne  nature, 
that  it  is  an  euen  number,and  that  it  is  a  perfect  number,and  hath  many  mo  conditions  and  proprie¬ 
ties.  Andfoconceiueye  of  all  other  numbers, whatfoeuer,ofj?.  12,  and  fo  forth. 

An  other  way,number  may  be  cofidered  by  way  of  ccparifoji,and  in  refpeft  offbme  other  number 
either  as  equall  to  it  felfe,or  as  greater  the  it  felfe,or  as  Idle  the  it  felfe.  As  12. may  be  cofidered,as  co¬ 
pared  to  iz.  which  is  equall  vnto  it,oras  to  24.  which  is  greater  then  it, for  12  is  the  halfe  thereof,  or 
as  to  6.  which  is  lelfe  then  it,as  beyng  the  double  therof.  And  of  this  confederation  of  numbers  arifeth 
and  fpringeth  all  kyndes  and  varieties  of  proportio:  as  hath  before  bene  declared  in  the  explanation  of 
the  principles  of  the  fift  booke,fo  that  of  that  matter  it  is  needelelfe  any  more  to  be  fayd  in  this  place. 

The  third  way  may  numbers  be  confidered  as  they  are  applied  to  formes  and  figures  of  Geometry. 
And  numbers  fo  confidered  are  not  reprefented  by  figures  or  charactes  of  number  commonly  vfed  in 
Ari  this  clique, but  are  fignified  by  certayne  pointes  or  prickes,which  reprefent  the  vnities  which  they 
eontayne  :  which  ,accordyng  to  the  diuerfitie  of  the  difpofition  and  placing  of  them,may  reprefent  di¬ 
uers  formes  and  figures  of  Geometry  :  and  accordyng  to  the  nature  of  the  figure  which  it  reprefen- 
teth,k  taketh  his  name,and  is  called  a  trianguler  number,  a  fquare  number,  a  cube 
number  or  after  any  other  figure,-  As  if  the  figure  of  xo.  be  fo  deferibed  by  his  vni-  •••*•*•*•• 


ententes. 


Fol.  i&j,. 


•  ■  *  - 

fles  that  they  be  orderly  fet  in  a  ftraightcourfe.fo  that  they  reprefenc  the  forme  of  a  line,  then  is  the 
number  xo  called  a  lineall  number  .And  ifthefame  number  to  befo  deferibed  by  his  vnities,  « 
that  it  ihew  forth  theforme  of  a  triangle, then  it  is  called  a  trianguler  nuber :  as  ye  here  fee , 

Likewife  if  it' be  in  fuch  fort  deferibed  by  his  vni  ties,  that  it  reprefeteth  that  forme  or  figure 
which  in  Geometry  is  called  a  figure  on  the  one  fide  longer :  then  {hall  the  number  i%  be 
called  a  number  hauyng  the  one  fide  longer,andfo  may  you  conceaue  of  all  others. 

Thus  much  of  this  for  the  declaration  of  the  thingesfoUowing. 

•  r :  .  v\  -..v. -.‘■bVn-.'t,  r.  l;'r.  •  _ 


4  4  ♦♦ 

4  ♦  ♦ 
4  4 


4  ♦  4  0 
♦  *  ♦  4 


srtz 

bps* 


3  Mpart  is  a  lejje  number  in  comparifon  to  the  greater  leben  the 
leftemeafureth  the  greater.  _ 


The  third  deft# 


4  Cartes  are  a  lefte  number  in  refpeSi  of the  greater,  K>hen  tbeleftemeafu*  de* 

reth  not  the  greater*  *'* 

As  the  number  3  compared  to  y,  is.  parteS  of  y  and  not  apart.  For  the  number  3  is  le/Te  then  the  nu 
ber  y,  and  doth  not  meafure  y .  For  taken  once  it  maketh  but  3 .  once  3  is  3,  which  is  lefle  then  y .  and  3 
taken  twife  maketh  6}  which  is  more,  then  y .  Wherfore  it  is  no  part  of  y  but  partes,namely,  three  firth 
partes  of  y .  For  in  the  number  3  there  are  3  vnities,and  euery  vnitie  is  the  fifth  part  of  y .  Wherfore  j  is 
three  fifth  partes  of  y,and  fo  of  others.  ; 


r  Multiplex  is  a  greater  number  in  comparifon  of  the  lefts,  Heben  the  lefte 
■r  '  meafureth  the  greater.  • 


The  fifth  defi* 


mttm. 


...  uv. 


,  tn-.. 


.  As  9  compared  to  3  is  multiplex,the  numberyis  greater  then  the  number*.  And  mdreouer  3  the 
ieffe  number  meafureth  9  the  greater  number. For  3  taken  certaine  tymes,namely,  3  tymes  maketh  9. 
three  tymes  three  is  9. For  the  more  ample  and  full  knowledge  of  this  definition,  read  what  is  fayd  in 
the  explanation  of  the  fecond  definition  of  the  y  booke,  where  multiplex  is  fufficiently  entreated  of 
With  all  his  kyndes . 

•  u\V\  Vi V  'V,-’  :t\  y.*  y  y  v.  •>  •  yn*  y’  V 

6  An  euen  niimberis  that  flinch  may  be  deuided  into  two  equal partes. 

As  the  number  ^  may  be  deuided  into  3  and  3  which  are  his  partes,and  they  are  equall,the  one  not 
exceding  the  other  .This  definition  of  Euclideis  to  be  vnderiland  of  two  fuch  equal]  partes,which  ioy- 
ped  together, make  the  whole  number  :  as  3  and  3  (the  equall  partes  of  6)  ioyned  cogether.maketf  for 
qtherwife  many  numbers  both  euen  and  odde  may  be  deuided  into  many  equall  partes,as  into  a  \  6 
f!rmo,and  therforeintoa.  As  9  maybe  deuided  into  3  and  3  which  are  his  partes,  andarealfo  equal! 
fpr;the  one  of  themexcedeth  not  the  other:  yet  is  not  therfore  thisnumber  9  an  euen  number  for  that 
3  apd3  f  thefe-equall  partes  of9)  added  together  make  not  9  but  orfely &.  Likewife  taking  the  definiti- 
oti  fo  generally,euety®umber  whatfoeuer  fbould  be  an  euen  number :  for  in  thatfort  of  vnderftadine 
thereis  no  number,butthatitmay  be  deuided  into  twoequall  partes  :  as  this  number  7  may  bedeui- 
fted-qno  3  partesjnam  cly  ,3. 1.  and  3.  of  which  two, namely, 3.  and  3  are  equal, yet  is  not  7  an  euen  num 


Thefixth  defi-' 
mtiom.  *  ” 


dti^diuidtivno  medio  »onintercede»tefihia.tiisv 
^.  An  euen  number  is  that  which  may  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes,withoUt  an  vnitid  commine 
fcetwenethem .  As  8  is  deuided  into  4  and4  two  equall  partes  without  an  Vnitie  cormning  betWene 
them, which  added  together, make  8,  fo  that  the  fence  of  this  definition  is,that  an  euen  number  is  that 
Which  is  deuided  into  two  fuch  equall  partes,which  are  his  two  halfe  partes. 

;  ..gereisalfo  tqbe  fioted,thatapartis  takenin  this  definition,and in  certaine  definitions  following, 
amp  that  fignificaaon  as  it  was  before  defined,namely,for  fuch  a  part  as  meafureth  the  whole  nutn- 
ber,but  for  any  part  which  helpeth  to  die  making  of  the  whole, andinto  which  the  whole  may  be  re  - 

lov?,  arC3  °f  8 10  thlS  fence  butnot  in  the  For  neyther  3  nory  meafureth 

!.*  v^f0/35  bls  fcht)l^rsSaue  bother  definition  of  an  euen  number(which  definition  al- 

|o  hathjaiter  this  maner. 

dC  ij.  An 


Seettut. 


An  ether  defi~ 
nit  ion  efinn  ene 
number. 


Id-tie  % 


Vithxgtrfiit 


An  ether  deft* 
mitten* 


An  ether  defi¬ 
nition. 


An  other  defi¬ 
nition* 


The  feuenth 
definition. 


An  tutn  number  it  that  which  in  ene  and  the  fame  diuifipnk  devilled  into  the  greatefi, and  into  the  Uafi  i  jfa. 
to  the  greatejl  ,as  touching fpace, and  into  the  leaf  as  touching  yuan/itie.  As  to,  is  deuided  intp J  fig.  j,.  whicfr 
a.-e  his  greateft  partes  (which  greatnes  of  partes  he  calleth  fpace)  and  in  thela^dii^on  thejjumier 
to  is  deuided  but  into  two  partes  :  but  into  leffe  thefwo  partes  nothing  can  be  deuided,which  thins 

he  calleth  quantitie,f6  that  io  deuidedinto  . y  and  y  .  in  that  one  deuifion, is  de«idedintQ  .the  greatdil> 

namely, into  his  halues,and  into  the  leaft,namely,into  two  partes, and  no  mo, 

There  is  alfo  another  definitibn  more  auncient,' which  is  thus. 

An  euen  number  is  that  which  viay  be  deuided  into  two  e  quail  partes, and  into  two  9>ne  quail partes Just in  nei¬ 
ther  diu/fisn  ( to  the  confiitucion  of  the  whole )  to  the  euen  part  is  added  the  edde, neither  to  the  odde  is  added  the 

euen.  As  8  may  be  deuided  diuerily,partly  into  euen  partes, as  into  4  and  4. likewife  into  <S-and  2*  and 
partly  into  od'de  partes, as  into  y  and  3 ,  alfo  into  7  and  1.  In  all  which  deuilions ,  ye  fee  no  odde  parte 
ioyned  to  an  euen, nor  an  euen  part  ioyned  to  an  odde  :  but  if  the  one  be  euen, the. other  is  eiien,  and 
if  the  one  be  odde,  the  other  is  odde.  In  the  two  firft  deuifions,both  partes  were  euen,and  in  the  two 
laifrboth  partes  were  odde.Itis  to  be  confidered  that  the  two  partes  added-  together  mull  make  the 
whole.  ‘ 

This  diffinition  isgeneralland  conjtnori  to  all  euen  numbers,  except  to  the  number  a.  which  cap 
not  be  deuided  into  two  vnequall  partes,but  onely  into  two  ypities,  which  are  equall.'  f 


onelj  by 


from  9  an  odde  number,beingaboue  it  but  by  one.  And  alfo  from  7.  vnder  it,  it  differeth  likewife  by 
one, and-fo  of  others.  •  .  1 


ST  ttt 


,'Vtt)  1 


An  other  defi¬ 
nition  of  an  od 
number. 

An  other  defi¬ 
nition. 


The  eight  defi¬ 
nition* 


Campane. 


An  other  defi- 

nitso  of  ad  -eufi'r 

ly  euen  num¬ 
ber. 

»!*■» 

Blufates* 

An  other  defir 
nit  ton* 

Beetius. 

An  other  defi¬ 
nition*  " 


7  An  odde  number  is  that  n thick  cannot  be  deuided  into  two  equal partes: 

or  that^hich  onely  byan'Pnitie  differeth  from  an  eueivmmber.  r  ,  A 

.  ■  ifh  it  e  ■  -  - 

As  the  number  y  can  be  by  no  meanes  deuided  into  two  equall  partes,namely,  fucK  two  which  ad? 
tied  togtfther^fhall  make  y .  Or  by  the  fecond  definition,*  an  odde  number,  difereth  from  6  an  eu.eh 
number. abpue  it,by  1.  And  the  fame  y  differeth  from  4  an  euen  number  vnder  it  likewife  by  1. 

Boetiusdefineth  an  odde  number  after  this  maner.  .  f 

ai»  odde  numbefys  that  which  Cannot  be  deuided  into  twg  e<juaUpartes,  but  that  an.  ’ixstie  Jhall  be  betwene 
them.  As  rr  ye  clcuide  y  into  2  and  1;  which  are  two  equall  partes,  there  remain  eth  one  or  an  vnitie  be¬ 
twene  them  to  make  the  whole  number  y.  ‘  •.*..«  >.%u 

T  here  is  yet  an  other  definition  of  an  odde  number.  An  odde  number  is  that ,  which  being  deuided  into 
two  Smeyuad par.tps  hgwfoeuer,. the  one.ts  euer euen,  and  the  other  odde.  As  if  9  be  deuided  into  two  partes, 
which  added, together, maketh  the  whole,namcly,into  4and  y.  which  are  vnequali': :  yefee  the  one  .is 
euen,  namely,^,  apd  the  other  is  odde,Ramely,  y.  fa  ifye  deuide#  in  to  6  and/or  into  8  and  1.  the  ode 
part  is  euer  euen,and  the  other  odde.  ;  -  aofr. is rbh  bflOa#afb1o  fibi) •/-  l<  <->  ed? 

B  A  number  euenly  euen  (  called  in  latine  pariter  parj  js  that  number, 
mm  an  euen  number  me afureth  by  an  euen  number.  ‘  -  * 

n  jf..  -  -  .4  -  ;  ' -/ ?  bns  oiniL  ' ■  sd  ?srn  >.  ledmUfl  e .  • ;  zA 

As  8  is  a  number  euenly  euen.For  4  an  euen  number  robafijrbth  8  by  2,which’is  alfo  an  euen  UUnta, 
her.  This  definition  hath  much  troubled  many, and  fcemeth  not  a  true  definitions  for  that  therc-are 
many  n  um  be-rs-  which  euen  numbers  do  meafure,and  that  by  euennumbersywhichyetare  not  eudn* 
ly  eue  numbers,  after  moft  mens  minds  : as  24.  which  ^hn  eue number  doth  meafure by  fourejWh'igh 
is  alfo  an  euen  number, and  yet  as  they  thinkeis  not  24  an  euenly  euen  number, forThat  8  an  eueh  ufi^ 
ber  doth  nieafuieaifo  24  by  3.  art:odde  number.  WherforeC'<#^.*»e  to  make  his:fdntenceplaine,affef 
this  maner  lettethforth  this  definition. par  efi <juem  cun tti pares eumButtterah'tit  i  fidribui % iabut 
numerant ~thnt  is  l  isdundtaodmun  Ofi  Zl 

An  euenly-euen  number  is, when  all  the  euen  numbers  which  meafure  it,  doo  mcafure  it  by  eiilfe 
timesjthat  is, by  euen  numbers, as  16.  All  the  euen  numbers  whith  meafure  i^  a-sasre  8.4.and  i;  da 
meafureitby  euen  numbers .As  8  by  2,  twife  8 .is *1^4  by  4,foUretimes4is  r«::3nd  4  by;8,  8  times'2-ii 
Kj.'Which  particle  ( a'd euen  numbers )  added  by  Campane  maketh  24  to  be  no  euenly  euen  number.  Fot 
thatfome  one  euen  number  meafureth  it  by  an  odde  number  as  8  by  3.  flujpttes  alibis  plainly  of  this 
minde,  tha t  Ejsclide  gaue  not  this  definition  in  fuch  maner  as  ir  is  byTA«»  wmteil^or  thelargenes  Sc 
gcneralide  there!’, For  that  it  extendeth  it  to  infinite  numbers  which  are  not  -  euenly  euen  as  he  thin- 
keth,forwhichcaufe  in  place  therbfjhegeueth  this  definition*  ;  .  :  .  ; 

A  number  et+cnly  euen  ,is that  which  nnely  euen  numbers  do  meafure. Pi.S  16  is  meslfored  of  none  but  oftfUen 
numbers,and  therfore  is  euenly  euen. There  is  alfo  aiBoetius  geuen  an  other  definition-  of  more  facifr* 
tie,includinginitnodoubtatall,whichis  moftcommonly  vfed  of  all  writers, atidis  thusv  ' 

A  number  euenly  euenis.that  which  ihay  be  deuided  inio  two  euen  partes,and  thdfpar.t  agaytie-into  two-eueti 
parteitandf<>  continually  deuiding  without flay  tidye  come  to  Stnitie.  As  by  example}  £4,  maybe  deuided 

.lonsct?  mflf  *  -  intp:^a  *■*{ 


ofSuclides  Elementes . 


FqLi$$9 


into  3  i  and  31.  And  either  pf  thefe  partes  may  be  deuided  into  two  euen  partes/or  3  2,  may, be  deuided 
into  16  and  16.  Againe,  16  may  be  deuided  into  8  and  8  which  are  euen  partes,  and  S  into  4  and  4  .  A* 
gdine  4  into  1  and  2,  andlaft  of  all  may  2  be  deuided  into  one  and  one, 

p  A  number  evenly  odde  ( called  in  ferine  pariter  irnparj  is  that  'Which  an  e* 


ken  number  meafureth  by  an  odde  number. 


The  ninth 
definition. 


As  the  number  6  which  2  an  euen  number  meafureth  by  /  an  odde  number, thre  times  1  is  Like- 
wife  10.  which  2. an  euen  ft  umber  meafureth-  by  y.an  odde  number  .In  this  diifinition  allb  is  found  by  . 
all  the  expofitors  ofEuc/ide,  the fame  want  that  was  found  in  thediffinition  next  before.  And  for  that , 
it  extendeth  it  felfeto  larffe,for  there  are  infinite  numbers  which  euen  numbers  do  meafure  by  odde 
numbers,which  yet  after  their  mindes  are  not  euely  odde  nubers3as  for  example  12.  For  4  an  eue  nu- 
ber,meafureth  12  by  3  an  odde.number’:  three  times  4  k  12.  yet  is  not  12  as  they  thinke  an  eu'ealy 
odde  number.  Wherfare  'taniyane  amendeth.  it  jifter  his  thinking,by  adding of  this  worde  ^as  he  did 
in  the  firll, and  defineth  It  after  this  mancr.  .....  ... 

A  number  euenly  oMt  ts.wher. i  nil  the  euen  numbers  which  measure  it ,4?  tueafure  it  by  $»eue»  tymes3  that  is, 

by  an  tide  number,  * 

As  xo.is  a  numb  er  euenly  odde,  for  no  euen  number  but  onely  a.  meafureth  10.  and  that  k  by  j  an 
odde  number.  But  not  all 'the  euen  numbers  which  meafure  12.  do  meaftlre-  it  by  odde  numbers..  For  ; 
ft  an  euen  number  meafureth  12  by  2  which  is.alfo  euen.Wherfpre  ia  is  not  by  this  definition  a  num- . 
ber  euenly  'odde.f*«^3fwalfo’6ffended  with  the  ouer  large  generalitie  or  this  definition  to  make  the 
definition  agree  with  the  thrag  defined  putteth it  after  thismaner.  . 

A  Humber  euenly  odde,  is  that  which  an  eddejiumber.  doth  meafure  onelyby  an  euen  number,  - 

~  As  rf  Which  7%arrodde  number  doth  meafure  onely  by  1. which  is  an  euen  number .Thereis  alio  an 
other  'definition- of  this  jdnde  of  number  commonly  geu.cn  ofmore  plaines,which  is  this. 

‘A  number  euenly  odde  is  t lid  t  which  may  be  deuided  into  two  equall partes, but  that  part  cannot  agayne  be  de~ 
aided  into  two  equyll  partes  ;&s  6  .may  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes  into  3. and  3  .but  neither  of  them 
canbedeuided  into  two  equall  partes:  for  that  3. Is  an  odde  number  and  fuffereth  no  fuch  diuifion. 

10  A  number  oddly  euen  (  called  in  kttin  im  pariter  pa rj  ’{s  that  which  an 
A  odde  number  nieajureth  by  an  even  number.  •  . 

.As  the  number  ia-: for  3^an  odde  number  meafureth  ia4by  4. which  is  an  euen  num ba’.:.three  times 
4. is  ia,  -  1 

This  definition  is  notfounde  in  the  greeke  neither  was  it  doubtles  .euer  inthis  maner  written  by 
EucUd&yihkh  thing  the  flqndefnes  and  the  imperfection;  thereof  and.  the  absurdities  following  alfo  of 
the  .a me  declare  mod  manifeftly .  The  definition  next  before  geuen  is  in  fubftance  all  one  with  this. 
For  what  number  foeuer  an  euen', number  doth  meafure  by  an  odde ,  the  felfe  fame  number  doth  an 
odde  num  ber  meafure  by  an  euen.As2.an  eue  number  meafureth  6.by  3.an  odde  number.  Wherfore 


Campon? . 

An  other  defi* 
nstion. 


Flu  fates. 

An  other 
definition. 

An  other 
definition . 

The  tenth 
definition.  , 


:.r.S» 


T his  definition 
notfoundin  the 
Creese. 


euenly  odde  and  10  is  contayned  vnder  two  diuers  kindes  of  numbers  .  Which  is  direttly  a«uynft  the 
°L’.Euijtle.-.'fh?jdyyy^7 proueth hereafter, in  the ^-booke, that euery nomber whofe halfe 
lSaii'oude  number,is  a  number  euenly  odde  onely. Flufiates  hath  here  very  well  no  ted,  that  thefe  two 
euenly  odde,  andoddely  euen  ,  were  taken  cfcZuclifis  for  on  and  the  felfedame  kinde  ofnoniber .  But 
‘^  fwimber  which  here  o.nght  to  haue  bene.place-d  is  called  of  the  , befi:  interpreters  of  Euciide,  numerus 
par  if e  f -far  &  nut  ar,  that  is  a  number  euely  eue,  and  eucly  odde.  Yea  and  it  is  fo  called  of  Enctidc  him 
lelre  in  the  34.  propofition  of  his  9 .  booke :  which  kinde  of  number  Campanus  and  Flufiates  in  fteade  of 
the  infufneient  and  vnapt  definition  before  geuen,afilgne  this  definition.  - 

A  number  euenly  etie'n  .and  euenly  odde  yisthOi  which  an  euen  number  doth  ineafure fometime  by  an  euen 
number, and fometime  by  an  odde.  * 

As  the  number  i2;for  i.an  euen  number ,meafure.th  12. by  tf.an  euep  number:  two  times fj.is.ta.  Al- 
»4.-an  euen  num bef  meafureth  the  fame  number  ia.by  3. an  odde  number.Andthereforeis  ta.ahum- 
ber^uenly  euen, and  enertly  odde,  and  fo  of  fuch  others.  ;  I  A  . 

'  .Ttat.  ^fionus  and  mjjatei  were,  fo  fcrupelpusin.  am  ending  (as  they  fuppofed  ).  th  e 

two  definitions  before,namely,  ofa’  number  euely  euen  and  ofa  number  euenly  odde,  the  one  by  ad- 
ding  tuis  word  ad, and  the  other  by  adding  this  word  onely  ,  was  for  that  they  were  offended  with  the 
1?  4  genefal«ie  °-f  that  by  them ,  on  arfdthelblfe  fame  ■number  might  be  cofnpre- 

“  ^^on.  Ahd  fo^he^npmberfhpuldbe  both  euenly  euen ,!nd alfo  euenk 
odd^.which  th..y  tooKe  for  an  abfurditre.For  that  they  are  two  diftinft  and  diuers  kindAof  numbers^ 

weLafe*hanrwnettinbv^ ^  be  hard  n°r  amnTe  to  thinke » thac  thefe  definicios 
■: :■ and  h?AA¥e in ,  as  they  arec delivered  vnto-  vs by  Thebn:  tnfi 

'A  Sf,iij.  that 


An  othfir  defi.  v, 
nit/on 


Camp  One  and  c 
Flufiates  with 
other,i»  averts  < 
ror. 


Om  number  in 
diuers  refpedes 
smay  be  of di¬ 
ners  kjndes  of 
members. 


Eoetius  defini¬ 
tion  ofatwm-, 
ber  euenly cite, 
And  euenly  od 


The  eleuenth 
defiflitHfi. 


flufi.ites. 

An  other  defi¬ 
nition. 

The  twelfth 
definition. 

Prime  numbers 
called  tneompt- 
fednumbcrs. 

Tie  thir tenth 
definition. 


■thzt  they  neede  not  thefe  corre&ions  and  amendementes  by  adding'thefc  wordes  ^andWt,for  ad* 
mit  that  they  be  diltinft  kinds  of  numbers,may  not  contraries  be  attributed  in  diuerfe  refpe&es  to  one 
thing?May  not  one  line  be  fayd  to  be  great  and  little  ,  compared  to  diuers  ?  Great  in  comparifon  of* 
ie  demand  lefie  in  comparifon  of  a  greater?  Huen  lb  one  number  in  diners  relpects  may  be  of diuers  and 
contrary  kindesof  numbers  .  What  are  more  diuers  them  a  fquare  number  and  a  cube  number.  And  yet 
is  <H-in  diuers  refpe&es  a  number  both  fquare  and  cube  .  In  refpeft  of  8.  to  be  his  roote,it  is  a  fquare 
numbers  for  S. times  8.  is  rf4.andin  refpe£tof4.to  be  his  roote,iusa  cube  number  for  4.  times  4.  fewer 
times  is  rf4 :  fo  in  diuers  refpe&es  it  is  bo  th,without  any  abfurditie  at  all.Likcwife  this  num  ber  6.  in  di¬ 
uers  relpedtes,  is  a  number  on  the  on  fide  longer ,  and  alfo  a  trianguler  number  :  which  yet  are  diuers 
and  diftind  kindesof  numbers  .  For  rf.defcribed  by  his  vnities  refembling  a  figure 
of  lengthe  and  breadthe  hauing  two  fides, namely  1  .and  3  .is  a  plaine  or  fuperfici- 
all  number  of  one  fide  longer.  And  if  the  fame  rf.be  fo  deferibed  by  his  vnities,  that  „  ” 

it  reprefenteth  the  figure  of  a  triangle,  then  is  it  and  beareth  it  the  name  of  a  trian¬ 
gler  figure  :  as  here  ye  may  fee  the  forme  of  either.  And  if  ve  extende  in  description 

therofall  his  vnities  in  length  onely,fo  is  rfalfo  a  lineal!  number.  So  you  fee  rfindi- 
uers  refpedes  is  a  Iineallnumber,a  number  on  the  one  fide  longer,  and  alfo  a  trigo¬ 
nal!  or  trianguler  numbered  yet  therby  no  inconuenienceatall.And  why  may  not 
hkewife  one  and  the  felfe  number  in  diuers  refpedes  be  accompted  a  number  both 
euenly  euen,and  euenly  odde  ?  Yea  Eudtde  him  felfe  doth  moll  manifdlly  proue  the  fame ,  and  in  the 
fame  wordes, if  it  be  diligently  wayed,in  his  ninth  booke.For  he  fayth,  that  all  numbers  being  double 
in  continuall  courfe  from  the  number  2. be  euenly  euen  numbers  only -.and  agayne  all  numbers  whofc 
halues  are  odde ,  are  euenly  odde  numbers  only  :  and  that  number  which  neither  is  duple  from  the 
number  two  not  hath  to  his  halfean  odde  number  is  a  number  euenly  euen  and  a  number  euenly 
odde.  What  in  this  can  be  fpoke  more  pIayncly?So  that  by  Euclide  it  is  no  inconuenience  that  on  num¬ 
ber's  1  2, for  example, in  diuers  refpedes  ihould  be  both  a  number  euenly  euen,and  alfo  a  number  e- 
ucnly  odde  .In  refpedthatrf.ilri  euen  number  meafureth  n.byz.an  euen  nuraber,iz  is  a  number  euen¬ 
ly  euen:  and  in  refped  that  4<an  euen  number  meafureth  i2.by3.an  odde  number,  12  .isanumber  e- 
uenly  odde.  And  thus  iudgeye  of  all  others  like. 

There  is  alfo  an  other  definition  geuen  of  this  kindeof  number  by  .Stfefew  and  others  commonly  , 
which  is  thus, 

A  number  euenly  euen, and  euenly  odde  is  that ,  which  may  be  deui Jed  into  two  equal!  partes ,  andtche  of  them 
may  agayne  be deuided  into  two  equall parte  stand  fo forth  .  Buffh'is  diuipenis  at  Unghth. flay  d ,  and  continue  th 
nit  till  it  come  tiS-mtie.Ks  for  example  48 :  which  may  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes,  namely ,  into 
24.and  24.  Agayne  24 .  which  is  on  of  the  partes  niay  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes  12.  and  12.  A- 
gayne  ii.into  rf.and  rf.And  agayne  rf  may  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes, into  3  .and  3 :  but  3  .cannot 
be deuided  into  two  equall  partes .  Wherefore  the  deuifion  there  llayeth:  and  continueth  not  till  ic 
come  to  vnitic  as  it  did  in  thde  numbers  which  are  euenly  euen  only . 

1 1  A  number  odly  odde  is  that ftyhich  an  odde  number  doth  measure  by  an 
odde  number. 

As 25 , which  fan  odde  number, meafureth  by  an  odde  number,namely,by  f .  Fiue  times  fiue is  if: 
Likewnezi.whom  7-an  odde  number  doth  meafure  by  3,  which  is  likeWifc  an  odde  number  .  Three 
times  7.  is  ti .  . 

Tin  fiat  us  geueth  this  definition  following  of  this  kinde  of number, which  is  all  one  in  fubftance  with 
the  former  definition. 

A  number  odly  odde, it  that, which  onely  an  odde  number  doth  meafure. 

As  15. for  no  number  meafureth  if.  but  onely  f .  and  3:  alfo  if.  none  meafureth  it  but  onely  f . 
which  is  an  odde  number,  and  fo  of  others. 

12  A  prime  (or firji)  number  is  thatfinhich  onely  Tmitie  doth  meafure. 

As  5.7. n. ij.For  no  number  meafureth  f,but  onely  vnitie.Forv.vnities  make  the  number  f.  So  no 
number  meafureth  7,but  onely  vnrcie.2  .taken  3  .rimes  maketh  rf.  which  is  lclfe  then  7:  and  2.  taken  4. 
times  is  8,  which  is  more  then  7  .  Andfo  of  11.13.and  fuch  others.  So  that  all  prime  numbers,  which 
alfo  are  called  firll  numbers,ahd  numbers  vncomp6fed,haue  no  part  to  meafure  the, but  onely  ynitie. 

13  Numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other  are  they^hich  onely  hnitie  doth 
meafure jbeing  a  common  meafure  to  them. 

As  if  .and  aa.be  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other .  ij.ofit  felfe  is  no  prime  number/or  notone- 

"  '  fy 


9 


FoLi$6. 


iy  vnitie  doth  meafure  it,  but  alfo  the  numbers  y. arid  for  j  .times  f.li  if*  Likewise  izM  ofit  felfe’n© 
prime  number  :  tor  it  is  meafured  by  i .and  n,befides  vnitie.  For  ii. twife, or 2. eleuen  times, make  22. 
So  that  although  neither  of  thefe  two  numbers  ij.and  is.  be  a  prime  or  iftcdihpofed  number,  but  ey- 
therhaue  partes  of  his  owne, whereby  it  may  be  meafured befide  vnitie  :  ytt  tom  pared  together,  they 
are  prime  the  one  to  the  other  :  for  no  One  number  doth  as  a  common  meafure, meafure  both  of  them 
but  onely  vnitie,  which  is  a  common  meafure  to  all  numbers  .  The  numbers  y.and  3 .  which  meafure 
if.  will  not  meafure  si :  agairie,the  numbers  i.and  :  i  .which  meafure  ii,do  not  meafure  if. 

id-  A  number  compofed ,  is  that  lehich fome  one  number  meafureth. 

A  number  compofed  is  not  meafured  onely  by  vnitie, as  Was  a  prime  number,  but  hath  fome  nitm- 
ber  which  meafureth  it.  As  if :  the  number  3  .meafureth  ij,namely,taken  f  .times.  Alfo  the  number  j* 
meafureth  if, namely,  taken  3-times ,  f.times3,and  3.  times  f,  is  if  .  Likewife-iS.is  a  compofed  num* 
ber,  it  is  meafured  by  thefe  numbers  6.3 .9-1.  and  fo  of  others.Thefe  numbers  are  alio  called  common¬ 
ly  fecond  numbers,  as  contrary  to  prime  or  firft  numbers. 

/  ;  TSLumbers  compofed  the  one  to  the  other, are  they  piehich fome  one  number , 
being  a  common  meafure  to  them  both,  doth  meafure * 

As  12. and  8.are  two  compofed  numbers  the  one.  to  the  other.  For  the  number.*,  is  a  common  mea¬ 
fure  to  them  both  :  4.taken  three  times  maketh  11;  and  the  fame  *.taken  two  rymes  raaketh  8.  So  are 

and  rf  :  3. meafureth  them  both.  Alfo  lo.and  if  :  for  f.meafureth  both  of  them  :  and  fo  infinitely  of 
others.  In  thys  do  numbers  compofed  the  one  to  the  other  or  fecond  numbers,  differre  from  numbers 
prime  the  one  to  the  other  :  for  that  two  numbers  being  compofed  the  one  to  the  other,  ech  ofthem 
feuerally  is  ofneceilitie  a  compofed  number  .  As  in  the  examples  before  8. and  12.  are  compofed  num¬ 
bers  :  bkewife^.and  if  :  alfo  io.andif  :  but  if they  be  two  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other, 'it  is 
not  of  necelfitie, that  ech  of  them  feuerally  be  a  prime  number.  As  9.  and  22. are  two  numbers  prime 
the  one  to  the  other  :  no  one  number  meafureth  both  of  them  :  and  yet  neither  of  them  in  itfelfe  and 
in  his  owne  nature  is  a  prime  number,  but  ech  ofthem  is  a  compofed  number .  For  3. meafureth  9, and 
ii. and  1. meafure  n. 

16  number  is  fayd  to  multiply  a  number,  H vhen  the  number  multiply ed,  is 

fo  oftentimes  added  to  itfelfe, as  there  are  in  the  number  multiplying  hnu 
ties  :  and  an  other  number  is  produced . 

In  multiplication  are  eucr  required  two  numbers,  the  one  is  whereby  ye  multiply, commonly  called 
the  multiplier  ormultiplicant,  the  otheris  thatwhichis  multiplied.  Irhe  number  by.: toihich  an  other 
is  multiplied,namely ,the  multiplyer,  is  fayd  to  multiply.  As  if ye  Will  multiply  *.by  3  ,then  is  three  fayd 
to  multiply*  :  therefore  according  to  this  definition, beeaufe  in  3.  there  are  three  vnities  :  adde*,3. 
times  to  itfelfe,  faying  3,  times  *  :  fofhall  ye  bring  forth  another  number,  namely,  i»,whichis  the 
fumme  produced  of  that  multiplication  :  and  fo  of  all  other  multiplications. 

n  When  two  numbers  multiplying  them  felues  the  one  the  other, produce  an 
other  :  the  number  produced  is  called  a  plaine  or  fuperficiall  number.  And 
the  numbers  lohich  multiply  them  felues, the  one  by  the  other, are  the fides 
of  that  number. 

As  let  thefe  two  numbers  3  .and  multiply  the  one  the  Other paying,  3  .times  ^orfixe  tyrnes  3, they 
fiiall  produce  18.  Thys  number  18. thus  produced,  is  called  a  plaine  number,  or  a  fuperficiall  number. 
And  the  two  multiplying  numbers  which  produced  ii,namely,3.and 
arethe  fides  oftheiame  fuperficiall  or  plaine  number,that  is,  the  length 
and  breadth  thereof.  Likewife  if  9. multiply  i  i  .or  eleuen  nine, there  fhal 
He  produced  99- a  plaine  number,  whofe  fides  are  the  two  numbers  9, 
and  it  i  as  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  fame.  They  are  called  plaine 
and  fuperficiall  numbers,  beeaufe  being  deicribed  by  their  vnities  on  a  o 
plaine  fuperficies,  they  reprefent  fome  fuperficiall  forme  or  figure  Geo-  < 
metricail,hauing  length  and  breadth.  As  ye  fee  of  this  example:  and 
fo  oF  others .  And  all  fuch  plaine  or  fuperficiall  nunibersdoeucri’e* 
pefeht  right  angled  figures  $s  appeareth  iH  the  example. 

Sfiiij. 


The fburtenth 
definition. 


The fiftenth 
definition. 


The  fixtenth 
definition. 


Two  numbers 
required  in 
multiplication. 


The  feuenttnth 
definition. 


fUhj  they  4re 

called  jnperfisid 
all  numbers^ 


1 3  When 


Tie  eigh  tenth 
definition^ 


Why  they-are  . . 
called folid 
numbers  i 


1 8  When  three  numbers  nmltiplyed  together y  one  into  the  other,  produce  any 
number, the  number  produced, is  called  a folide  number:  and  the  numbers 
multiplying  them  f elites  the  one  intoy  other,  are  the /ides  therof. 


As  taking  thefe  three  nubers  3.4.  y.  multiply  the  one  into  the  other. 

Firll  4.into  f. faying, foure  times  y.is  zo:  then  multiply  that  number  pro- 
duced,namely,zo.into  3 :  which  is  the  third  number/ 

(fo.which  is  a  folide  number  :  and  the  three  numbers 
thenumber5namely,3.4.  and  f.  are  the  fides  of  the  fame  .And  they_.. 
called  folide  numbers,  becaufe  being  defcribed  by  their  Ynities,they  re- 
prefent  folide  and  bodylicke  figures  6f  Geometry, which  liaue  length, 
breadth, and  thicknes'.  As ye  fee  this  number  60.  expreffed  here  by  hys  ,  , 

vnities.  Whofe  length is  hys  fide  ^,bis  bie&dfb is  3  ,and  thipknes  4. And  \  f~  I  t  I 

thus  may  ye  do  of  all  other  three  nfrbe'rs  multiplying  the  one  the  other.  - U — 4 


- - — ^  *  •  y 

>ly  that  number  pro-  .  ,  ~  , 

r,fo  fhall  ye  produce  n  \  \  X  \ 

-Ts  Which  produced  I ) — \ — — V—y 

fame  .  And  they  are  4i\  \  \  \  \ 


The  vinetenth 
definition. 


Why  it  is  called 
a  fi/uare  num¬ 
ber. 


The  trventctb  % 
definition . 


ip  A  j'qfi'are  number  is  that  which  is  equally  equall :  or  that  -which  is  conlay* 
nedtnider  two  equatt numbers.  "v  • 

. * 

As  multiply  cwp  equall  numbers  the  one  into  the  other.  As9.by9.ye 
(hall  produce  8i,which  is  a- fquarenumber.  Euclidec alleth  it  a  number  e- 
apaflv  equ2, 11,.  becaufe  it  is  produced,  of  the  multiplication  oftwo  equall 
numbers  tile  one  into  the  other  .  V^hich  numbers  are  alfo  fayd  in  thefe-  •• 
cond  definition  to  cpntayne  a  fquarenumber .  As  in  the  definitions  of  the  tyTI 

fecond  booketWQliues  arefaydtocontainqafquareoraparalielGgramme  :  L 
figure  .It  is  called  a  fquare  number,  becaufe.being  defcribed  by  his  ynitie?  y.  j~|: 
it  reprefenteth  the  figure  of  a  fquare  in  Geometry.  As  ye  here  fee  doth  the 
number  81. .whofe.fides,  that  is  to  fay,.whofe  length  and  breadth, are  *?.  and  ,■  ,-j 
?,equall  numbers which  alfo  are  faydto  contayne  the  fquare  number  8 1  *. 
andfo  of  others. 

.  A  ♦  ►  *  1  *  •  *  1  *  t  - 

.........  •  .  ...  .  .  :  ,  (  ■  •  .  .  5  | 

tqyned Imder  three  equall  numbers. 


\\\  ‘-.W-VA^Vt 


...  ' 

Why  it  is  called 
a  cube  number. 


,  As  multiply. three  equall  numbers  the  one  into 
the  other,as  9,9,  and  ?  :  firft  9  .by  9 ,  fo  fhally.e  haue 
81 :  which  agayne  multiply  by  j»,fd, fhall  ye  produce 
f%9 .  which  is  a  Cube  number  .  And  Euclide  calleth 
it  a  number  equally  equall  equally, becaufe  it  is  pro¬ 
duced  of  the  fri  ukiplication  of  three  equall  num¬ 
bers  the  one  into  the  other:  which  three  numbers 
are  fayd  in  the  fecond  definition  (wherein  he  fpea- 
keth  more  applying  to  Geometry  )  to  contayne  the 
cube  number.  It  is  therefore  called  a  cube  number, 
becaufe  being  defcribed  by  hys  vnities,  it  reprefen- 
teth  the  forme  qf  a.  cube  in  Geometry,  wlipfe.fide,s, 
that  is'to  fay,  whofe  length,  breadth,  and  thicknes, 
are  the  three  equall  numbers  9, 9,  and  51,  of  which 
he  was  produced  :  which  three  fid es  alfo  are  fayd 
to  com  aine  the  cube- number  7zp- :  beholde  here 
the  defeription  therof. 


IVliZillW  i7: 


;a*!A- 


21 


The  twenty  one 
definition. 


Numbers  proportimatt  are, when  the  firft  is  to  the fecond  eqnemultipleXj 
as  the  third  is  to  the  fourth,  or  the fielfe fame  part, or  the felfe fame partm 


.VViV. 


Here  he  definetH  which  numbers  are  called  proportional!,  that  is,  what  numbers  haue  one  an 


s.ii 


FohZj. 

<$is  double  to  3 :  and  fo  is  ^double  fa2. Likewife  thefe  foUre  numbers'are  in  like  proportion  3 .9  .4.11 , 
forwhatpart3.isof^,fuehpartis4.ofi2  t  j.ofpiisa  third  parti  fo  is  alfo4,ofiz.a  thirdpart .  So  are 
thefe-foure  numbers  alfo  in  proportion  2. jrr-fvJO:  what  partes  2  .are  of  y,fuch  partes  are  4.  of  id  :  1,  of 
y,are  two  lift  partes,  Iikewife4.of  ro.are  two  lift  partes.  Moreover, thefe  numbers  8. 6:  ii. 9 :  be  in  pro- 
poftion,for  what  and  how  many  parts  8  .are  of  6, inch  &  fo  many  parts  are  12. of  9 :  8  .of  6,is  foure  third 
paftels/or One  thMparcbftf .is 2, which  taken  foure  times;maketh  8':  fo.1a.6f  5>,is  alfp- foure  thyrd 
partes  :  for  oneThira  part  of  9.1s  3,  which- taken  foure  tim^s  ihakeia.  Andfo  conceaue  ye  of  all  other 
proportionall  numbers* 

-  Iprthe  fixt  definition  of  the  v.booke,  Euclide .gane  a  farre  other  definition  of  magnitudes  proportio- 
nall,and  much  vn]ike  to  this  which  he  heregeueth  of  numbers  proportionall:  the  reafon  is  as  there  al- 
fo  Was  partly  rioted, for  that*  there  he  gaue  a  definition  common  to  ail  quantities  difcrete  and  continu- 
all,rationall,and  irrationall :  and  therefore  was  confixayned  to  geue  the  definition  by  the  exeefie,equa- 
litie  or  want  of  their  equemulriplices,and  that  generally  onely  :  for  that  irrationallquantities  haue  no 
^er^aynepart  prcp.ipmpi]  meafurpto  bejraeafured  byorkno.wen,neythcrcan  they  be  exprelfed  by  any 
certayne  numbers.  But  here  in  this  place  becaufe  in  numbers  there  are  op  irrationall  quantities,  but  all 
are  certaynly  knowen,fo  that  both  they  and  theproporttons  betwenethgm  may  be  exprcfied  by  num¬ 
bers  certayne  and  knowen,  by  reafon  of  their  partes  certayne,  and  for  that  they  haue  fome  common 


• .  vviiAwii  vitmiiLiuAi  ifjuv.11  cauci  uiui  uic  ;  aiiq.  4s,nac. 10 -large., . as  is 
the  otber,neitherextendeth  it  felfgenerally  to  alikinde  of  quantities  rationall  and  irrationall, but  con- 
tayneth  it  fclfe  Mlithin  the  limites  and  bonaes  of  raiionall  quahtitie  afldinumbers. 

22  Likegjam  numbers, and  likejolide  numbers ^tre fuchpiohichh^ue  their 
Cri-'iJhdes  proportionall. 


—  -  —  J  .  ...  -  -  .  -  -J  J - *  - - - - ***  V.  ilAV  U1V  VllV  tu  Ulw 

other.  The  likenes;  of  which  numbers  dependeth  altogether  of  the  proportions  of  the  fides  of  th  efe 
numbers.  So  thatif  thc.tw.o  frdcs  of  one  plaine  number, haue  the  fame  proportion  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther.jthat  the'  two  iides  of  the  other  plaine- number  haue  the  one  to  the  o.ther,then  are-fuehtwe  plaine 
huinbers  like.  For  in '.example  6  and  24be.,tWPplaiuehumbefs,\tKe-fidesof  6  be  2  and  3,  two  tytr.es  a 
ftaketfrtfie  fides  iof.  24  be  4  atid  foure  rimes  6  makes  14.  Againe  the  fame  proportion  that  is  betwene 
3  and  2  the  fides  of  6,  is  alfo  betwene  6  and  4  the  fides  of  24 .  Wfierfote  24  and  6  be  two  like  plaine  and 
fuperficiall  numbers.  And  fo  ofother  plaine  numbers.  After  the  fame  manner  is  it  in  folide  num¬ 
bers.  If  three  fides  ;of  the  one  be  in  like  proportion  togethe-r»as  are  the  three  lides-of  the  other  ,“then  is 
the  6he  folide  number  like  to  the  otfiervAs  h  and'  192  be  folide.  mnnbers,  the  fides  of24.are  2  . 3 .  and 
4v.tw6-tymes  three  taken  4  rirhesare  24  ;;thefidel  0  f  1 92  are4  dfaiicfS  •  -fo r  fo u re  ty mes  6  8  times  make 
192.  Againe  the  proportion  of4  to  3  is  fefquitercia,the  proportion  of3  to  2  is  fefquialtera*  which  are 

the  nmnorfinns  of  .  '.r-.t, _ ’  ’’  i.  i 


•£Oiin iiiups ais ri-aiaw •  s 1 m  ...si  w»\U9msR  ■  qatarasnp) •:  nsn zvy. 

23  jiperfeffi number  is  that ^hich  is  eqU&lltoallhispartes^  - 


iduiumsn 


they  are.  \Vherfofe  6  is  a  perfect  number.  So  likewife  is  28  a  perfed  number,  the  partes  whereof  are 
thefe  numbers  14. 7. 2  and  1 :  14  is  the  halfe  therof,  7  is  the  quarter, 4  is  the  feuenth  part,  *jT  is  a  four- 

^  1  t  S  f*  |1  V  ^  ^  t”  f*  O  M  T  ^  M  .A  O  f*.  A  14^  A  V.  .4  Am  i'A  m-m  .f  *  A  4*  A.  A  t  l  L.  »  . —  ■  ...  f  A  _  1  t  — ft  C  4  4  .  


like. This  kinde  of  numberais  very  rare  and  leidorne  found.  From  i  to  io,:there  /s  but  one  perfed  nura 
^namdy^.tr^,iptQ  ip.a°p;there  one,that  is,a8*  /4@.®©jn  xpe  to  iqdo  . there  is  . but  one 

which  is  496.  From  1000  to  ioooo  likewife  but  one.  So  that  betwene  euery  Hay  in  numbring, which  is 
euer  in  the  tenth  place, there  is  found  but  one  perfed  number  And  for  their  rarenes  and  meat  perfec- 
ti°n,they  are  of  maruelous  vfe  in  magike.and  in  the  fecret  part  of  philofophy. 

•  Thiskindeof  number  is  called  perf^dn  refpefi  of  ether  fiuf|ibef-s  Which  are  iniperfed*  For  as  the 
nature  of  a  perfedt  number  llandeth  in  this ,  that  all  his  partes  added  together  are  cqUallto  the  whole : 
and  make  the  whole :  fo  in  an  imperfed  nuber  all  the  parts  added  together  are  Hot  equal  to  the  whole, 
nor  make  the  whole^but  make  either  more  or  lefle  #  therefore  of imperfefl:  numbers  there  are  two 
ifiodes, the  one  is^aile’d >i(>f*rtdans  orabnndih'gjthe  other  Wanting. 

A  numberabundingis  that  v/hofe.partes  b.eingall  added  together  njake  more  then  the  whole 
liumbsrwhofepartes  they  are, as  12. is  an  abundant  number  .'For  all  the  partes  of  12.  namely,  6,4.3 -2. 

and 


Why  the  deft* 
ntt ion  ofpro- 
portionail  mag-* 
mt udes  a 
like  to  the  clef* 
ntt  to  of  proper* 
t  nr.  all  r.Hm* 
hers • 


The  twenty 
two  definition^ 


The  twenty 
three  definit/e. 


P erf  num« 
her s  rare  &  of 
great  Ssfein 
magike  &  m 
fecret phtlofo* 
phy. 

a  num’yr  n 
perfect. 

Two  kjnds  of 

imperfeil 

numbers^ 


and  1  .added  together  make  irfjwhieh are  more  then  ta.Likewiie  x8,is  a  num ber  abunding,all his pait» 
n.me!/j9*<5-3.i*andi.addedtogethermakezo.which’areinoretheni8:andfoofotherj,  r 
number  A  number  diminutc,or  wanting  is  that  whofe  partes  being  all  added  together,  make  lefle  then  the 

tiny  whole, or  number  whofe  partes  they  are. 

As  ?.is  a  diminute,or  wanting  number, for  all  his  partcs,namely,3  .and  x  .(moe  partes  he  hath  not) 
added  together  make  onely  4:  which  are  leffe  then  ?,Alfo  a*.is  a  diminute  nuber,all  his  partes,  name¬ 
ly.  13,1.1.  added  together  make  onely  16 :  which  is  a  number  much  leffe  then  16,  And  fi>  of  fuch  like.; 


Third  common 
/ entente t 


?yv,yviT 


fourth  common 
[entente^ 

\  ^3  VWtVt'ii 
*»  *6 


'  -  i  -  .  Id  ;  •  ...... 

As  if  vnto  the  number  3  be  taken  two  numbers  containing  the  fame  numberfoure 
times,  that  is  being  equemult-iplices  to  the  fdme number  three  /  the  fayd two  numbers 
flialbeequall.For  4,times  3  .will  cuef.be  1 2.S0  alfo  will  it  be  iFvnto  the  two  equal  num¬ 
bers  3,  &  3, be  taken  two  numbers^the  one  cotaining  the  one  number  3,  foure  times, 
the  other  containing  the  other  numberj  .alfofourc  times,that  is,being  equemultipli- 
ccs  to  the  equall  numbers  3.. and  3. 

■  ■  ••  -  Dil.‘ i'.ilA  .  .  „un  onii1.  i  lail.v'  j  o *  bn  A  .  HI;.:  .  |!r;  .  Iraqi)! 

3  Tfafiminbers-wvbme  oneandthefilfefame'mnibeirn  equtmltU, 
plexor  ’tyhofe  equemultiplices  are  equall:  are  alfo  equall  the  on  to  the  other* 

As  if  the  number  1 8,be  equemultiplex  to  any  two  numbers,  that  is,  contaync  any 
two  numbers  twife,thrife,  fower  times  &c?  As  for  example  3  .times:  then  arc  thefayd 
two  numbers  equall.For  1  d.deuided  by  3  .will  euer  bring  forth  6. So  that  that  diuiftott 
made  twife  will  bring  forth  <J,and  d.two  equall  numbers.  So  alfo  woUldft  follow  if  the 
two  numbers  had  equall  equemultiplices.namely,  if  18. and  18.  which  are  equall  num- 
berscontayned any  two  numbers  3, times,  ;s. 

4  If  a  number  meafure  the ‘tobole, and  apart  taken  a^paydtjhall  alfo  meet * 

fire  the  ref  due.  :  ;  ' 

.  :  ■  ■  ■  izmdl  .  \  .  d  11  s  '  £  OB  t  j  HsiSp* 

As  if  from  24.  be  taken  away  ^.there  remainethij  .And forasmuch  as  the  number 
3  mcafureth  the  whole  number  24,&  alfo  the  number  take  away,riamely,y.  it  fhall  al¬ 
fo  meafure  therelidue.whichis  z  5 .For  3 .mcafureth  1 5  by  fiue.fiuc times  3, is  i  5 ,  And 
foofothers* 


•  'vT-4. 

Tifthcommtn 

farm.' yy 


i  If ammber  meafure  any  numberiit  alfo  meafireth  euery  number  that 
thefayd number  meafireth. 


,V«UV-.,« 


A s  the  number  5,meafuring  the  number  x  s iflvall  alfo  meafure  all  the  numbers  thae 
1 2. mcafureth. -as  the  numbers  24,3  6,48.  <5o,  and  fo  forth ‘which  thenumber  1  a.  doth 

meafur£ 


ofSuMet  Ekmentes .  Fol.iSS, 

rneafure  by  the  numbers  24?. 4*and  5 «And  for  as  much  as  the  number' 1  2*ddth  meafure 
the  numbers  2443 6.4.8  .anddo ;  And  the  nuber  <5.doth  meafure  the  number  1 2 .  (namely 
by  2 ,)  It  Followcth  by  this  eo'mmo  fentence,thatthe  number  Gmeafurcth  eche  of  thefe 
numbers  24,3  <?44S4and<5p,And  fo  of  others, 

"  6  If  aiutmber  meafure  ifep  numbers f  itJhaU  alfo  meafure y  number  com * 

pojed  of them. 

.....  ■  .  ■ 

As  the  number  jmeafurcth  thefe  two  numbers  6\and  p:  it  meafureth  6, by  2>-and  pt 
by  3  ,  And  therefore  by  this  common  fetttence  it  meafureth  the  number  1 5  .  which  is 
compofedof  the  numbers  <5.andp:namelyit  meafureth  it  by  5, 

7  If  in  numbers  there  be  proportions  ho W  manyfoeuer  equal l  or  the  felfe 
fame  to  one  proportion :  they  Jhall  alfo  he  e quail  or  the  felfe  Janie  the  one  to 
the  other. 

As  yfthe  proportion  of  the  number  6.  to  the  number  3.  be  as  the  proportion  of 
the  number  8,  to  the  number  4,  if  alfo  the  proportion  of  the  number  1  o«  to  the  num¬ 
ber  54be  astheproportion  of  the  number  8.to  the  number  4:thcnfliall  the  proportion 
of  the  number  5t  to  the  number '3*be  as  the  proportion  ofthe  number  io.is  to  the 
number  5;  namely^echeproportionisduple.And  fo  of  others  in  his  j.bopke 

the  1  1  .proportion  demonftrated  this  alfo  in  continuall  quantitie  :  which  although  as 
touching  that  kinde  of  quantitie  it  might  haue  bene  put  alfo  as  aprinciple  (asin  num¬ 
bers  he  taketh  it)yetfor  that  in  all  magnitudes  theyr  proportion  can  not  be  expreffed, 
f  as  hath  before  berte  noted  &fhalbe  afterward  in  the  tenth  booke  more  at  large  made 
manifeft  :)therefore  he  demonftrateth  it  there  in  that  place,  and  proueth  that  it  is  true 
as  touching  all  proportions  generally  whither  they  be  rational  or  irrationall. 


T  hefirfl  Uropofition.  T he firJITheoreme. 

A  1  * 

f  ,  If  there  begeuen  two  iynequM numbers }and if  in  taking  the  lejle  continue 
ally  from  the  greater,  the  number  renfqyning  do  hot  meafure  the  number 
going  before  ylmtiU  it jhall  come  to  Imitie :  then  are  thofe  numbers  which 
*•  Were  at  the  beginninggeuen^prime  the  one  to  the  other. 


Fppofetbat  there  be  two  unequal  numbers  A  B  the  greater,  and 
C  D  the  lefe,  and  from  A  B  the  greater,  take  away  CD  the 
lefe  as  often  as  you  can  leauing  F  A,  and from  C  D  take  away 
FA^  often  as  you  can, leaning  the  number  G  C.  LAnd  from 
F  A  take  away  G  C  as  often  as  you 


i  can,  and  fo  ao  continually  till  there 
J  j  remay ne  onely  untile,  which  let  be 
^|HA.  Then  1  fay  that  no  number 
meafureth  the  numbers  A  B  and 


E . . 

V  ...  G  ..  C 
B . F . .  H .  A 


C  D.  For  if  it  be  ■jtofible  let fome  number  meafure  them, and  let  the  fame  be  E.  Tfcw  G  0 
pteaftring  A  B  leaueth  a  lefe  number  then  it J’elfc, which  let  be  F  A.  And  F  A  mea firing 
0  Qleaueth  alfo  a  lefe  then  it  felfe, namely,  G  C .  lAnd  G  C  me af tiring  F  A  leaueth  v - 
pitie}\A..Andforafnuchasthemmber'EmeafurethT)  C,  and  the  number  C  D  mea~ 
fureth  the  number  3V\therfore  the  number  E  alfo  meafureth  B  F,  and  it  meafureth  the 

whole 


Sixth  commit* 
fentence^ 


Seitenth  ccmt 
man  fentence^  ,  . 


ConffruSisnl 


Demontlratim 
leading  to  <t» 
ahfardttie9 


alfo  meafureth  that  which  remayneth, namely, the  number  G  C  (by  thefimeCommonjen- 
tence)  xbutGQ  meafureth phe 'number  F  Hjwherforpplfo, Tm^fgrepk J2  \\,TU\dit:  mea - 
fureth  the  whole  miMer^F  A,  wherfore  (bythefobmer  common  fentencej^ii  Mfo  meafu¬ 
reth  that  which  remay neth  H  A ,which  is  vnitiejt  felfe  being  a  number,  which  is  tmpojji - 
ble.  Wherfore  no  number  dothmeafure  the  numbers  A  B  and  C  D,  wherfore  the  numbers 

A  B  and  C  D  are  prime  numbers  the  one  to  the  other :  which  was  required  to  be  Proued. 

rrr- ii,  ■"  '  J  .  uM  -  . 


The  conuerfe  of  this  proportion  after  Campane. 


'<  r  '-i,: 


ioho 


.03 


Tin  conuerfe  of 
this  proportion. 


Haw  to  know 
whether  two 

numbers  geuen 

be  prime  the  one 
to  the  other. 


Two  cafes  in 
this  probleme . 
Thefrfi  cafe. 


The fecond  cafe. 


And  if  the  two  numbers ,  namely  A  B  and  C  D  be  prime  the  one  to  the  orher.tKen  the  leffe  being 
continually  taken  from  the  greater  there  fhalbe  no  day  pf  that.Tnftra^ioBitrlbthatyou  cpme  to  vnirie. 
Forifin  thecontinuallfubltraOion  thcre-be'allay ‘before  you' come  to  vnitie. 

Suppofe  that  H  A  be  the  number  whereat  the  day  is  made,  which  alfo  being  D .  ..G.  ,C 

fubtrahed  out  of  G  C  leaueth  nothing .  Wherfore  H  A  meafureth  G  C  wher-  B . F..H.A 

fore  alfo  it  meafureth  F  H  by  the  s.commorrfencence  of  the  feuenth.  And  for 
as  much  as  it  alfo  m'ealuretH  it  felfe ,  therefore  it  alfo  meafureth  the’whole  AF  by  the  fkth  common 
fentence  of  the  feuenth  ,  Wherfore  alfo  it  meafureth  D  G  by  the  j.  common  fentence .  But  it  is  before 
proued  that  it  meafureth  GC,  Wherfore  it  meafureth  the  whole  CD,  by  the  fixth  common  fentence 
of  the  feuenth  -.wherfore  alfo  it  meafureth  B  F  by  the  5  .common  fentence  of  the  feuenth. And  it  is  alfo 
proued  thatit  meafureth  F  A,wherfore  alfo  it  meafureth  the  whole  number  A  B  by  the  fixth  common 
fentence  of  the  feuenth .  Now  for  as  much  as  the  number  H;A  meafureth  the  numbers  A  B  and  C  D, 
,therfore  the  numbers  ABand  CD  are  numbers  compofed :  wherfore  they  are  not  prime  the  one  to  the 
other :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppoddon, 

And  by  this  propofition  if  there  be  two  numbers  geuen.lt  is  eafv  to  finde  out, 
“whether  they  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other  or  no.  For  if  byluch  continual  fubftra&ion 
of  the  lelfe  from  the  greater, you  come  at  the  length  to  ymtie.Then  are  thofc  numbers 
geuen  prime  the  one  to  the  other.But  if  there  be  a  day  before  you  come  to  Ynltie,  then 
are  the  numbers  geuen,numbers  compofed  the  one  to  the  other. 

C -V  f  r. '  f-V'jec-S^V 'Wr  * 

f  The  i.Probleme.  T he  z.  Propofition. u 

Two  numbers  beinggeuen  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other,  tofiaieout  their 
^gr  eat  eft  common  meafure. 

\  Vppofe  the  two  numbers  geuen  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other  to  be  A  B  and  C 
D.  It  is  required  tofnde  out  the  greatefl  common  meafure  of  the faid  numbers 
|  A  B  and  C  D .  T{ow  the  number  C  D  either  meafureth 
m  the  number  A  B  or  not.  JfG  D  meafure  A  B  it  alfo  mea¬ 
fureth  it  felfe.  Wherefore  C  D  is  a  common  meafure  to  the  numbers 
CD  ana  A*B.  ssfnd  it  is  manifeft  alfo  that  it  is  the  greatefl  common 
meafure :  for  there  is  no  number  greater  then  CD  that  will 
nqgafure  CD. 

But  ifC  D  do  not  meafure  A  B ,then  if  of  the  numbers  A  B  A  . . 
and  C  D,  thelefe  be  continually  taken  away  from  the  greater ,  C  . . 
there  will  before  you  come  to  vnitie, be  left  a  number, which  will  meafure  the  number  going 
before  (by  the  1  .of the feuenth  )  .For  if there  fhould  not ,  thenjhould  the  numbers  A  B  and 
C  D  bep  rime  the  one  to  the  other, which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition.Let  the  fayd number 
left  by  the  continudl ptbflraffion  of  the  lejfe  number  out  of  the  greater  be F  C .  So  that  let 
the  number  C  D  meafuring  A  B ,  and  fubtrahed  out  of  it  as  often  as  you  can  leue  a  lejfe 
number  then  it felfe,  namely  A  E.  K^fna  let  AE  meafuring  G  D,  and  fubtrahed  out  of  it 


A ........  B 

C....D 


n 


.D 


AS 


of Smlides  Elementes.  Po/.iSp* 

as  often  as  you  can  leans  deffelhen  it felfe  namely  ,C  B.UW fuppofethat  C  F  dofo  mea- 
fare  A  E  that  there  remayne  nothing  .Then  l  fay  that  C  F  is  a  common  meafure.  to  the  , 
numbers  A  B  and  C  D.Fer for af much  as  C  F  meafureth  AE,  and  A  E  meafureth  D  F, 
therefore  C  F  alfo  meafureth  D  E  (  by  the  fifth  common  fentence  of  the  feuenth  )  and  it 
hkemfe  meafureth  it  felfe ,  vs  h  erf  ore  it  alfo  meafureth  the  tv, hole  C  D  (by  the fixth  common 
f entente  ofthefeuenih )  but  G  D  meafureth  B  E ,  wherefore  C  F  alfo  meafureth  BE  (by 
thefiftc  common  fentence  of  the feuenth)  .xAndit  meafureth  alfo  E  A  .•  wherefore  it  alfo 
me  a  fureth  the  whole  B  A  (by  the fixth  common  fentence  of  the feuenth ) :  and  it  alfo  meaju-  , 
nth  CD  as  we  haue  before  proued :  wherefore  the  number  C  F  meafureth  the  numbers 
AB  &  C  D  :wherfore  the  number  C  F  is  a  comma  meafure  to  the  numbers  A  B  &  C  D . 

1  fay  alfo  that  it  is  thegreatejl  common  meafure.  Tor  ifC  F  be  not  the greatefi  commo 
meafure  to  A  B  and  C  D,  let  there  be  a  number  greater  then 

C  F  yvhich  meafureth  A  B  and  G  Dv  which  let  be  G.  iAnd  sA . ..  .E . B 

forafmucb  as  G  meafureth  CD,  and  C  D  meafureth  BE,  G . . . 
therefore  G  alfo  meafureth  BE  (  by  the  fft  common  fentence  C  .  .F .. . .  D 
of  the  feuenth)  .  And  it  meafureth  the  whole  A  B, where¬ 
fore  alfo  it  meafureth  the  ref  due ,  namely,  AY(by  the  4.  common  fentence  of  the  fe¬ 
uenth  )  .But  A  E  meafureth  D  F, wherefore  G  alfo  meafureth  DY  (by  theforefayd  $.  com¬ 
mon  fentence  of  the  feuenth )  .And  it  meafureth  the  whole  C  D  .  Wherefore  it  alfo  meafu¬ 
reth  the  refidue  F  C :  namely ,  the  greater  number  the  leffe:  which  is  impofsible .  No  number 
therefore  greater  then  C  Y  fh  all  meafure  thofe  numbers  A  B  and  CD.-  wherefore  G  F  is 
thegreatejl.  common  meafure  to  AB  and  CD  .-which  was  required  to  be  done „ 

Corrolary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft ,  that  if  a  number  meafure  Woo  numbers  it  fbatt  alfo 
>  meafure  their  great  eft  common  meafure .  For  if  it  meafure  the  whole  &  the 

part  taken  aw  ay, it  {hall  alwayes  meafure  the  refidue  alio ,  which  refidue  is  at 
the  length, the  greatefi;  common  meafure  of  the  two  numbers  geuen. 

T  he  2.(Probleme.  Th  3.  Tropofition . 

T  hre  numbers  beinggeue  jiot  prime  the  one  to  the  other.toftnde  out  their 
greatefi  common  meafure. 

... 

Fppofe  the  three  numbers  geuen  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other  A . 

to  be  A,  B,  C  .  Now  it  is  required  rvnto  the  fayd  numbers  B . 

A,B,C  to  finde  out  the  greatefi  common  meafure  .  Take  the  C _ 

greatefi  common  meafure  of  the  two  numbers  A  and  B  (by  the  2  of  the  D  . . 
feuenth )  which  let  he  D  .*  which  number  D  either  meafureth  the  num-  E ... 
her  C  or  not.  .  v  .  :  % 

Firfi  let  D  meafure  C .  And it  alfo  meafureth  the  numbers  A  and  B,  wherfore  D 
meafureth  the  numbers  A,  B,  C.WhereforeD  is  a  common  meafure  vnto  the  numbers 
A,B,  C. Then  I  fay  alfo ,t hat  it  is  thegreatejl  common  meafure  unto  them.  For  ifD  be  not 
thegreatejl  common  meafure  vnto  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  let  feme  number greater  then  D 
meafure  the  numbers  A,BjC  .  And  let  the fame  number  be  YL.Njjw forafmuch  as  E  meafu¬ 
reth  the  numbers  A,B,C  ,it  meafureth  alfo  the  numbers  A,  B  Wherefore^t  meafureth  alfo 

Tt.i ,  A  the 


VemnttratiS 
of  the  Jecond 
cafe 

That  C  Fit  « 
common  mea¬ 
fure  to  the 
numbers  A  B 
and  CD, 

That  C  F  is 
thegreatejl 
common  mea¬ 
fure  to  kAB 
and  CD, 


Two  Cafes  in 
this  Propcfi- 
tion. 

The  firfi  cafe. 


thegreatefi  cmmon' ineafure  ofthe  numbers  A,B  (by  the  Co-  J  , , .  \ 

r diary,  of  the  fecond  of  the  feuenth ) .  But  thegreatefi  common  B  ...........  r 

meafure  ofthe  numbers  A,  B>  is  the  number  D  (by  con -  C ....... . 

Jirudion)  .Wherefore  the  number  E  meafureth  the  number  D . . 

D,  namely, the  greater  the  lejfe whicbisrmfofiible  .  Where-  E . . 
fore  no  number  greater  the  D  meafureth  the  nubers  A,B,C.  E ... 

Wherefore  D  ts  thegreatefi  common  meafure  to  \the  numbers 

A,B,C. 

7he  fecond  but  notv  fiuppofe  that  D  do  not  meafure  C .  Firfl  l fay  that  D^C  arc  not  prime  mm* 

safe*  hers  the  one  to  the  other .  For  forafmuchas  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  are  not  prime  the  one  to 

the  other  (by  fuppofilion)  fame  one  number  will  meafure  them  :  but  that  number  that  mea- 
fureth  the  numbers  A,  B,C, fall  alfo  meafure  the  numbers.  A,  B,and fall  likervlfe  meafure 
thegreatefi  com  on  meafure  of  A.  Br namely  ,D  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  fecond  ofthe feueth). 
K^yind  the fayd  number  meafureth  alfo  C  .  Wh erf  ore fame  one  number  meafureth  the  num¬ 
bers  D  and  C .  Wherefore  D  and  C  are  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other. 

Flow  then  let  there  be  taken  ( by  the  2  .ofthe feuenth )  thegreatefi  common  meafure  <vnto 
the  numbers  Y)  and  Q, which  let  be  the  number  E .  <^Andforajmucb  as  E  meafureth  D, 
and  D-  meafureth  the  numbers  A,B>  therefore  E  alfo  meafureth  the  numbers  A,  B  (  by  the 
fixt  common  fentece )  :and. it  meafureth  alfo  C.  Wherfore  E  meafureth  the  nubers  A,B,C. 
Wherefore  E  is  a  common  meafure  vnto  the  numbers  A,B>C .  j  fay  alfo  that  it  is  the  grea¬ 
ter  i  For  if%  be  not  thegreatefi  common  meafure  'unto  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  let  there  be 
fame  number  greater  then  YLjvbieh  meafureth  the  nubers  A,B,C.  <_ And  lei  the fame  num¬ 
ber  be  F .  And  for  a fmuch  as  F  meafureth  the  numbers  A3B,  C  .•  it  meafureth  alfo  the  num¬ 
bers  A>B.  Wherefore  alfo  it  mea  fureth  thegreatefi  common  meafure  of  the  numbers  A,B 
( by  tbs  Corollary  ofthe  2. of  the feuenth ).  But  thegreatefi  common  meafure  ofthe  numbers 
£).  Wherefore  E  meafureth  D .  i^yAnd  it  meafureth  alfo  the  number  C.  Wherefore 
F  meafureth  the  numbers  D,C .  Wherefore  alfo  (  by  the fame  Corollary)  it  meafureth  the 
greatefi  common  meafure  ofthe  numbers  D,  C .  But  the  greatefi  common  meafure  of the 
numbers  D,G,  is  E.  Wherfore  F  meafureth  E,  namely ,  the  greater  number  the  lefie:  which 
is  impoffible .  Wherefore  no  number  greater  then  E  (ball  meafure  the  nubers  A,B,C  .Wher¬ 
fore  E  is  the  greatefi  common  meafure  to  the  numbers  A,B^G  -•  which  was  required  to  be 
done.  ■  ■  ' 


^Corollary. 

Wherefore  it  is  manif eft, that  if  a  number  meafure  three  numbers ,  it  jhatl 
alfo  meafure  their  greatefl  common  meafure .  yfnd  in  like fort  more  num* 
hers  bfmggem  not  prune  the  one  to  the  other  may  be  found  out  their gre fa 
left  common  meafure, and  the  Corollary  "Will  follows. 


f  The  z.  Theorems.  The  i.Tropoflfton. 

Busty  leftfe  number  is  of mery greater  number,  either  a  part, or  partes. 

. .  ■■V;-  „  v, '  v  '•  -  *•' 

Ff  pofe  there  be  two  numbers  A  and  B  C .  6 f  which  let  B  C  be  the  lefie .  T hen  / 
4  IMbflayjhat  B  Cis either  apart  or  partes  of  A.  For  the  numbers  A  and  B  G  are  eu 


turn.  j  ^SMpherprimethtmemhe  other, or  not .  Fir  ft  let,  A  andB  C  be  prime  the  one  to  the 

Ihfirfieafe.  ether..  Ljnddem&e  the  number  B  G  into  thofe ’unities  which  an  in  it.  Now  euery  one  of 

she 


Ttibiafieb 

chfi  fmpafi- 


\  ■ 


of  FoL  19©. 

fhb-tmitip''vtohkh^tmEC^f^^tnmpartofAlWherefire^  C  are partes  of  A. 

.  But  now  fuppofeihat  the  numbers  h  and  B  C  benot prime  the  one  to  the  other  .  Then 
’%fk:Pthp:PiffutttkA.dr'mtme0ji»Ph'it:'dfE  C  meafure 
A,  then  is  B  C  a  part. of  A  .  But  if  not,  take  [  by  the  z.of  the 
feuenth )  thegreatef  common.meafure  of  A  andE  (2,  and  let 
the  fame  be  D.  ^AndleJ-.  B  C  bedeuided  into  as  many  partes 
as  it  hath  e'qu'all  v  n  to  T),  thtififrinto.  'B  E*E  F*; amE. -C- 
i^And forafnnt  ch  as  I)  meafureth  A  ,  therefore  D  is  a  part  of 
A  .  But  D  is  cquall  vnto  entry,  one  of  thefe  partes  B  H,E  F,  ,  < 
and  F  C.  Whdrfm  alfo  cuery  oneof thefe  partes  B  E,  E  F,  and  F  C,  is  apart  of  A .  Wher- 
fmthe'ntti&jker&G  ispartes  of  A'- Wherefore  euery  lefe number  is  of euery  greater  nuber, 

either-  dparte&gqft&Sp  -  which  wTtrO/miredtn  hr  Dramdl-  ■■ 


■  ■■  * 

B.......C 

JS  *  c 

JF...C 

D... 


Jbefeeoni 

cafe. 


K  ’V-l 
evttiU 


ymS  t  *\  '--A  e 


v. 


-i  it 


vivmv  v?.\ 

'  \  r  \  *•>  *  _  *A».  v 

*1  &  v,  v  Vs* 


f  T  he  j.  T heoreme.:  T he  s.  ^ropofltion. 

If  a  number  be  a  part  of a  number,  and  an  other  mberthe  felfe  fame  part 
of  another  number,  then  both  the  numbers  added  together  f?all  be  the 
felfe fame  part  of  both  the  numbers  added  together fiohich  one  number  leas 
of  one  number. 

J. ,,  •  ,  •  ’ 


Fppofe  the  number  A  to  be  apart  of  the  number  B  C,  arid  let  an  other  number , 
namely,  D,  be  the felfe fame part  of  an  ether  number,, namely  ,ofE  F,  The  I fay , 
that  the  numbers  A  and  D  added  together,  are  the  felfe  fame  part  oftheniL 

_ hers  JB  C  and  E  F  addedf together, that A  is  of  B  O  v  For  for afmuch  as  what 

parithe  number  A  is  of  the  number-  B  C,  the  felfe  fame  part 
is  the  number  D  of  . the  number  E  E,therfore  how  many  num. 
hers  there  are  in  B  C  cquall  vnto  A  fo  many  numbers  are 
therein  E  F  cquall  v.rJto  D.  Deuide  I  fay,  B  C  into  the  num¬ 
bers  that  are  equall  vnto  A,  that  is,  into  B  G,  and  G  (2,  and 
Itkewife  deuide 'Em  'into  the  numbers  that  are  equall  vnto  D, 
that  is,  inioE  Hand  H  F .  Flow  then  the  multitude  of  thefe 
B  G  and  G  C,  is  equall  vnto  the  multitude  of thefe  E  H  and  H  F  .  fndforafmuch  as 
EG  is  cquall  vnto  A,  andE  Hvnto  E>,  therefore  B  G  and  EH  are  equall  vnto  A  &X>. 
luAndby  the  fame  reafon for afmuch  as  G  C  is  equall  vnto  A,andHEvntoD  :  therefore 
G  G  and  H  F  are  alfo  equall  vnto  A  and  D  .  Wherefore  how  many  numbers  there  are  in 


tsd ...... 

'V’  ■-  ’  '  l \  ;■  V:. 

b  ......  a 

D . ... 

E. ...&....F 


This  probofi* 

t io, ana  the  6. 
ptopo/itionm 
difirete  qum< 
title,  an/toer 
to  tbeprfi  of 
in 


contmtai 

qtuhikie. 


\ 

U:V 


DemoMflra- 

tmi. 


numbers AaxdQ  .Wherefore  what  part  A  is  of  EC, the felfe  part  alfo  are  A  D  added 

together,  ofE  C  andE  F  added  together :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

.  • .  -  - .  '» >  i-  f  •'  •  -  2*  jv  i  *  . .  .  -v  ..  .  .  V  •  G._  v.*'  ... 


tf  sFbe  4-  T heomhe. 


6.  Tropofttion.: 


ame 


If awmberhe  partes  of  a  number,  and  another  number  the  felfe,  fa..„ 

,  partes  of  an  other  number:  then  both  numbers  added  together  flail  be  of 

both  numbers  added  together  the  felfe  fame  partes ,  that. outnumber^ as 
of  one  number. 


Tt.q. 


Suppoft 


tonjlrutlm , 


Dmonttra- 

tiOH. 


Tfjis  propofi- 
tion  and  (he 
next  following 
in  it  first  qua- 
titie  anfive- 
reth  to  the 
fifth  bropofitio 
of  the  fifth 
bokein  conti¬ 
nual!  quality. 
Cohftruftiott • 
Vemouftra- 
thn. 


Vppofe  that  the  number  A  B  be -partes  of  the  number  C,and  let  an  other  number^ 
namely,  DE^  the felfe fame fartes  of  an  ether  number, namely, ofF.  Then  I fay , 

_  that  the  numbers  A  hand  D  E  added  together, are  of  the  numbers  C  and  F  added 

together  the felfe fame  fartes, that  AB>is of C.Forforafmuch 
as  what fartes  AB  is  of C>  the felfe fame fartes  is  DE  of F.*  \^A .  ..G...S 

therefore  how  many  fartes  of  C  there  are  in  AB,fomany  g 
fartes  ofF  are  there  in  D  E.  DeuideA  B  into  the  fartes  ofC, 

that  is,  into  A  G  and  G  B,  and  likewife  D  E  into  the  fartes  D  ...  ..H ....  E  -  ‘ 

of F, that  is,  into  D  H  and  H  E .  Now  then  the  multitude  of  p 

thefe  A  G  arid  G  B  is  equallto  the  multitude  of  thefe  D  H  ‘ ‘ 

WHE.  \^4nd  forafmuch  as  what fart  A  G  is  of  Cf the  felfe  fame  fart  is  D  H  ofFs 
therefore  what fart  A  G  is  of Q, the  felfe  fame  fart  is  AG  ana  D  H  added  together  ofC 
and  F  added  together .  ^Nnd  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  what  fart  GBisofC,  the felfe fame 
fart  is  GB  and  HE  added  together  of  C  and  F  added  together  .Wherefore  what fartes 
Ah  is  of C,  the  felfe  fame  fartes  are  A  B  andD  E  added  together  of  C  and  F  added  toge¬ 
ther  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 

:  '  -  .  -  '  l 

f  T he  s.  Theorem  e »  The  7,  ■ Tropofition , 

If  a  number  he  the felfe fame  part  of a  number, that  a  part  taken  away  is  of 
a  part  taken  away :  then fi?all  the  refidue  he  the felfe fame  part  of  the  re  fie 

due,  that  the  lehole  'Was  of  the  Tohole. 

'  ... 

2  Fpfofe  that  the  number  AB  be  of  the  number  C  D  the  felfe  fame  fart,  that  the 
i  fart  taken  away  AE  is  of  the  fart  taken  away  C  F .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  refidue 

_ j1  E  B  is  of  the  refidue  F  D  the felffame  fart  that  the  whole  A  B  is  of  the  whole  C  D. 

What  fart  A  E  is  ofC  F,  the  felfe  fame  fart  let  E  B 
be  of  GO .  And for  that  what  fart  A  E  is  ofC  F,the 
fame  fart  is  E  B  of  CG,  therefore  what fart  A  E  is 
of  C  F,  the fame  fart  (by  the  s .  of  the feuenth)is  AB 
ofF  G .  But  what  fart  AE  is  ofC  F,  the fame fart  (by  fuff  ofition)  is  AB  ofC  D.Wberi 
fore  what  fart  AB  is  ofF  G,the felffame  fart  is  A  BcfC  D  Wherefore  A  Bis  one  &  the 
felfe  fame  fart  of  both  thefe  numbers  GF  and  C  D .  Wherefore  G  F  is  e quail  vnto  C  D 
(by  the fecond  common  fentence  of the feuenth )  .Take  away  G  F  which  is  common  to  them 
both .  Wherefore  the  refidue  G  C  is  equal! vnto  the  refidue  F  D.  ^And forafmuch  as  what 
part  A  E  is  ofC  F,  the fame  fart  is  E  B  ofG  C  .*  but  G  G  is  equallvnto  F  D  ••  therefore 
what  fart  ABis  ofF  C,  the felfe  fame  fart  isFLB  ofF  D  .  But  what  fart  A  E  is  of  C  F, 
the fame  fart  is  AB  of  CD .  Wherefore  what  fart  EB  is  ofF  D,  the  fame  part  is  A  B  of 
C  D  Wherefore  the  refidue  EB  is  of the refidue  F  D  the  felfe  fame  fart  that  the  whole 
A  B  is  of the  whole  CD:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated . 

tf  T he  6.  Theorems.  The  8.  Tropofition. 

If  &  number  be  of a  number  the  felfe  fame  partes ,  that  a  part  taken  away 
is  of  a  part  taken  away fibe  refidue  alfiiJhaU  be  of  the  refidue  the  felfe  fame 
partes  thatthe  ^holeis  of the  ^hoM 

Suppole 


C  ■». « •  .<  C •  • •  *  •  •  *  *  F  •  •  •  * ,0 
o/. . .  .IT  *  .2? 


0. 


.  L , . ,  Jj  . .  B 
C .........  F ...  D 


>  Fol.ipu 

*  py  pofe.  that  the  number  AL>  be  of the  number  CD  the felfe  ftmepartes  that  the 
f  5§S  part  taken  away  A  E  if.oftkpart  taken  CP.  Then  1 fay, that  the  ref  due  E  B  is  of 
£4^1^ ;  the.  ref  due  F  D  the  felfe fame  partes  that  the  whole  A  B  is  of  the  whole  C  D.Vnto 
A  B  put  an  equall  tsuber  G 1 1.  Wherefore  what  partes  G  H  ts  of  C  D , the  felfe  ftmepartes 
is  A  E  of  C  F.  Dsut.de  G  FI  into  the  partes  of  C  D>  that  is,  G  K,  and  K  FI,  and  likewife 
A  E  into  the  paries  ofC  F ,  that  is,  into  A  L  and  L  E .  Ttyvthen  the  multitude  of thefs 
G'K  and  K  H',  tstquallvnto  the  multitude  ofthefe  AL  and L  E  ,■  i^/fnd  forafmuchas 
what  part  GKts-of CD, the felfe fame part  ishjUfC  F.-  teCD  is greater  then  OF. 
Wherefore  G  K  is  greater  then  A,  L  .  Put  ovnto  A  L  an  c  quail 
number  M  G .  Wherefore  what. part.  G  K  is  of  C  D*  the  fame  , 
partis  G'M  of  G  F  .  Wherefore  the  re  fldue  MK  is  (by  the 
j.  ofthefeuenth.)  of  the  refidue  YJd,  the  felfe  Jams  par.Pthat  ’ 

the  whole  GKis  of  the  whole  CD.  -^game,  forafmueh  as  .  G. 
what  part  KH  is  of  CD ,  the felfe  fame  part  BEL  of  C  F; 

but  C  D  is  greater  then  C  F  .  Wherefore  H  K  is  greater  then  EL.  Putvnto  E  Lane- 
quail  number  KN  .  Wherefore  what  part  KH  is  of  CD,  the  felfe  fame part  is  KN  of 
C  F  .  Wherefore  the  ref  due  alfo  N  FI  is  (  by  the  7 . ofthefeuenth )  of  the  refidueE  D,  the 
fife  fame  part  that  the  whole  KH  is  of  the  whole  D  C  .  Wherefore  both thefe  MK  and 
N  H  added  together  are  (by  the. 5. of  the  feuenth )  off)  F  the felf fame partes  that  the  whole 
H  G  is  of  the  whole  C  D  .  But  both  thefe  M  KandN  H  added  together,  areequall  vnto 
•  E  B  .  ^And  H  G  is  e  quail  unto  B  A  .  Wherefore  the  refidne  E  B  is  of  the  refidue  F  D  the 
felfe fame  paries  that  the  whole  A  B  is  of  the  whole.  C  D .•  which  was  required  to  be  proued . 

f[An  other  demonstration  after  Flufiates. 

Suppofethatthenumber  AB  beoftbenumberCDthefelfefemepartesthatthe  part  taken  away 
A  E-is  of  the  part  taken  away  C  F  .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  refidue  E  B  is  of  the  refidue  F  D  the  felfe  fame 
partes  that  the  whole  A  B  is  of  the  whole  C  D.Let  E  B  be  of  C 1  the  felf  fame  partes  that  A  B  is  of  C  D, 
or  A  E  of  C  E .  Now  forafmueh  as  E.B  is  of  C I  the  felfe- fame  partes  that  A  E  is  of  C  F ;  therefore  both 
thefe  A  E  and  E  B  added  together  are  of  both  thefe  C  E  and  Cl  added 

together  (that  is,  the  whole  A  B  is  of  the  whole  FI)  the  felfe  feme  B  . .  E . . .  A 

partes  that-  AEis-ofC  E  (by  the' fixt  of  this  booke)  .But  what  partes  r>  F  r  1 

A  E  is  ofCF,  the  felfe  feme  partes  is  the  number  A  B  of  the  number 

C  D  (by  fuppofitron)  .Wherefore  what  partes  the  number  A  B  is  of  the  nfiber  F  I, the  felfe  feme  partes 
is^he  feme  number  AB  of  the  number  CD.  Wherefore  the  numbers  FI  and  CD  are  equall.  Take  a- 
'way  the  number  C  Fwhichisebmmonto  them  both.  Wherefore  the  numbers  remayning  Cl  and 
ED  are  equall .  Wherefore  what  partes  the  number  E  B  is  of  the  number  C  I,  the  felfe  feme  partes  is 
the  fame  number  E  B  of  the  number  ED  .  But  what  partes  E  B  is  of  C  I,  the  felfe  fame  partes  (by  con- 
lirmftion)  is  A  B  of  C  D  .  Wherefore  what  partes  the  refidue  EB  is  of  the  refidue  FD,  the  felfe  feme 
partes  is  the  whole  A  B  of  the  whole  CD  :  which  was  required  tobe  proued. 


ffThe  7-Theoreme. 


'The  9.  Tropofition * 


If  a  number  be  a  part  of a  number 0  and  if  an  other  number  be  the felf  fame 
part  of  an  other  nuber :  then  alternately  yohat part  or  partes  the firfi  is  of 
the  third }the felf  fame part  or  partes fhall  the fecond  be  of the fourth 


I  Fppofe  that  the  number  0/  be  of  the  number  B  C  the 
’ felfe fame  part, that  an  other  number  D  is  of  an  other 
number  E  F .  And  let  belefie  then  D  .Then  I  fay, 

that  alternately  what  part  or  partes  A  is  ofD,  the felfe  fame 
part  or  partes  is  B  C-ofE  F.  For  forafmueh  as  what  part  A  is 
of  BC,  the  felfe  fame  partis  D  of  E  F ,  therefore  how  many 


9.  B-  .  O' 

B ... C 
E> .... » 

E . . . .  .H ....  .F 
Ttdf  numbers 


ConflmUmt 


'Demntlffc  A 

turn. 


Another^ 
monftramn 
after  j 
tes * 


Cofiffrutfimi 


Demonstra¬ 

tion, 


Conftrutfion. 


Demonstra¬ 

tion, 


This  propor¬ 
tion  in  difcrct 
quaiitie  anf- 
wereth  to  the 
ninth  fmpof - 
tTofthe  fifth 
bobbin  conti¬ 
nual  quatitie. 


B 

D. 


(7 ....  C 


.&.....  F 


numbers  there  are  in  B  C  equall  vnto  ^A,  fo  many  are  therein  . . . 

E  F  equall  vnto  D  .  DeuideB  C  into  the  numbers  e quail  vnto 
<3fL  that  is,  into  BG  &GC :  and  likewife  E  F  into  the  num¬ 
bers  equall  vnto  D,that  is,  into  E  H  and  H  F.  Flow  then  the 
multitude  of  thefe  B  G  and  G  C,  is  equall  vnto  the  multitude 
ofthefe  EH&H  F .  And forafmuch as  the  numbers  B  G  and 
G  C  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  the  numbers  alfo  E  H  and  H  F  are  equall  the  one  to  the 
other :  and  the  multitude  ofthefe  BG  &GC  is  equall  vnto  the  multitude  of thefe  E  H  and 
H  F.  Wherefore  what  fart  or  partes  BGis  ofE  H,the felf fame  part  or  partes  is  GC  ofH  F. 
Wherefore  what  part  or  partes  BGis  ofE  H,  the  felfe fame  part  or  partes  (by  the f ft  & fixt 
of  the  feuenth )  are  B  G  and  G  C  added  together,  ofE  H  and  HE  added  together.  But  BGis 
equall  vnto.  A,  and  E  H  vnto  E> .  Wherefore  what  part  or  partes  A  is  of  D,  the felfe fame 
part  or  partes  is  B  C  ofE  F :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 


The  8.  Tbeoreme. 


The  io.  Tropojition. 


If  a  number  be  partes  of a  number,  and  an  other  nuber  the felf  fame  partes 
of an  other  number ,  then  alternately  "frbat  partes  or  part  thefirft  is  of the 
third, the felfe fame  partes  or  part  is  the fecond  of the  fourth. 


■p Vppofe  that  the  number  Alb  be  of  the  number  C  the felfe fame  partes,  that  an 
1  other  number  D  E  is  of  an  other  nuber  F,  and  let  Alb  be  lefe  then  D  E.  Then 
j/ fay, that  alternately  alfo  what  part  or  partes  Alb  is  of  DE,  the  felfe  fame 
partes  or  part  is  C  ofE  .  Forafmuch  as  what  partes  Alb  is  of  C  ,the felfe fame 
partes  is  D  E  ofE  :  therefore  how  many  partes  of  C  there  are 
in  Alb,  fo  many  partes  ofE  alfo  are  there  in  D  E.Deuide  A  B  C ..... . 

into  the  partes  ofC,  that  is,  into  A  G  and  G  B.  And  likewife 
D  E  into  the  partes  ofE,  that  is,  D  H  and  H  E .  Flow  then 
the  multitude  ofthefe  A  G  and  Gib,  is  equall  vnto  the  multi¬ 
tude  ofthefe  D  H  and  H  E  .  And  forafmuch  as  what  part 
A  G  is  of  C  ,  the felfe fame  part  is  D  H  of  F,  therefore  alter¬ 
nately  alfo  ( by  the former  )  what  part  or  partes  AG  is  ofD  H,  the  felfe fame  part  or  partes 
is  C  ofE  .  And  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  what  part  or  partes  G  B  is  of  HE,  the  fame  part  or 
partes  is  C  ofE  .  Wherefore  what  part  or  partes  AG  is  of  DH,  the  felfe  fame  part  or 
partes  is  AilofDE(  by  the  6. of the feuenth )  .  But  what  part  or  partes  AG  is  of  DEL? 
the felfe fame  part  or  partes  is  it proued  that  C  is  ofE  .  Wherefore  what  partes  or  part  A  B 
is  of  D  E,  the felfe fame  partes  or part  is  C  of  F  .•  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


A..G  ,,B 


a  , , a  .  ...  .  a 


jl  The  9.  Theoreme. 


The  i  j.  (propojition . 


If  the  "tyhole  he  to  the  "fo hole ,  as  a  part  taken  away  is  to  a  part  taken  away: 
then Jhall  the  refidue  be  Emto  the  rejidue,  as  the  n Qhole  is  to  the  lohole. 

Vppofe  that  the  whole  number  A  B  be  vnto  the  whole  number  C  D,  as  the  part  take 
I  away  A  E,is  to  the  part  take  away  C  FA  he  1 fay  that  the  refidue  E  B,is  to  the  reft - 
due  F  D,as  the  whole  A  Bis  to  the  whole  C  D  .For forafmuch  as,  A  B  is  to  C  D,  as 
A  E  is  to  C  F:  t her  fore  what  part  or  partes  A  B  is  of CT), the felfe 
fame  part  or  partes  is  A  E  ofC  F.  Wherfore  alfo  the  refidue  EB  C  ....  F  ....  D 
js  eft  he  refidue  E  D  (by  the  S.  of the feuenth)  the felfe fame  parte  :•  <^A  . ...  E  ...  B 

^  '  or  partes 


0 


Fo/.ipz. 


or  partes  that  A  B  is  ofC  D .  Wherefore  alfo  (by  the  21.  defnition  oj 
F  JD,fo  is  A  Bto  C  j D  :  rvhich  rvas  required  to  be proued. 


m  boohjas  EBiiU  ?ow»ir*- 
■  '  uon . 


yf  T he  10.  T heoreme. 


The  12.  Tropoftion. 


If  there  he  a  multitude  of numbers  how  manyfoeuer  proportional! :  as  one 
of the  antecedentes  is  to  one  of  the  conjequentes ,fo  are  all  the  antecedentes 
toalltheconfequentes. 

Vppofethat  there  be  a  multitude  ofnubers  how  many  foeuer  proportional,  name¬ 
ly,  A,B,C,D  ,fo  that  as  A  is  to  Bfo  let  C  be  to  D.  T hen  I  fay  that  as  one  of  the 
’^antecedentes  ,namely ,  A  is  to  one  of  the  confequentes, namely  ,to  B,  or  as  C  is  to  Z>, 
jo  are  alithe  antecedentes : namely  >  A  and  C  to  all  the  conjequentes, 
namely  ,to  B  and  D  .  F or  forafmuch as  (by  fuppofition)  as  Aisto  B, 
foisCto  D,  t  her  fore  what  parte  or  partes  Ais  of  B,  the  felfe  fame 
part  or  partes  is  C  of  D  (by  the  21.  definition  of  this  booke)  where¬ 
fore  alternately  what  part  or  partes  A  is  ofC  the  felfe fame  parte  or 
partes  is  B  of  B  (by  the  ninth  and  tenth  of  the  feuenth )  wherefore 
both  thefe  numbers  added  together ,  A  and  C,are  of  both  thefe  numbers  B  and  D  added  to - 
get  her, the felfe fame  part  or  partes  that  A  is  ofB  (by  the  $.  and  6.  of the feuenth)  *  wherforc 
(by  the  21  .definition  of  the  feuenth)  as  one  of  the  antecedents , namely  ^A, is  to  one  of  the  con- 
fepuentes , namely , to  Bfo  are  alithe  antecedentes  A  and  C  to  alithe  confequentes  &  &  D* 
Which  ivas  required  to  be  proued. 


O'/  . . 

B  . . . 

C  .... 
D  ... 


Tbuindifcrtt 
quatity  anf- 
wentbto  the 
twetjc  propo - 
fitton  of  the 
fifth  m  conti¬ 
nual  quatity, 
Demonfira- 
thm 


fjT he  n.T heoreme. 


The  13.  Tropoftion. 


If  there  hefoure  numbers  proportionall :  then  alternately  alfo  they Jhall  he 
proportional h 

\Vppofe  thatthere  be foure  numbers  proportional ,  AJ$,C,~D,  fo  that  as  A  is  to  B, 
ffo  let  C  be  to  D  .  T  hen  I  fay  that  alternately  alfo  they  jhalbe  proportional,  that  is. 
r  as  A  is  to  C,fo  is  B  to  D  .  F or  forafmuch  as  (by  fuppofition)as  A  is  to  B,  fo  is  C 
to  I), t  her  fore  (by  the  21.  defnition  of  this  booke)  what  part  or  partes 
A  is  bfB  the  felfe  fam  e  part  or  partes  is  C  of  D.  T  her  fore  alternate-  . . . 
ly  what  part  or  partes  A  is  of C  the  felfe  fame  part  or  partes  is  B  ofD  B  .....  „ 

(by the p,ofthefeuenth)dralfo(bythe io.ofthefame)-wherforeas  C  .... 

A  is  to  cfo  is  B  to  D  (by  the  21.  defnition  of  this  booke) :  which  was  D . . 

required  to  be  proued.  <  j 


This  in  dif- 
crete  quantity 
anjwetetb  to 
thefixtenth 
proportion  of 
the  fifth  boo^e 
1  n  continuall 
quantities 


Here  is  to  be  noted,that  although  in  the  forefayd  example  and  demonftration  the  number  Abe 
fuppofed  to  be  leffe  then  the  number  B,  and  fo  the  number  C  is  lefle  then  the  number  D  :  yet  will  the 
fame  feme  alfo  though  A  be  fuppofed  to  be  greater  then  B  ,  wherby  alfo  C  fhall  be  greater  then  D,  as 
in  this  example  here  put .  For  for  that  (by  fuppofition)  as  A  is  toB,  fois  C  to  D,and  A  is  fuppofed  to 
be  greater  then  B,  and  C  greater  then  D  :  therefore  (by  the  21 .  definition  of  this 
Booke)  how  multiplex  A  is  to  B,  fo  multiplex  is  C  to  D,  and  therefore  what  part  A ..... . 

orpartesB  is  of  A ,  the  felfe  fame  part  or  partes  is  D  of  C.  Wherefore  alternately  B... 

what  part  or  partes  B  is  of  D,  the  felfe  fame  part  or  partes  is  A  of  C,  and  therefore  C . , 

by  the  fame  definition,  B  is  to  D,  as  A  is  to  C  .  And  fo  mull  you  vnderltand  of  the  D.... 

former  Propofition  next  going  before.  *  " 


Note >« 


. 


This  In  dif- 
c/ete  quantity 
,  anfwmth  to 
the  twety  one 
proportion  of 

the  fifth  bookp 

tn  contin  stall, 
q  tt  ant  if  it, 
Dcmwjlra- 
lion. 


Certa'mc  ad- 
>  dimm  of 
Campane.  . 

Two  cafes  in 
this  ptopofmo. 
The ftril  cafe * 

Tbefccmd 

cafe. 


tfrepwliona- 

Ipydemdsd, 


Fmparttona- 
Uty  eompofed. 


Bmtfe  pro- 
§  ttmuhty. 


efeue 


f  The  12. Theorems. 


J4* 


oition. 


S?  &. ' 


If  there  be  a  multitude  of numbers  how  many foeuer3  and  alfo  other  num* 
hers  e quail ^mto  them  in  multitude  3  K>hkh  being  compared  two  and  two 
are  in  one  and  the fame  proportion :  they Jh all  alfo  of equalitie  be  in  one  and 
the  fame  proportion.  ■ 

Vppofe  that  there  he  a  multitude  of  numbers  how  many  foeuer namely,  A,B,C\ 
and  let  the  other  numbers  equall  njnto  them  in  multitude  be  D,E,F :  which  be¬ 
ing  compared  two  and  two,  let  be  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion :  that  is,  as  A 
to  B,fo  let  D  be  to  E :  and  as  B  is  to  C,  fo  let  E  be  to  F .  Then\I fay, that  of  equa¬ 
litie,  as  A  is  to'Cyfo  is  D  to  F  .  For  forafmuch  as  by  fuppofiti- 

on  as  A  is  to.B,  fo  is  D  to  E  :.  therefore  alternately  alfo  {by  the  A . . . . 

1 3 .  of  the feucnth )  as  A  is  to  D  fo  is  B  to  E.  Agamefor  that  as  B ..... . 

B  is  to  Cfo  is  E  to  F:  therfore  alternately  alfofby  the felffame)  C ... 

as  B  is  to  E,fo  is-  C  to  F  .  But  as  B  is  to  E,fo  is  A  to  D.  VVher- 

fore  ( by  the  feuenth  common  fentence  of  the feuenth )  as  A  is  to  D . . 

D-fo  is  C  to  F.  Wherfore alternately  (by  the  1 3  .of  the feuenth )  E .  .  .  . 

as  A  is  to'Cyfo  is  I)  to  F  :  which  was  required  to  be  demon-  F .. 

jlrated. 


After  this  Pi-apofition,  Campant  demonftrafeth  in  numbers  thefe  foure  kindesof 
proportionality, namely  proportion  conuerfe,compofed,deuided,andeuerfe :  which 
were  in  continual  quantitie, demonflrated  in  the  4. 1 7. 1 8 .  and  ip.  propofitions  of  the 
fift  booke.  And  firft  he  demonftrateth  conuerfe  proportion  in  this  maner. 

Suppofe  that  the  number  A  be  to  the  number  B,  as  the  number  C  Is  to  the 

oqmberD  .  ThenIfay,thatconuerfedIy  B  is  to  A,asDis  toC.Forif  Abelefie  A, . . 

then  B,  C  alfo  fliall  be  lefle  then  D,  and  what  part  or  partes  A  is  of  B,the  felfe  B ..... . 

lame  part  or  partes  is  C  ofD  .  Wherefore  B  is  equemultiplex  to  A,  as  D  is  to  C.  C .... 

Wherefore  (by  the  a  1. definition  of  this  booke)  as  Bis  to  A,fo  is  E)  to  C.  D... 

Butif  A  be  greater  then  B,  C  alfo  is  greater  then  D  :  and  what  part  or  partes 
B  is  of  A,  the  felfe  fame  part  or  partes  is  D  of  C  .  Wherefore  (by  the  fame  definition)  as  B  is  CO  A3  lb  is 
D  to  C  :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


Proportion alitic  deuided,  is  thus  demonflrated. 


Suppofe  that  the  number  A  B  be  to  the  number  B,as  the  number  C  D  is  to  the  number  D  .  Then  I 
fay, that  deluded  alfo,as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  C  to  D .  For  for  that  as  A  B  is  to  B, 

fo  is  C  D  to  D  :  therefore  alternately  (by  the  i^.of  this  booke)  as  AB  is  to  A  . B .  • 

C  D,fo  is  B  to  D .  Wherefore  (by  the  1 1  .of  this  booke)  as  A  B  is  to  CD,  C. ......  D « .  . 

fo  is  A  to  C.  Wherefore  as  B  is  to  D,  fo  is  A  to  C  :  and  for  that  as  A  is  to 
C,  fo  is  B  to  D ,  therefore  alternately  as  A  is  to  B,  fo  is  C  to  D. 

Proportionalitie  compofed,  is  thus  demonflrated. 

If  A  be  vnto  B,as  C  is  to  D  :  then  fhall  A  B  be  to  B,as  C  D  is  to  D .  For  al¬ 
ternately  A  is  to  C,as  B  is  to  D .  Wherefore  (by  the  13  .of  this  booke)as  A  B , 
namely, all  the  antecedentes  are  to  C  D,namely,to  all  the  confequentes,  fo  is  C . . . .  D . . 

B  to  D, namely  ,one  of  the  antecedentes  to  one  of  the  confequentes  .  Wher¬ 
fore  alternately  as  A  B  is  to  B,  fa  is  CD  toD. 

Euerfe  proportionalities  is  thus  proued. 

Suppofe  that  A  B  be  to  B3as  C  D  is  to  D  i  thenihaB'ABbeto  Aaas  CD  istoC »  For  alternate^ 

ABis 


FoIa p$. 


AB  is  to  C  D»d&B  is  tbb.  Wh«fcforfe(bythcij.'dfrfiis  bdoke)  A  E  is  to  G£»>  A  . .  . 
as  Ais  t©  O'.  Wherefore  alternately  A  B  is  to  A>*sC-©  is  to  4£  i  vsfhiefet^wis.  G  .  ,.E>vx. 
requireclto  fee  proued. 


•jf  A  pTofJortibh  here  added  by  'tanifanb. 


-  .  -  .  .  .  .  .  .  *T 

the firft  Mid  the  fifth  taken  together, fha/l  be  to  the fecond, us  the  proportion  of  the  third  and  tkeftdt 
taken  together  to  the finrth . 

As  if  A  be  vnto  B,  as  G  is  to  D  :  and  if  alfo  E  be  to  B,as  F  is  to  D  .Then  {hall  A  &  E  taken  together, 
be  vnto  B,as  C  and  F  taken  together, are  vnto  D .  For  by  conuerfe  proportionality,  B  is  to  E,  as  D  is  to 
E  ,  Wherefore  by  proportion  of  equalitie, as 

A  is  to  E,fb  is  C  to  F.  Wherefore  (  by  com-  A  ....... .E ....  C  . , ...  .F  . .  .B  . . .  .D ... . . 

pofition)  as  A  and  E  are  to  E,  fo  are  0  and  F 

to  F .  But  (by  fuppolition)  as  E  is  to  B,fo  is  F  to  D .  Wherefore  againe  by  proportion  of  equalitie,  as  A 
and  E  are  to  B,  fo  are  G  and  F  to  D  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

And  after  the  fame  maner  may  you  proue  the  conuerfe  of  this  Proportion. If  B  be  to  A, as  D  is  to  G  *■ 
and  if  alfo  B  be  vnto  E,as  D  is  to  F  :  Then  (hall  B  be  to  A  E,as  D  is  to  G  F.  for  by  conuerfe  proportio¬ 
nality,  Ais  t©  B,  as  C  is  to  E>  .  Wherefore  of  equalitie  jAiS  to  E,asC  is  to  F.  Wherefore  by  compofi- 
tion  A  and  E  are  to  E,  as  G  and  F  are  to  F.  Wherefore  conuerfedly,  E  is  to  A  and  E,  as  F  is  to  G  and  F. 
But  by  fuppofi'tibn,  B  is  to  E,  as  D  is  to  f .  Wherefore  agayne  by  Proportion  ofequalitie,  B  is  to  A  and 
E,  as  D  is  to  C  and  F  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

A  Corollary. 

By  this  aLfoit  is  manifeft  that  if  the  proportion  of  numbers  how  many  {beucrvnto 
the  firft, be  as  the  proportion  of  as  many  other  numbers  vnto  the  fecond, then  (hall  the 
proportion  of  the  numbers  compofed  ofall  the  numbers  that  Were  antcccdentes  to  the 
firft, be  to  the  firft, as  the  number  compofed  of  all  the  numbers  that  were  antecedcntes 
to  the  fecond  is  to  the  fecond.  And  alfo  conuerfedly  if  theproportion  of  the  firft  to  Hu¬ 
bers  how  many  foeuer,b£  as  the  proportion  of  the  fecond  to  as  many  other  numbers: 
then  (liall  the  proportion  of  the  firft  ro  the  number  compofed  of  all  the  numbers  that 
were  coftfequerites  to  it  felfe,bc  as  thy  proportion  of  the  fecond  to  the  number  tompo* 
fed  of  all  the  numbers  that  were  confequentes  to  it  felfe. 


f  The  if.  Theoreme. 


The  is.  Troptijition. 


Ifonitie  meafure  any  number ,and an  other numhet  do' fo  many  tirtiesmea* 
Jure  an  other  number :  Vnitie  alfo  fl?all  alternately  fo  many  times  meafure 
the  third  number 3  as  the  Jecond  doth  the  fourth . 

Wfrfi  that  vnitie  A  do  meafure  the  number  B  C :  and  let  an  other  nuber  D  fo 
many  times  meafure  fome  other  nuber, namely, E  F.  T hen  I  fay ,  that  alternate¬ 
ly  /unitie  A  Jhdll  fo  many  times  meafure  the  number  D,as  the  number  B  C  doth 
_ meafure  the  number  E  F .  For forafmuch  as  vnitie  A  doth  fo  many  times  mea¬ 
fure  B  C,  as  D  doth  E  F :  therefore  how  many  unities  there  are  in  B  C, 
fo  many  numbers  are  there  in  E  F  equall  vnto  i>.  Veuide  (/  fay)  B  C  in¬ 
to  the  'unities  which  are  in  it, that  is, into  B  G,  GB,and  B  C.Anddeuide 
■  likewife  E  F  into  the  numbers  e quail  vnto  D, that  is,  into  E  K,  K  L,and 
L  F .  Now  then  the  multitude  of  thefe  B  G,GB,  dndB  C,  is  equallvnto 
the  mukkudewfi thefe  E  K,K  L,L  F .  And forafmuch  as  thefe  vnities 
B  G,  G  B,and B  C,are  equall  the  one  to  the  other ,dnd  thefe  numbers  E  K,K  L,  dr  L  F,  an 
alfo  equall  the  one  to  the  other, and  the  multitude  of  the  vnities  B  G,G  B^andH  C, are  equal 
vnto  the  multitude  of  the  numbers  E  K,KL,&  L  F:  therefore  as  vnitie  B  G  is  to  the  mm 
ber  EK,fo  is  vnitie  GBUthe number K  L,and  alfovniikB  Gtet'he  numberX  F.Wher 


A. 

B.G.B.C 

Z>.. 

E..P..L..P 


Jbispropoft 
tion  in  difcrtt 
quantity  an - 
Jircretb  to  the 
Hyropofitio 
of  the  fifth 
hope  in  conti¬ 
nual  quantity* 
Theconuetjt 
of the fame 
pn  pofition. 
Demon ftra- 
tion a 

*€  Corollary 
following 
thofe  propoft - 
tiont  adaedby 
CampauSo 


CotiflrulUetta 


Demonstra¬ 

tion. 


m 


ifS,  ' 
■£  ‘  ;> 


fa?fiy'tfa.Wflh$M^plS ow^fam&fdentefclstemoftk  ./,1D«?.i  ?  * 
ionjequmtei) fo are atlihe antctedentes  kallthocOnfequejriiiWhekfoPe  B  .G  .P  .C" 
as  vnitie  BG  is  to  the  number  E  K,fo  is  the  number  B  C  to  the  number  Pi. 

E  F.  Butvnitie  BG  is  equally pto  vnitie  A,and  the  number  E  K  to  the  E..K  ..L  F 
number  D .  VVhmfort^^e^jemmmfmfdniifds  vnitie  Mis  to  the 


requited  to  be  froued. 


ms 


>>  n  • 


WV.iV. 


fcV, 


,IN  , 


i\  ,,U 


AvT 


ai.U; 
3  03 


rr  The  14.  Theorems.  .  The  ib.Tropofjtion. 

ti  ..  1  Jt .  -V  -  '  ;■  OT  25 *  •  *  bl  '  •  Ir.i  :  Q  3*  .  07 


' 

&  fcfc.fi  05  r  vf  rl 


,  .  ,  :oW,  .A 

%  ‘  •  ’• 
fc 

-V  i'Vl  V?  K  •  . 

Pmwftra- 

mu. 


Pemuflnt- 

$ion» 


If  two  numbers  multiplying  them felues the  one  into  the  other  produce  any 
•  • members :  the  numbers  produced Jhixll  be  equall  the  one  into  the  other. 


>«c-3<i  xa  3? 


1  u 


i"! 


>-H  Vt!;  liiZ 


]Vppofe  that  there  be  Wo  numbers  A  and  B :  and  let  A  multiplying  B  produce  Ct 
; and  let  B  multiplying  A  produce  P  .Then  I  fay  , that  the  number  C  is  equall  vn- 
io  the  number  P.  T ake  any  vnitk ynamely,  E.  Andforafmuch  as  A  multiplying 
\-B  produced  C,  therefore  B  meafireth  C  by  the  vnitks  which  are  in  A.  Andvni- 
ifeElheafmvthiheniiikbe'r  A by  thofevniiies  which  are  in  the  number  7 

■A .  wherefore  vmtie  E  fo  many  times  meafuretb  A^as  B  meafireth  C.  E . 

Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  ij.  ofthefeuenth)  vnitie  E  meafireth  A., 
the  mm  her  Bfo  many  times  as  A  meafuretb  C .  Againefor  that  B  mul-  B .... 

tiplying  A  produced  D  ^therefore  A  meafuretb  D  by  the  vnities  which  C .... .. . . 

are  in  B  .  And  vnitk  E  meafireth  B  by  the  Amities  which  are  in  B.  P .... .... 

Whereforevnitk  E  fomany  times  meafuretb  the  number  B,  as  A  mea- 
fureth  P  .But  vnitieE  fo  many  times  meafuretb  the  number  B,as  A  meafuretb  C.  Wher el- 
fore  A  meafuretb  either  of  thefe  numbers  C  and  D  a  like .  Wherefore  (  by  the  3 . common 
fentenceofihis  booke )  C  is  equall  vnto  D :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. . 

’The  1  f.  T beoreme.  The  17.  Skopofition. 

.  If  one  number  multiply  two  numbers, and produce  other  numbers, the  num» 
hers  produced  of  them, Jh  all  be  in  the felfefame  proportion ,  that  the  num* 
hers  multiplied  are. 

Tff  of  that- the  number  A  multiplieng  two  numbers  B  and  C,  do  produce  the 
numbers  P  and  ET  hen  I fay  that  as  B  is  to  C,fo  is  P  to  E.T ake  vnitie  ,name‘ 
ly?  F.  And  forafmuch  as  A  multiplieng  B  produced D ,  therfore  B  meafuretb  D 

_  by  thofe  unities  that  are  in  A.  And  vnitie  F  meafuretb  A  by  theft  vnities 

which  are  inA.Wherfore  vnitie  F fomany  times  meafuretb  the 
number  A> as  B  meafuretb  D .  Wherfore  as  vnitie  F  is  to  the  F. 
number,  A>  fo  is  the  number  B  to  the  number  P  (by  then,  de-  A  ... 
fniiion  of  this  booke )  And  by  the fame  reafon ,  as  vnitie  F  is  to  B  .... 

the  number  A,f>  is  the  number  C  to  the  number  E  :  wherefore  C  ..... 

a!fd(bythe7.commonfentenceofthisbooke)asBistoD,fois  P  ............ 

C  to  E.VVherf ore  alternately  (by  the  15 .  ofthefeuenth)  as  Bis  E  .... .. . ..... .. . 

to  Cfo  is  D  to  E. If  therfore  one  number  multiply  two  numbers , 

andproducc  other  numbers:  the  numbers  produced  of  them, (hall  be  in  the felfe fame  proper* 
timghat  the  numbers  multiplied  are :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Her® 


x  Ai : 


ofSuclides  Elmentes . 

•  ■  *  •  -  ^  *  -t  v 

Here  Fixates  addeth  this  Corollary, 


Fol.194.. 


si  Corollary 
added  by 

Flufauu 


H . . 

A .  C .  F 

B  .  .  D  ...  £ 

G . . 


If S^o  numbers  hauing  one  and  the  fame  proportion  'frith  tWo  other  numbers  do  multiply  the  one 
the  other  alternately  ,and  produce  any  numbers }the  numbers  produced  cf  them  foall.be  squall  the  one 
to  the  other* 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  numbers  A  and  £  ,and  alfo  two  other  numbers  C  and  D ,  hauing  the  fame 
proportion  that  the  numbers  A  and  B  hauc  :  and  let  the  numbers-*  and  B  multiply  the  numbers  C  8c 
i?alternate!y,thatisjlet^multip!ieng  ' 

D  produce  F,  and  let  B  multiplieng  C 
produce  £.Then  I  fay  that  the  numbers 
produced  namely,£  &£are  equallJLec 
a  and  B  multiply  the  one  the  other  in 
fuch  fort, that  let  W -multiplieng  £  pro¬ 
duce  G,and  let  B  multiplieng  A  produce  ft.  Now  then  the  numbers  <7  and  ft  are  equal  by  the  nf.ofthis 
booke  And  forafmuch  as  A  multiplieng  the  two  numbers  B  and  D,  produced  the  numbers  Gand  F, 
iherfore  G  is  to  £,as  B  is  to  D  by  this  proportion. So  likewife  B  multiplieng  the  two  numbers  Wand  C 
produced  the  two  numbers  £fand£.  Wherfore  by  the  fame  H  is  to  £  as  Wis  to  C.  £ut  alternately  (by 
the  13 .  of  this  booke )  A  is  to  C  as  B  is  to  £>,butas  A  is  to  C  fo  is  Wto  £,  and  as  B  is  to  D,  fo  is  G  to  F. 

Wherfore  by  the  feuenth  common  fentence,as  ft  is  to  £,fo  is  G  to  F.  Wherfore  a'ternatelyfbythe  13  , 
of  this  booke  J  ft  is  to  Gas  £  is  to  F.  But  it  is  proued  that  G  &  Ware  equall :  wherfore  E  and£f which 
haue  the  fame  proportion  that  a  and  B  haue )  are  equall.  If  therefore  there  be  two  numbers,  &c. 

Which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

ffThe  16.  Theoreme.  The  i2.  Tropofition. 

If  two  numbers  multiply  any  number  produce  other  numbers:  the  num* 
bers  of them  produced Jh  all  be  in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  number r 
multiplying  are. 

Fppofe  that  two  numbers  A  and  B  multiplieng  the  number  C,  doo  produce  the 
numbers  D  and  E.  T  hen  I fay  that  as  A  is  to  BfoisDtoE.  For  forafmuch  as 
A  multiplieng  C  produced  Djherforc  C  multipli - 
eng  A  produceth  alfo  D  (by  the  1 6.  of  this  booke.)  A  .... 

And  by  the  fame  reafon  C  multiplieng  B produceth  E.  Tfow  B  ..... 
then  one  number  C  multiplieng  two  numbers  A  and  2?,  pro-  C  ... 

duceth  the  numbers  D  and  E.  Wherfore  by  the  1 7.  of  the fe-  D . . 

uenthys  A  is  to  Bfo  is  D  to  E :  which  was  required  to  be  de-  E . . . . 

monltrated.  j*-r  , 

Thi  s.Propofi.tion,and  the  former  touching  two  numbers,  may  be  extended  to  nu m-  This propofi - 
bers  how  many  focuer.So  that  if  one  number  multiply  numbers  how  many  focuer,and  tion  at.dtbe 
produce  any  numbers,the  proportion  of  the  numbers  produced,  and  ofthe  numbers  fotmer  may  be 
multiplied,  (hall  be  one  and  the  felfe  fame,  Likewife  if  numbers  how  many  foeuer  mul-  extended  to 
tiply  one  number,and  produce  any  numbers,  the  proportion  ofthe  numbers  produ-  numbers  hour 
ced,and  ofthe  numbers  multiplieng  lhall  be  one  and  the  felfe  fame.'  which  thing  by  manyjoeuero 
this  and  the  fcH'iner  propofition  repeted  as  often  as  is  needefull, is  not  hard  to  prpUe, 


Demonjlror 

tion. 


f  The  17.  Theoreme. 


19.  Tropo in  on. 


Iftherebefoure  numbers  in  proportion :  the  number  produced  of  the  fir fl 
arid  the  fourth,  is  equall  to  that  number  "Which  is  produced  of  the  fecond 
and  the  third  .  find  tf the  number  lohich  is  produced  of  the  firfi  and  the 
fourth  be  equall  to  that  Svhicb  is  produced  of the  fecond  iythe  third:  thofe 
-  pure  numbers  Ihall  be  in  proportion. 

Suppofe 


7 he feuenth  Boo%e 


7  hit  p?Gpifi- 
tiininnum- 
b&s  demon  - 
jlratethtbat 
which  the  16, 
ofthe  fixth 
booke  dmon- 
fratstb 
in  lines ♦ 
CmflruHion. 
Demonflra- 
tists. 


A  . 
B  . 
C  . 
D 

E  . 
F  . 

G  . 


The  feeond 
part  of  this 
proportion 
'Which  is  the 
cornier fe  of 
ehefirfl. 
Demonftra- 
tiers. 

An  afiampt 
added  by 
Campatie, 


This  propcfi- 
thn  m  num- 
bees  demon- 
Jhateth  that 
which  the  ly. 
eftkefixtb 
demon ft  rautb 
in  lines. 
DemonUra- 


wje  that  there  befoure  numbers  in  proportion  A,  B,  C,  T>,as  A  is  to  Bfo  let 
C  he  to  D.  And  let  A  multiplieng  D  produce  E :  and  let  B  multiplieng  C  pro¬ 
duce  Eft , hen  I fay  that  the  number  E  is  e  quail  vnto  the  number  F.  Let  A  mid- 

T _ _ tiplieng  C produce  G.Now forafmuch  as  A  multiplieng  C, produceth  G,&  muh 

tiplieng  D  it produceth  E :  it  follow  eth  that  the  number  A 
multiplieng  two  numbers  C  and  D,  produceth  G  and  E. 

VVherfore  by  the  17  of  the feuenth ,  as  C  is  to  D,  fo  is  G  to 
E.  But  as  C  is  to  D,fo  is  A  to  B,  wherfore  as  A  is  to  B,  fo  is 
G  to  E.  Againe , forafmuch  as  A' multiplieng  C produced  G, 
and  B  multiplieng  C produced  F :  therfore two  numbers  A 
and  B , multiplieng  one  nuber  C, do  produce  G  &F.  VVher¬ 
fore  by  the  1 8 .  of  the  feuenth,  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  G  to  F.  But 
as  A  is  to  B,  fo  is  G  to  E  :  wherfore  as  G  is  to  E,fois  G  to  F. 

Wherfore  G  hath  to  either  ofthefe  E  and  F  one  &  the  fame 

proportion  (But  if  one  number  haue  to  two  numbers  one  and  the  fame  proportion,  the  faide 
two  numbers  flail  be  equall ) .  Wherfore  E  is  equall  vnto  F. 

But.  nowagainefuppofe  that  E  be  equall  vnto  F.  T  hen  I  fay  that  as  A  is  to  B,fois  C  to 
D .  For  the fame  order  of  construction  remay  ning  Jlillforafmuch  as  A  multiplieng  C&  D 
produced  G  and  E, therfore  by  the  17,0/ the  feuenth,  as  C  is  to  D  fois  G  to  E,  but  E  is  equall 
vnto  F  (But  if  two  numbers  be  equall, one  number  fhallhaue  vnto  them  one  and  the  fame 
proportion )  wherfore  as  G  is  to  Efo  is  G  to  F.But  as  G  is  to  E,fo  isC  to  D.  Wherefore  as  C 
is  to  jyfo  is  G  to  F,but  as  G  is  to  Ffo  is  A  to  B  by  the  18 .  of  'the  feuenth,  wherfore  as  A  is  to 
Bfo  is  C  to  D  :  which  was  required  to  be proued. 

Here  C4»/w;/(?addeth,thatitis  ncedeles  to  demonftrate,that  if  one  number  haue  to 
two  numbers  one  and  the  fame  proportion,  the  faid  two  numbers  (hall  be  equall:  pr 
that  if  they  be  equalone  number  hath  to  them  one  and  the  fame  proportion,For(£aith 
he)  if  G  haue  vnto  E  and  F  one  and  the  fame  proportion,the  either,what  part  or  partes 
G  isof  E,the  fame  part  or  parts  is  G  alfo  of  F.-or  how  multiplex  G  is  to  E,  fo  multiplex 
is  G  to  F  (by  the  21. definition) And  therfore  by  the  2  and  3  common  fcntence,the  faid 
numbers  fhall  be.equall.And  fo  conuerfcdly,if  the  two  numbers  E  and  F  be  equal. then 
(hall  the  numbers  EandF  be.either  the  felfe  fame  parte  or  partes  ofthe  number  G,  or 
they  (hall  be  equemultiplices  vntoit,  And  therfore  by  the  fame  definition  the  number 
G  (hall  haue  to  the  numbers  E  and  F  one  and  the  fame  proportion. 

fThe  1 8.  Theorems.  The  zo.^ropoftion. 

If  there  be  three  numbers  in  proportion,  the  number  produced  ofthe  tx* 
tr  ernes, is  equall  to  the fquare  made  of  the  middle  number.  And  if  that 
her  Tohich  is  produced  of  the  extremes, be  equall  to  the  fquare  made  of  the 
middle  number, thofe  three  numbers fhall  be  in  proportion, 

Vppofe  there  be  three  numbers  in  proportion,  A,B,C,  as  A  is  to  Bfo  let  B  be  to 
C.  T hen  l fay  that  the  number  produced  of  A  and  C  is  equall  to  the Jqttare  num 
her  which  is  made  of  B.  Put  vnto  B  an  equall  number  D . 

Wherfore  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  D  to  C.  Wherfore  that  which  is 
produced  of  A  into  C,is  equalvnto  that  which  is  produced  of B  into  D. 

'  But  that  which  is  produced  ofB  into  D  is  equal  to  that  which  is  made 
of  B  (for  B  is  equalvnto  D)  wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of A  into 
£  is  equal  to  that  which  is  made  ofB. 
c  But  now fappofe  that  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  C3  be  equall 


A  _ _ 

B  ...... 

C  .  ... 

D  ...... 


of Suclides  Elemerites . 


F0L195. 


to  that  which  is  made-  ofB.T hen  I  fay  that  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  B  to  C.  For  ( the fame  order  of 
construction  remayni-ng)  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  C,is  equal l  to  that 
winch  is  made  of B,  hut  that  which  is  made  ofB ,  is  equal  to  that  which  is  produced  ofB  in - 
to  D.  (For  B  and  D  are  by  juppoftion  equal!,):  therfore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  C 
is  equal!  to  that  which -is  produced  ofB  into  D  :  wherfore  (by  the  fecond part  of  the  former 
propoftion)  as  A-is  to  -B,fo  is  D  to  C:but  D  is  equal  to  B.  Wherefore  as  Ca is  to  B,  fo  is  the 
fame  B  to  C which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

I-'  -  •  >  ;  '•  ..  ' 

j/The  ip.  Theorem.  1  he  21.  ^Propoflion. 

T  he  left  number sL  in  any  proportion  yneafure  any  other  nubers  hailing  the 
Janie  proportion  equally fibe greater  the  greater the  lejfe  the  leffe. 

Vppofe  that  C  D  (f  E  F  be  the  leaf  numbers  that  haue  One  &  the fame  propor¬ 
tion  with  the  numbers  4 and  B.T hen  I  fay, that  the  number  CDfo  many  times 
meafureth  the  number  A, as  the  number  E  F  meafureth  the  number  B.  For  for - 
fmuch  as  by  fuppofition  CD  istoE  F,as  A  is  to  B,and C D  and  E F  are  alfo 


The fecond 
part  which  it 
the  Conner] e  of 
the  firfi. 
Demonstra¬ 
tion, 


Demrf  ra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  mpofibi- 
lity. 


fuppofed  to  be  lefe  then  A  and  3  :  therefore  C  D  andE  F  are  either  part  or  partes  of A  and 
B  (by  the  4.  of  this  booke,  and  by  the  21. definition  ofi the fame)  .  But  they  are  not  partes.  For 
if  it  be  pofiibk,  let  C  D  be  partes  of  A  .VFherfore  E  F  is  the felfe fame  partes  of B, that  C  D 
ts  of  A .  Wherefore  how  many  partes  of  A  there  are  in  CD,fo  many  partes  are  there  ofBin 
E  F  .  Deuide  C  D  into  the  partes  of  A, that  is,  into  C  G  and  GD.  And  likewife  deuide  E  F 
into  the  partes  ofB, that  is,  into  E  H  and  H  F.  Flow  then  the  multitude 
efthefe  C  G  and  G  D,is  equall  <vnto  the  multitude  of thefe  EH  &  FI  F.  C  ,.G,.D 
And forafmuch  as  CG  and  GD  are  numbers  equal l  the  one  to  the  other,  E  ..II.  F 

a  nd  thefe  numb  as  E  H  and  H  F  are  alfo  equall  the  one  to  the  other, and  A ....... . 

the  multitude  ofthefe'C  G  and  G  D,  is  equall  to  them  altitude  of  thefe  B  ...... 

E II  and  H  F therefore  as  C  G  is  to  E  H,fo  is  G  D  to  H  F.  Wherefore 
(by  the  1 2  .of  ihe  fluent  h)  as  one  of  the  antecedentes  is  to  one  of  the  confequentes,fo  are  all 
iheantecedentesto  aUthe  cenfequentes.  Wherefore  as  CG  istoE  H,fo  is  CDtoE  F  Wher¬ 
fore  C  G  and  EH  are  in  the  felfe  fame  proportion  that  CD  and  E  F  are, being  alfo  lefe  then 
C  D  and  E  E  :  which  is  impofible  .  For  C  D  and  E  F  are  fuppofed  to  be  the  leafl  that  haue 
one  and  the fmepropbrtion  with  them .  Wherefore  C  D  is  not  partes  of A :  wherefore  it  is 
apdrt  .Wherefore  EF  is  ofB  the  felfe fame  part,  that  CD  is  of  A.  Wherefore  CDfo  many 
time's  meafureth  A,, as  E  F  doth  B  >  which  was  required  to  be  demonfi rated. 

ffTbe  20.  Theorems,  The  22.  Propojition. 

If  there  be  three  numbers  yand  other  numbers  equall  1m  to  the  in  multitude > 
yohich  being  compared  two  and  two  are  in  the  felfe  fame proportion  ?  and  if 
alfo  the  proportion  of them  he  perturb  ate fihen  of equalitie  they flail  he  in 
one  and  the fame  proportion. 


Fppofi  that  there  be  three  numbers  A,B,  and  C :  and 
let  the  other  numbers  equall  unto  them  in  multitude 


A 

B 

C 


_ KibeD,E-,and  F.  ^And  let  trvo  and  two  compared  toge¬ 
ther  be  in  oneandthe fame  proportion :  and  let  the  proportion 

of them  be perturbate  ,fo  that  as  A  is  to  B,fo  let  E  be  to  F,and  D . 

as  B  is  to  C,fo  let  D  be  to  E  .  Then  I  fay,  that  of  equalitie  as  A  E . 

ti  top , fo  is  D  to  F . -Mor, for  that  ai  A  is  to  B,fois  E  to  F:  F  ...... 

Vv.i,  therefore 


This  propoft- 
tion  in  difertt 
quatitie  anf- 
wereth  to  the 
z$.  props ft- 
tio  of  the  fifth 
hope  in  conti¬ 
nual  quatitie. 


therefore  that  which  is  produced  of into  F ,  is  (by  the  ip. of  A  ...... 

the feueth)eqmll  to  that  which  is  produced  of B  into  E.Againe  B  . . , . 
for  that  as  B  is  to  Cfo  is  D  to  E ^therefore  that  which  is  produ-  C  ... 
ced  of  D  into  C,is  equalt  to  that  which  is  produced  of  B  into  E. 

And  it  is proued,  that  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  F,is  e~  D . 

qual  to  that  which  is  produced  ofB  into  E.Wherfore  that  which  E . 

is  produced  of A  into  F,is  equal  to  that  which  is  produced  ofD  F . 

into  C.  Wherefore(  by  the fecond part  of  the  i  p .  of  the feuenth ) 
as  A  is  to  C,fo  is  D  to  F :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  fame  may  alfo  be  proued.  if  in  either  order  be  more  then  three  numbers :  as  if 
was  proued  in  the  2  3  .of  the  fift  touching  more  magnitudes  then  three. 


Jhs  and  the 
tleuen  propo¬ 
rtions  follow¬ 
ing,  declare  the 
pdjfmis  and 
properties  of. 
prime  nubers * 


Demon  ft  ra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  impoftibi- 
iitjt 


f  The  2 1.  T heoreme.  T he  23 .  Vropofition. 

Numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other:  are y  leaf  of  my  numbers  ,  that  haue 
one  and  the  fame  proportion  loith  them. 

Vppofe  that  A  and  B  be  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other. T hen  I fay  that  A  and 
B  are  the  leaf  of  any  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the  fame  proportion  with  them. 
_ For  if  A  and  B  be  not  the  leaf  of  any  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the fame  propor¬ 
tion  with  them ,  then  are  there  feme  numbers  lefe  then  A  and 
B, being  in  the fe/fe  fame  proportion  that  A  and  B  are.  Let  the  ....... 

fame  be  C  and  Z> .  2Si [0  w  forafmuch  as  the  leaft  numbers  in  any  B .... 

proportion  meafure  any  other  numbers  hauingthe  fame  pro-  £ . . 

portion  equally ,  the  greater  the  greater ,  and  the  lejfe  the  lejfe  C .... 

(by  the  21.  of  the  feuenth  )  that  is  ,the  antecedent  the  antece-  D  . . . 
dent, and  the  confequent  the  confequent :  therefore  Cfo  many 

times  meafureth  A, as  D  meafureth  B  .  How  many  times  C  meafureth  A, fo  many  unities 
let  there  be  in  B.Wberefore  D  meafureth  B  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  B.  And  forafmuch 
as  C  meafureth  A  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  E ,  therefore  E  alfo  meafureth  A  by  thofe 
unities  which  are  in  C .  <^And  by  the  fame  reafon  E  meafureth  B ,  by  thofe  unities  which 
are  in  D  Wherefore  E  meafureth  A  and  B  being  prime  numbers  the  one  to  the  other:  which 
(  by  the  13 .  definition  of  the  feuenth  )  is  impofftble .  Wherefore  there  are  no  other  numbers 
lejfe  then  A  and  B,  which  are  in  the felfe fame  proportion  that  A  and  B  are .  Wherefore  A 
and  B  are  the  leaft  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the  fame  proportion  with  them :  which  was 
required  to  be  demvnftrated. 


If  T be  22.  T heoreme.  T he  24.  Tropojition . 

T  he  leaft  numbers  that  Imie  one  and  the  fame  proportion  ‘tyith  them:are 
prime  the  one  to  the  other. 


This  is  the  co¬ 
tter  fe  of  the 
former  propo¬ 
rtion. 


SFppofe  that  A  and  B  be  the  leaf  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the fame  proportion 
wjth  them .  T  hen  I fay  that  A  and  B  be  prime  the  one 

j to  the  other.  For  if  A &B  be  not  prime  the  one  to  the  A . . 

other,  then  (hall  fome  one  nuber  meafure  A  <jrB.  Let  the  fame  B . . 

be  C.And  how  oftentimes  C  meafureth  A  ,fo  many  unities  let  C .... 

there  be  in  D:and  how  oftetimes  C  meafureth  B,fo  many  uni -  D ... 

ties  let  there  beinE .  And  forafmuch  as  C  meafureth  A  by  E .. 

thofe 


thcfe  'unities  that  are  in  D ,  therefore  C  multiplying  D  produceth  A. Wind  by  the  fame  rea- 
fon  C  multiplying  E  produceth  B  wherefore  the  number  C  multiplying  two 'numbers  D  and 
E .producer h  A  (f  B.  Wherefore{by  the  ij.cf the  feuenth)  as  D  is  to  E,fo  is  A  to  B.But  the 
numbers  E>  and  E  are  lejfe  then  A  and  B ,  and  are  alfo  in  the  felfe  fame  proportion  with  the, 
which  is  imPojfble Wherefore  no  number  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A  andB .  Wherefore  A 
and  B  are  prime  the  on  to  the  other:  which  was  required  to  be  dernonf rated* 

f  The  23.  T heorem e.  T he  2 s.  Tropoftion. 


If  two  numbers  he  prime  the  onto  the  other:  any  number  measuring  one  of 
them '.jhalbe prime  to  the  other  number. 

Vppofe  that  A  and  B  be  two  prime  numbers  the  on  to  the  other.  And  let fome  num¬ 
ber, namely, C,meafireA.T  hen  I  fay  that  C  and  B  are prime  numbers  the  on  to  the 
_  other. For  ifC  and<B  be  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other, let  fome  number  meafure  C 

and  B,and  let  the  fame  be  D .  And  forafnuch  as  D  meafureth 
C ,  and  C  meafureth  A,therfore  T>  alfo  meafureth  A  ( by  the fft  tW. ...... 

common f entente  )  and  D  meafureth  B .  Wherefore  D  meafu-  B . . 

reth  A  and  B  being  numbers  prime  the  on  to  the  other ,  which  C . . . 

is  impo(fble{by  the  13  .definition  ofithe feuenth )  .* wherefore  no  D  .... 

number  meafureth  thefe  numbers  B  andC .  Wherefore  B  and 
C  are  numbers  prime  the  on  to  the  other  Which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


f  T he  24.  T heoreme.  T he  26.  Tropojttion. 

If  two  numbers  he  prime  to  any  one  number }  the  number  alfo  produced  of 
themjhall  be  prime  to  the felfe  fame. 

Fppofe  that  the  two  numbers  A  and  B  be  prime  to  any  one  number,  namely,  to 
C,and  let  AmultipliengBproduceD.  Then  I  fay  that  C  and  D  are  prime 
numbers  the  one  to  the  other.  For  if  C  anclYd  be  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other 
then  fome  number fhall  meafure  them.  Let  there  be.  a  number  that  meafureth 
them, and  let  the  fame  be  E.  fAnd  forafnuch  as  AandQ.  are  prime 
numbers  the  one  to  the  other, and  the  number  E  meafureth  C  .T  her  fore  A  B  ... 

E  and  A  are  ( by  the  25.  of  the feuenth )  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  And  C _ 

forafnuch  as  E  meafureth  D .  How  many  times  E  meafureth  D  ,fo  ma-  D  ... ... 

ny  unities  let  there  be  in  F.  Wh  erf  ore  F  alfo  meafureth  D  by  thefe  uni-  E  . , . 
ties  which  are  in  E.  Wherfore  E  multiplieng  F  produceth  IT. But  A  alfo  E  . . 
multiplieng  B  pr  educed  D .  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  E  into 
F  is  e  quail  to  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  B.  But  if  that  which  is  produced  of  the  ex * 
tr ernes  be  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  the  meanes,  then  are  thofe  four e  numbers  in 
proportion  (by  the  19  .of the feuenth)  wherefore  ashdis  to  A, foisBtoB.  But  A  and  Bare 
prime  the  one  to  the  other.  Tea  they  are  prime  andthe  leattin  the fame  proportion  {by  the  23 
of  the feuenth.)  But  the  lead  numbers  in  any  proportion  meafure  any  other  numbers  hatting 
the  fame  proportion  equally , the  greater  the  greater, and  the  lejfe  the  lejfe,  that  is,  the  antece¬ 
dent  the  antecedent, and  the  confequent  the  confequent  by  the  21. of  the  feuenth:  wherfore  E 
meafureth  B,  and  it  alfo  meafureth  C  .*  wherfore  E  meafureth  C  and  B,  which  are  by  fup- 
po fit  ion  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other, which  is  impoffble  by  the  13 .  definition  of  the 


Demnffra*- 
tioti  leading  tQ 
an  ab [urd.uk. 


DmonClu - 
tion  leading  w 
an  ab/urditko 


Demonffra- 
tion  leading  t® 
m  abfurdmce, 


Dewitt  ra¬ 
tion. 


Demon/!  ra¬ 
tion. 


feuenth.  Wherfore  no  number  meafureth  thofe  numbers  C  and  D j  Wherfore  G  and  D  are 
prime  the  one  to  the  other :  which  ms  required  to  beproued. 

f  The  2f.  Theorems .  The  27 .  TrOpofitioji. 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other JthaVtyhkh  is  produced  of  the 
one  into  him  felfejs prime  to  the  other. 

Vppofe  that  then  be  two  numbers prime  the  me  to  the  other,  A  ...  B ... , 

!  A  and  B,  and  let  A  multiplieng  himfelfe  produce  C.  T hen  1  (7  .......... . 

fay  that  B  and  C  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  For  put  vn-  D ... 

_ _ _  to  A  an  e quail  number | namely ,  D .  Andforafmuch  as  A  dr 

B  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other, and:A  is  equall  vnto  D :  therefore  D  andBalfo  are  prime 
the  one  to  the  other.  Wherfore  either  ofthefe  numbers  D  and  A  is  prime  to  B.  Wherfore  that 
■which  is  produced  ofD  into  A  is  prime  vnto  B  by  the  former  propofition.  But  that  number 
which  is  produced  ofD  into  A  is  the  number  C.  Wherefore  C  and  B  are  prime  numbers  the 
one  to  the  other :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

ff  T he  26.  T heoreme,  T he  28.  Tropofition. 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  to  two  numbers /che  to  either  ofbothithe  numbers 
produced  of them  Jhall  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other. 

H  Vppofe  that  there  be  two  numbers  A  and  B  prime  to  two  numbers  C  and  D,  either 
of  both, to  either  of both :  namely  ,let  either  ofthefe  A  and  B  be prime  to  C?  and  alfi 

_ _ to  D.  And  let  A  multiplieng  B  produce  E,  and  let  C 

■  multiplseng  JD produce  F .  Then  I  fay  that  E  and  F  are  prime  A  ... 
numbers  the  one  to  the  other.Forforafmuch  as  either  ofthefe  A  B  ..... 

dr  B  are  prime  vnto  C,therfore  that  which  is  produced  of A  into 
B  is  prime  vnto  C  by  the  2  6.  of the  feuenth.  But  that  which  is  E  ........... ...I 

produced  of  A  into  B  is  the  number  E,  therefore  E  and  C  are 
prime  the  one  to  the  other.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  E  and  C  . . 

D  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherfore  either  ofthefe  num -  D .... 

bers  C  and  D  are  prime  vnto  E :  wherefore  that  alfo  which  is 

produced  ofC  into  D  is  prime  vnto  E  by  the  fame.  But  that  F  ........ 

which  is  produced  of Cinto  l),is  the  number  F Wherfore  E  and 
F  are  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other :  which  was  required  to  be  demonflrated. 

f  The  27.  T heoreme.  The  29.  Propofition. 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other ^and  ecb  multiplying  him felfi 
bring  forth  certaine  numbersithe  numbers  of them produced Jhall  be  prime 
the  one  to  the  other .  And  if  thofe  numbers geuen  at  the  beginning  multi* 

.  plying  the  fayd  numbers produced^produce  any  numbers :  they  alfo pall  be 
prime  the  one  to  the  other :  and  fo pall  it  be  continuing  infinitely. 

'  ’  \ -V-.  ..  _  •  .  -  v. v  -  ■  •  "•  a*  •  ' ' ,r  ■  '  -  * '  v:"-f  .  ,  •  - 

Suppofi 


/ 


cfEudules  Elementes. 


Fol.\9J. 


Vppofe  that  there  be  two  numbers  A  and  B  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  And  let  A 
multiplying  him felfe  produce  C :  and  multiplying  C  let  it  produce  E.  Likemfe 
let  B  multiplying  him felfe  produce  D,  and  multiplying  D  let  it  produce  FT he 
1 1  fay, that  C  and,  D  are  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other .  And  likewife  that  E 
And E  are  numbers prime  the  one  to  the  other .  For  forafmuch  as  A  and  B,  are  prime  the 
one  to  the  other,  and  A  multiplying  him  felfe  produced  G,  therefore  C  and  B  are  prime  the 
fine  to  the  other  ( by  the  27. of  the feuenth )  .  And  by  the fame  reafon  forafmuch  as  C  and  B 
A  •  .  e  .  .  v  A 


c .... 

E.... 
B  . . . 
D . . . 


■  M  • 


are  prime  the  one  to  the  other,  and  B  multiplying  him  felfe  produced  D,  therefore  C  and  D 
are  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  Againe forafmuch 1  as  A  and  B  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other , 
and  B  multiply  ing  him  fefe  produced  D  .Therefore  (by  the  27. of  the  feuenth)  A  and  D  are 
prime  the  one  to  the  other .  ‘flow  then  forafmuch  as  two  numbers  A  and  C  are  prime  to  two 
numbers  B  and  D,  either  of  both  to  either  of both :  therefore  (by  the  28  .of the  feuenth )tbat 
which  is  produced  of  A  into  C  is  prime  to  that  which  is  produced  ofB  into  T>  .But  that  which 
is  produced  of  A  into  C  is  the  number  E,and  that  which  iS  produced  of B  into  D  is  the  num¬ 
ber  F  .  Wherefore  E  and  F  are  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  And  fo  alwayes  if  A 'dr  B 
multiplying  the  numbers  E  and  F  do  produce  any  numbers,  the  numbers  produced,  may  by 
the  former  Prop  oft  ion,  be proued  to  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other  :  which  was  required  to  be 
proued 

yf  The  28.  Theoreme.  The  30.  ^Propojttion.  \ 

If  two  numbers  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other :  then  both  of  them  added  to * 
gether, /ball  he  prime  to  either  of them .  Jnd  if  both  of  them  added  toge* 
th/r  be  prime  to  any  one  of  them 9  then  alfo  thofe  numbers geuen  at  the  be* 
ginning }  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other. 

Vppofe  that  thefe  two  numbers  A  B  and  B  C  being  prime  numbers  be  added  to¬ 
gether  .  Then  I  fay, that  both  thefe  added  together  ^namely ,  the  number  ABC , 
is  prime  to  either  of  thefe  A  B,  and  B  C .  For  if C  A  and  A  B  be  not  prime  the 

.  - one  to  the  other fome  number  then  fall  meafure  them .  Letfomenumbermea- 

fure  them,  and  let  the  fame  be  D  .  Tfow  then forafmuch  as  D 

meafureth  the  whole  C  A  and  the  part  taken  away  A  B,it  mea-  A  ... _ B . C 

furetb  alfo  thercfJue  CB  (by  the  4. common  fen  fence)  .  And  D  .... 
it  meafureth  B  A .  Wherfore  D  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A  B 

and  B  C, being  prime  the  one  to  the  other :  which  is  impofible  (by  the  1 3  .definition  of  the  fe¬ 
uenth  )..  Wherefore  no  number  meafureth  thefe  numbers  CAandAB.  Wherefore  C  A  and 
A  B  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  it  be  proued,  that  C  A 

and  B  C  are  prime  the  one  1 0  the  other.  Wherefore  the  number  AC  is  to  either  of  thefe  num¬ 
bers  A  B  a'nd  B  C,  prime.  ->  J 

But  now fuppofe  that  the  numbers  C  A  and  A  B  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other  .  Then 
J  fay  y hat  the  numbers  A  B  and  B  C  are  alfo  prime  the  one  to  the  other .  For  i  f  A  B  dr  BC 
be  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other :  fome  one  number  meafureth  thefe  numbers  AB  and  B  C: 

Vv.iij.  Let 


DeronUrd* 
tun . 


Demnfira* 
tion  of  the 
firft  part  tea* 
ding  to  an  ab* 
furdnie. 


Dmonjlra- 
sion  of  the 
ferond  part 
which  is  the 
cotiuerfe  oft  he 
prU, leading  . 
alfo  to  an  ab- 
furdnie. 


iA,  CsmU&y 
added  by 
■Campane, 


Let fome  one  number  meafure  them, and  let  the  fame  be  D.  Andforafmuch  asD  meafureth 
either  ofthefe  numbers  AB  and  B  C,  it jhallalfo  meafure  the  whole  C  A  (by  the  6.  common 
fentenoe ) .  And  it alfo  meafureth  A  B '.Wherefore  D  meafureth thefe  numbers  C  A  and A  B 
being  prime  the  one  to  the  other :  which  is  impofible  ( by  the  i  3 .  < definition  of the  feuenth ) . 
Wherefore  no  number  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A  B  and  B  C .  Wherefore  A  B  andB  C  art 
prime  the  one  to  the  other ,  which  was  required  to  beproued.  ~  » 


yj  The  29.  Theoreme. 


T he  3  j.  Tropojttion . 


vv4 


Dmonflra- 
tion  leading  to 
•an  abjarditie. 


Euery prime  number  is  to  euery  number -  n vhich  it  meafureth  not }  prime. 

5]  Eppofe  that  there  begeuen  a  prime  number, namely, A, and  let'B  bean  other nu- 
■ her 3  which  it  meafureth  not. Then  I  fay, that  the  numbers  B  &  A  are  prime  the 
one  to.  the  other  .For  if  A  and  B  be  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other,  then fome 
^  number  meafureth  them  .Let  there  be  a  number  that  meafureth  them,  and  let 
e fame  be  C.  ifow  C  is  no  vnitie.  Andforafmuch  as  C  mea- 
fufeih  Bput  A  meafureth  not  B,  therefore  C  is  not  one  and  the 
fam.e  number  with  A.  And forafmuch  as  C  meafureth  A  &  B, 
it  alfo  meafureth  A  being.a  prime  number,  and  being  not  one 
and  the  fame  with  it  >•  which  is  impofible/  by  the  1 3  fdefnition  of  the  feuenth )  .Wherfore  no 
number  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A  and  B.  And  therefore  A  andB  are  prime  the  one  to  the 
other  V  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


A.  . .  !■ « » •  B iiiiiiiiii 

L  m  .  •  •  • 


r-i  $5 


fT he  30.  Theoreme. 


The  32.  Tropojitiori. 


If  ttyo  numbers  multiplying  the  one  the  other  produce  any  number,  and  if 
alfo  fome  prime  number  meafure  that  t vhich  is  produced  of  them :  then 
Jhall  it  aljo  meafure  one  of thoj'e  numbers  “Which  "Were  put  at  the  beginning. 

rppofe  that  two  numbers  A  and  B  multiplying  the  one  to  the  other  do  produce  the 
j  nnber  Ctand  let fome  prime  number, namely,  D  meafure  C.T he  I fay  that  D  mea- 
mM fureth  one  ofthefe  numbers  either  A  or  B.Suppofe  that  it  meafure  not  A;  now  D  is 
a  prime  number .  Wherefore  A  and  T>  are  prime  the  one  to  the 
Wher  (by  the  propofition  next  going  before ) .  And  how  often  D 
meafureth  C,fo  many  amities  let  there  be  in  E.  And  forafmuch 
as  D  meafureth  Cby  thofe  unities  which  are  in  E,therfore  D 
multiplying  Eproduceth  C:  but  A  alfo  multiplying  B  produced 
C  wherfore  that  which  is  produced  ofD  into  E  is  equal  to  that 
which  is  produced  of  A  into  B.  Wherfore  (  by  the  19 -of the  fe¬ 
uenth  )  as  A  is  to  D  ,fo  is  E  to  B:but  D  and  A  are  prime  numb 
numbers  in  that  proportion  ibut  the  leaf  in  any  proportion  meafure  the  numbers  hamng  the 
felfe fame proportion  with  them  equally, the  greater, the  greater, and  the  lejfe,the  lejfe,thatis 
the  antecedent, the  antecedent,  and  the  confequent, the  confequent  (by  the  21.  of  the  feueth ). 
wherefore  the  confequent  D  meafureth  the  confequent  B  .  In  like  fort  may  we  proue  that  if 
D  meafure. not  B  it  meafureth  A.  Wherfore  D  meafureth  one  of  thefe  nubers  A  or  B:  which 
was  required  to  to  be  proued.  • 

A  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft  that  if  a  number  meafure  a  number  produced  of  two  nubers 
multiplied  the  one  irito.the  other,or  be  commehfurable  to  the  fame  ,  it  flial'l  alfo  either 
iV;,  <•  ,  meafure 


E . 

D  ... 
C..,. 
B.... 
A.. 


:  and  therefore  the  leaf 


ofSuclides  Ehmnles.  FoL  198. 

meafure  one  of  the  two  number?  multiplied,  or  be  commenfurable  with  one  of  them* 

The  i  i.'Theoreme.  The  33-  Erojojition. 

Euery  compofed  number  Js  rneajured  bjfome prime  number . 

fppofethat  Abe  a  tempo. fed  number  .Then  I  fay  that  A  is  meafuredby  fome 
prif&e  number.  For for aj much  as  A  is  a  compofed  number ,  fome  number  mujl 
needes  meafure  it  (by  the  14 .  definition  of  the feuenth )  .Let  there  be  a  number 

_ _  that  meafureth  it,  and  let  the  fame  be  B.  T(ow  if  B  be  a  prime  number  then  is 

that  manifefi  which  we  feekefor:but  if  it  be  a  com¬ 
pofed  member  fome  number  mujl  needes  meafure  it  C . .. 

(by  the  felfe  fame  definition )  Let  there  be  a  number  B . , 

that  meafureth  it, and  let  the fame  beG.^And for-  A - . . . . . 

afmuch as  C 'meafureth  B  ,  and  B  meafureth  A: 

ther fore  C  alfo  meafureth  A  (by  the  $. common fentece)  :and  if C  be  a  prime  number  then  is 
that  manifefi  which  we fought  for .  But  if  it  be  a  compofed  number fome  number jhall  mea¬ 
fure  it: and  the  like  confideration  being  had  there  jhall  at  the  length  be  found  fome  prime 
number  which  meafureth  the  number  going  before, which jhall  alfo  meafure  A.  For  if  there 
be  not  found  ant  fuch prime  number  then  jhall  infinite  numbers  decrejipg  meafure  the fay  d 
number  A  of  which  the  oneislejje  the  the  other, which  is  impojfble  in  numbers.  Wherfore 
fome  prime  number jhall  at  the  length  be found  which  jhall  meafure  the  number  goin%  before 
and  which  jhallalfo  meafure  the  number  A( by  the  5. common  fentence)  .Euery  copofednum- 
ber  therefore  is  meafured  by  fome  prime  number:  which  was  required  to  beproued , 


yj  jin  other  1 vqy. 

*  P0fi  thfit  The  a  compofed  number.  T hen  I fay  that fome  prime  number  meafureth 
it.  For  for  afmuch  as  GAis  a compofed  number, fome  number jhall  meafure  it  (by  theia.de- 
fimtion  of  the  feuenth)  Let  the  least  number  that  meafureth  it  be  B.  J 

Then  I fay  that  B  is  a  prime  number .  For  ifB  be  not  a  prime  mm -  A  ......... 

her  fome  number  jhall  meafure  it.  Let  C  meafure  it.  Wherefore  C  is  B 

kjfe  then  B.cAnd for  afmuch  as  Cmeafureth  B,  and  B  meafureth  C  .. 

A,  ther  fore  C  alfo  meafureth  being  leffe  then  B,  which  by  fuppo- 

fition  is  the  haft  number  that  meafureth  A, which  is  abfurd.  Wherfore  B  is  not  a  compo  fed 

number, but  a  pnme  number,  which  was  required  to  be proued.  1  J 

. Tie  32.  Theorem .  T he  3  A  Eropofition. 

Euery  number  is  either  a  prime  number  gw  els fome  prime  number  meafu* 


-y: 


~ti'. 


’  d  Si  3  X 


!  FfPff '■ that  thm  he  *  number  A.  Then  1 fay  that  ^A  is  either  a  prime  number 
j  els fome prime  number  meafureth  it.  For  if  A  be  a  prime  number 

— i  lben  is  that  had  which  is  required.  But  if  it  be  a  compofed  rnim-  A 

berjome prime  number jhall  meafure  it  (by  the  3 3. of the  feuenth).  Euery  A  ...... 

tpuwber Lhtgjow  is  eitber  a prime  number, ar  els  fome prime  number  mea- 
Jureth  it :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir  at ed. 


J}morMra- 
tion  leading  to 
animpojjibi- 
iitit* 


An  other 
monjlratm . 


Demnttra* 
tion . 


Two  cafes  in 
this  tropo/i- 
tion .  % 

T he  fir Jl  cafe, 

t.  4  ,  J 

The fecond 

cafe. 

Vemontfra- 
tiov ♦ 


Demonflra- 
4ion  leading  to 
m  abfurduie. 


Corollary 
redded  by 
Cdi/ipaue. 


The feuenth  Boole 

tfTlie  3.  Trobleme.  T he  3  $>  *P ropofition . 

How  many  numbers  foeuer  beinggeumfo find  out  the  leafi  numbers  that 
haue  one  and  the fame  proportion  "With  them. 


Vppofe  that  there  he  a  multitude  of  numbers  geuen , 
namely,  A,B>  and  C .  It  is  required to fnde  out  the 
[leaf  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the  fame  proporti - 
y  on  with  thefe  numbers  A,B,C.  T hefe  numbers  A, 


A  ■  •  1 1  • « 

B . 

C  , 


B, C7  are  either  prime  the  one  to  the  other, or  not  prime. ifAfb , 

C ,  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other,  then  are  they  the  leaf  that  haue  D . . 

one  and  the  fame  proportion  with  them  (by  the  2 3.  of  the  fe¬ 
uenth).  E  ... 

But  if they  be  not  prime, take  by  the  3  .of the feuenth, vnto  A,  F  .... 

ft, C, the greatef  common  meafure, which  let  be  the  number  D.  G . 

i^ylnd  how  often  D  meafureth  euery  one  of  thefe  A,ft,G,fo  ma¬ 
ny  'unities  let  there  be  in  euery  one  of  thefe  numbers  E  F  G.  H  . . 

Wherfore  thefe  numbers  E,F,G,  do  meafure  thefe  numbers  A,  K . . . 

B>C ,  by  thof e  Vnities  which  are  in  T).  Wherfore  thefe  numbers  L ... . 

E,F,G,  meafure  thefe  numbers  A7B,C,  equally.  Wherfore  E, 
ft, G, are  by  thei  3 .  of  the  feuenth,  in  the felfe  fame  proportion  M . . . 

that  A,  ft, G,  are.lfm  then  I fay  that  they  alfo  are  the  leafi. For 
if E,ft.,G,  benot  the  leafi  that  haue  one  and  the  fame  proportion,  with  A, ft, G,  there /had 
the  be  fome  numbers  "leffethen  E,F>G,  being  in  the felfe fame  proportion  that  A, ft, C, are. 
Suppofe  that  the  fame  nubers  be  fti,ftL,ft,which  jhall  meafure  the  numbers  Afft,  G, equally. 
H ow  many  times  H  mea  fureth  A  ,fo  many  'unities  let  there  be  in  M  .Wherfore  either  of  thefe 
K  and  ft  meafureth  either  of  thefe  B  and  G  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  M  (by  then,  of 
the  feuenth)  .  And  forafinuch  as ift  meafureth  A  by  thofe  'unities  which  are  in  M,therfore 
M  alfo  meafureth  A  by  thofe  'unities  winch  are  in  H.  fdnd  by  the fame  reafonM.  meafiu 
reth  either  of  thefe  ft  and  C  by  thofe 'unities  which  are  in  either  of  thefe  K  and  L.  Where * 
fore  M  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A, B 7C-  kAndforafmuch  as  H  meafureth  A  by  thofe  va¬ 
nities  which  are  in  M ,  t her  fore  H  multiplieng  lvl,produceth  A.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  E 
multiplieng  D  ,produceih  A.  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  offt  into  D  is  equall  to  that 
which  is  produced  ofH  into  M .  Wherfore  (by  the  19 of  the feuenth )  as  E  is  to  ftifo  is  M  t® 
D  .But  E  is  greater  then  ftl,wherfore  Malfo  is  greater  then  ft), and  it  meafureth  thefe  num 
hers  A,B ,  G, which  is  imp opble. For  D  isfuppofed to  be  the greatefl  common  meafure  vn¬ 
to  A,B,  C .  Wherfore  there fall  be  no  other  numbers  lefe  then  ft., ft, G, and  in  the felfe fame 
proportion  with  A, ft, G.  Wherf ore  ftfft,G, are  the leU numbers  which haut  one  and  the 
fame  proportion  with  A,B>C  ••  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

A  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft  that  the  greatefl:  common  meafure  to  numbers  how  many  foe¬ 
uer  :  meafureth  the  fayd  numbers  by  the  numbers  in  the  leaftproportio  that  the  num¬ 
bers  geuen  are. 


f  T he  4.  Trobleme.  The  3  6.  t  ropofition. 

Two  numbers  being geuen  fto  finde  out  the  kU  nuher  "Which  they  meafure . 


vfSuclides  Elementes*  FoL  19  p« 

Fppofe  that  the  two  numbersgeuen  be  A  and  B .  It  is  required  tofinde  out  the 
l esi  number  which  they  meafure  .  Nyw  A  and B  are  either  prime  the  one  to  the 
|  other, or  not .  S  upp  of e first  that  A  and  B  be  grime  the  one  to  the  other :  and  let 
A  multiplying  B  produce  C :  wherefore  B, multiplying  A produceth  alfo  C  (by 
the  1 6 .  of  the feuenth  )  .  Wherefore  A  and  B  meafure  C.  Now  alfo  I  fay,  that  C  is  the  kit  nh* 
her  which  they  meafure ,  For  if  it  be  not ,  thofie  numbers  A  and  B  meafure forme  number  lefie 
then  C :  let  them  meafure  fome  number  lefie  then  C,  and  let  the  fame  be  D  :  and  how  often  A 
meafiureth  F>,fo  many  sanities  let  there  be  in  E  rand  how  often  B  meafureth  D,  fo  many  v- 
nities  let  there  be  in  F  ,  Wherefore  A  multiplying  E produceth  I), and  B  multiplying  E  pro* 
duceth  alfo  D  .  Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  E, 

is  equall  to  that  which  is produced  of  B  into  F  :  wherefore  (by  A _ _ 

the  ip. of  the  feuenth)  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  F  to  E .  But  A  and  B  B  ... 
are  prime  .-yea  they  are  prime  and  alfo  the  lef  in  that  proper* 

tion  (by  the  23.  of  the  feuenth  )  :  but  the  lef  numbers  in  any  C . . 

proportion  meafure  thofie  numbers  that  haue one  and  the  fame  D . . 

proportion  with  them  equally :  the  greater  the  greater :  and  the  E  ... . 

lefie  the  lefie  ( by  the  21.  of the feuenth )  .  Wh  erf  ore  B  meafureth  F . 

i:',  namely,  the  ccnfequeni  the  confequent .  And  forafmuch  as- 

A  multiplying  B  and  E  producedC  and  D  :  therefore  (by  the  17, of  the feuenth)  as  B  is  to  E, 
fo  is  C  to  D  .  But  B  meafureth  E .  Wherefore  C  alfo  meafureth  D, the  greater, the  lefie:  which 
is  impofiible .  Wherefore  if  thofie  numbers  A  andB  be  prime,  they  [hall  meafure  no  number 
lefie  then  C .  Wherefore  C  is  the  lef  number  which  A  and  B  meafure * 

But  now fuppofe  that  A  and  B  be  not  prime  the  one  to  the  other, and  take  (by  the  3$. of  the 
feuenth)  the  left  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the fame proportion  With  A  and  B,  and  let  the 
fame  be  F  and  E .  Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  E,  is  equall  to  that  which  is 
produced  of B  into  F  (by  the  1 9  .of the  feuenth)  .  Let  A  multiplying  E  produce  C :  wherfore 
B  multiplying  F  produceth  alfo  C  .Wherefore  A  and  B  meafure  C .  T hen  I fay ,  that  C  is  the 
lef  number  that  they  meafure .  For  if  it  be  not,  thofie  number S 

A  and  B  fall  meafure fome  number  lefie  then  C:  let  them  rnea-  F  ...  A . * 

fare  a  number  lefie  then  C,  and  let  the  fame  be  D .  And  how  of-  E  . .  B  ... . 

ten  A  meafureth  D  ,fio  many  sanities  let  there  be  in  G.And  how 

often  B  meafureth  D,fo  many  smiths  let  there  beinH .  Now  C  ...... . . 

then  A  multiplying  G produceth  D  .AndB  multiplying  H pro -  F . . 

duceth  alfo  D  .  Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  G,  G  . . 
is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  B  into  U .  Wherefore  (by  H .. . 
the  1 9. of  the feuenth)  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  H  to  G .  But  as  A  is  to 

B,  foisFtoE.  Wherefore  as  F  is  to  E,fo  is  H  to  G :  but  the  lef  numbers  in  any  proportion 
meafure  the  numbers  that  haue  the  fame  proportion  with  them  equally,  the  greater  the  grea¬ 
ter, &  the  lefie  the  lefe(by  the  21. of  the  feueth).  FFherfore  E  meafureth  G.And  for afinuch 
as  A  multiplying  G  and E produced  C  and D  ,  therefore  ( by  the  17. of  the f ft )  as  E  is  to  G> 
fo  is  C  to  D .  But  E  meafureth  G.  FFherefore  C  alfo  meafureth  D, the greater  the  lefie  .-which 
is  impofiible .  Wherefore  thofie  numbers  A  and  B  do  not  meafure  any  number  lefie  then  C. 
Wherefore  G  is  the  lef  number  that  is  meafured  by  A  and  Be  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

The  33-T  heoreme.  T he. 3  7.  Tropofition . 

If  two  numbers  meafure  any  number ,the  leaf:  nuber  alfo  "Which  they  mea * 
j ureyneafureth  the f elf e  fame  number. 


Two  ta/es  in 

this pxcpofiivo. 
The f  At  cafe  t 

DmorMra- 
tion  leading  to 

an  abjurditist 


Thefetdni 

tafs. 


"Demonstra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  obfardkie* 


Demoutfu- 
Sion  leading  to 
an  impojfibi- 
Sittc, 


Two  cafes  in 
this  propofitio. 
The  fir  ft  cafe , 

Ty  e  man fl  ra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  abfurditie. 


Thefeconi 

cafe. 


Demon  fl  ra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
■an  abfurditie. 


Fppofe  that  then  he  two  numbers  geuen  A  and  Brand  let  them  meafure  the  mm* 
her  CD:  and  let  the  leaf  number  that  they  meafure  he  E .  The  I  fay  that  E  alfo 
meafureth  the  number  C  D .  For  ifE  do  not  mea¬ 
fure  C  D,let  E  meafuring  C  D,  that  is fubtrahed  out  of  C  D  A ,  . 
as  ofte  as  you  can, as  for  example,  oncejcaue  a  lefe  then  itfelfc ,  B . . . 

namely, Q  F .KAdnd let  the  number  fubtrahed  which  E  meafu-  E . 

rethbe  FD,  and  forafmuch  as  A  and  B  meafure  E,  and  E  C ....  F ....... .D 

meafureth  D  F ,  therefore  A  and  B  alfo  meafure  DF .  And 

they  meafure  the  whole  C  E>, wherefore  by  the  4. common  fentence  of  the  feuenth  they  mea¬ 
fure  alfo  that  which  remay  net h  C  F  being  lefe  then  E.-  which  is  impojfible.  Wherefore  E  of 
neceffitie  meafureth  C  D, which  was  required  to  beproued. 


f  The  s.  Trohleme.  The  3$.  Tropofition. 

Three  numbers  beinggeuen  fo finde  out  the  leaf  number  "Which  they  meafure . 

Fppofe  that  there  be  three  numbers geuen  A,  B  >  C  .  It  is  required 'to  fnde  out  the 
leaf  number  which  they  meafure. Take(  by  the  36. of  the feuenthfthe leaf  nnmber 
<%Mwhich  A  and  B  meafure,  and  let  the fame  be  D.  Tfow  then  C  either  meafureth  E> 
or  els  meafureth  it  not. Fir (l  let  it  meafure  it.  And  the  numbers 
alfo  A  and  B  meafure  D  .-wherefore  A,B,Q, meafure  D.Tfow  kA.  . . 
then  I  fay  that  D  is  the  leaf  number  which  they  meafure.  For  B .... 
if  not , let  the  numbers  A,B,Q, meafure  fome  number  leffe  then  C ...... 

D,and  let  the fame  beE.And forafmuch  as  A,  B,  C,  meafure  D . . 

E  therefore  alfo  A  and  B  meafure  E ,  wherefore  (  by  the  37. of  E . 

the  feuen  th  )  the  leaf  number  which  thofe  numbers  A  and  B 

meafure  fall  alfo  meafure  E  .But  the  leaf  number  which  AandB  meafure  is  D  .  Wherforg 
I)  meafureth  E, the  greater  the  leffe  .-which  is  imp  of, ible. Wherefore  thefe  numbers  AfB,Q* 
Jhall not  meafure  any  number  leffe  then  D.  Wherefore  D  is  the  leaf  number  that  A,B,QS 
doo  meafure. 

But' now fuppofe  that  C  meafure  not  T).  And  take  (  by  the  36.  of  the feuenth  )  the  leaf 
number  which  thofe  two  numbers  C  and  D  do  meafure, and  let  the  fame  he  E.  And foraf 
much  as  A  and B  meafure  T),and  D  meafureth  E,  therefore  A  and  B  alfo  meafure  E ,  and 
C  alfo  meafureth  E,  wherefore  A,  B,  C,  alfo  meafure  E.I  fay  moreouer  that  E  is  the  leaf 
number  which  A,B,C  meafure. For  if it  be  not  Jet  there  he fome  leffe  number  then  E  which 
they  meafure ,  and  let  the fame  be  F .  i And  foraf¬ 
much  as  A,B,  C,  meafure  F  .  T her ef ore  A  and  B 
alfo  meafure  F  :  wherefore  the  leaf  number  which 
thefe  numbers  A  and  B  do  meafure  doth  alfo  mea¬ 
fure  F  (by  the 37 .of  ’the  feuenth )  .But  the  leaf  mm 
her  which  A  and  B  doo  meafure  is  D  .  Wherefore 
D  meafureth  E.And C  alfo  meafureth  E.Wherfore 
D  and  C  meafure  F .  Wherefore  the  leaf  number 
which  C  and  D  doo  meafure, fall  alfo  (by  the felfe fame )  meafure  E.But  the  lead  number 
which  C  &  D  meafure  isE.Wherfore  E  meafureth  F,  namely,  the  greater, the  lefe,  which 
is  impojfible .  Wherefore  thefe  numbers  A ,  B,  C,do  not  meafure  any  number  leffe  then  E. 
Wherefore  E  is  the  leaf  number  which  A,  B,  C,  doo  meafure  ■  which  was  required  to  be 
demonf rated. 


A 

B  , 

C 

D 

E 

F 


In  like  maner  alfo  how  many  numbers  foeuer  being  geuen ,  may  be  found  out  the 

led! 


of Sttclides  Elementes .  Fol.zcc. 

lead  number  which  they  meafure.  For  if  vnto  the  three  numbers  A,  B,  C,  be  added  a 
forth, then  ifthefaydforth  number  meafure  the  number  E ,  then  is  E  the  lead  number 
which  the  fower  numbers  geuen  meafure.But  ifit  doo  not  meafure  E ,  the  by  the  3  7*of 
this  booke  niuft  you  finde  out  the  leaft  number  which  E  and  the  forth  number  meafure. 
Which  (hall  be  the  number  fought  for.  And  fo  likewife  if  there  be  fiue,  (ixe,or  how  ma¬ 
ny  foe  uer  geuen. 

Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft  that  the  leaft  comm 6  meafure  to  numbers  howmanyfoeuer, 
mcafureth  euery  number  which  the  fayd  numbers  howmanyfoeuer  meafure. 

f  The  34 *  Theoreme .  The  39.  Tropofition. 

If  a  number  meafure  any  number :  the  number  me afured [hall  haue  apart 
after  the  denomination  of  the  number  meafuring. 

IFppofe  that  there  be  a  number  B, which  let  meafure  the  number  A .  Then  I  fay, 
I  that  A  hath  a  part  taking  his  denomination  of  the  number  B .  For  how  often  B 
|  meafureth  A,fo  many  'unities  let  there  be  in  C.  And  let  D  be  < vnitie.Andforaf 
_much  asB  meafureth  A,  by  thofevnities  which  are  in  C,  and  vnitie  D  mcafu¬ 
reth  C  by  thofe 'unities  which  are  in  C,  therefore  vnitie  Dfo 
many  times  meafureth  the  number  C,  as  B  doth  meafure  A.  A ........... . 

Wherefore  alternately  (  by  the  is  ■  of  thefeuenth )  vnitie  D,fo  B  . . . . 

many  times  meafureth  B,asC  doth  meafure  A.  Wherf, ore  what  C... 

part  vnitie  D  is  of  the  number  B,  the fame  part  is  C  of  A, But  D  \ 

vnitie  D  is  a  part  of B  hauing  his  denomination  ofB .  Wher - 

fore  C  alfo  is  apart  of  A  hauing  his  denomination  ofB.  Wherfore  A  hath  C  as  apart  taking 
his  denomination  ofB :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  meaning  of  this  Proportion  is, that  if  three  meafure  any  number, that  number 
hath  a  third  part,  and  if  fours  meafure  any  number  the  fayd  number  hath  a  fourth 
part .  And  fo  forth.  f 

if  The  3S-  Theoreme.  The  40- Tropofition. 

If  a  number  haue  any  part:  the  number  wherof the  part  taketb  his  deno* 
minationjhall meafure  it. 

Fppofe  that  the  number  A  haue  a  part,  namely ,  B :  and  let  the  part  B  haue  his 
denomination  of  the  number  C.  T hen  I  fay, that  C  meafureth  A.  Let  D  be  vnu 
tie .  And  forafmuch  as  B  is  a  part  of  A, hauing  his  denomination  ofC :  and  D 
being  vnitie  is  alfo  a  part  of  the  number  C, hauing  his  denominate  0  ofC :  there¬ 
fore  what  pap  vnitie  D  is  of  the  number  C,the fame  part  is  alfo  B  of A: 

wherefore  vnitie  D  fo  many  times  meafureth  the  number  C ,  as  B  meafu-  A . 

reth  A.  Wherefore  alternately  ( by  the  is. of  the feuenth )  vnitie  D  fo  ma-  B  .... 

ny  times  meafureth  the  number  B,as  C  meafureth  A .  Wherefore  C  mca-  C  . . 

fureth  A :  which  was  required  to  be  proued.  D , 

This  Proportion  is  theconuerfe  of  the  former :  and  the  meaning  therof  is,  thate- 
uery  number  hauing  a-third  part  is  mcafured  of  three,  and  hauing  aiourth  part  is  mea« 
fured  of  foure.  And  fo  forth.  *  ' 


*A  Corollary* 


Vemonftrt* 

tim 


Theconuerfe 
of  the  former 
proportion • 
Dcmonjha - 
turn. 


ThefeuenthcBoo%e 

fThe  tifProbleme.  Th^i.^PropoJttion.  L 

T  o  fndeout  the  leafi  number ,  that  contameth  the  partes geuen. 

fesS  Vppofethat  the  partes  geuen  be  oA>  B ,  C>  namely  Jet  ^A  be  an  halfe  part  fB  a  third 
€onttru£tm.  Part >&  C  a  fourth  part. Now  it  is  required  tofnde  out  the  leaf  nuber  which  cotai- 

neth  the  partes  A,B,C. Let  the  faidpartes  A ?B,C,  haue  their  denominations  of  the 
numbers  D,EA,  rind  take( by  the  3  8.  of  the  feuenth)  the  leaf  number  which  the  numbers 
D,E,F>  meafure,  and  let  the  fame  be  GaAnd for  a f much  as  the 
numbers  D>E,F  meafure  the  number  Gather  fore  the  number  G 
hath  partes  denominated  of the  nuber s 'D,E,F  (  by  the  3$. of  the 
feueth )  .But  the parts  A,B,C,haue  their  denominatio  of  the  nnm 
hers  <D  ,EjF  Whcifore  G  hath  thofe  partes  ofoByGll fay  alfo  that 
Vemofiftratio  jt  is  the  leaf  number  which  hath  thefe  partes. For  if  G  be  hot  the 
t0  m  leaf  number  which  coniaineth  thofe  partes  A,  C,  then  let 
l  *  there  be  fame  number  lejfe  then  G which  containeih  the faide 

partes  AAA-Aind fuppofe  the fame  to  be  the  number  H.And 
fordfmuch  as  H  hath  ihefaid partes  fjB>C',  therforethe  numbers  that  the  partes  A}B,C, 
take  their denominati  on's of fall  meafure FI  (by  the  40  .of the  feuenth )  But  the  numbers 
wherofthe  partes  A, BfC,  take  their. denominations  of  are  t)yE,F  •  Wberfore  the  numbers 
D,E:F ,  meafure  the  number  H  which  is  lejfe  then  G,  which  is  impofible.  For  G  is  fuppofed 
' '  ■  to  be  the  leaf  number  t’h'ai  the.numbers  D,E,  F,  do  meafure.  Wherfore  there  is  no  number 

•  'l  lejfe  then  G , which contameth  thefe  partes  ApB,C:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

\  Corrohry.  ■  .  v  . 

IA  Corollary  Hereby  it  is  maniftft  that  if  there  be  taken  the leaft  number,  that  numbers  how  ma  - 

added  by  "  *~»y  ibetier  do  meafure ,thc  fayd  number  (lull  be  the  leaft  which  hath  the  partes  denomi- 
tampane*  nated  of  the  fayd  numbershow  many  foeuer. 


A  an  half e 
B  a  third 
C  a  fourth 
D... 

E ' ...  7 

F  .... 

G  . . 

JA  ......... 


~  -Gnpipane  after  he  hath  taught  to  fihde  out  the  fir  11  leaft  number  that  contayneth  the 
partes  geiien,teacheth‘  alfo  to  firide  ourtHe  fecond  leaft  nuhiber,  that  is,  which  except 
the  leaft  of  all  is  lefle  then  all  other, and  alfo  the  third  leaft,  and  the  fourth  &c.  The  ie- 
cond  is  found  out  by  doubling  the  number  G\For  the  numbers  which  meafure  ,the  nu¬ 
ber  G  ih  all  alfo  meafure  the  d®ubletlierof  ( by  they  ♦common  fentence  of  the  feuenth). 
But  there  cannot  be  geuen  a  number  greater  then  the  number  C,&  lefle  then  the  dou¬ 
ble  tberof,  whom  rh,e  partes  geuenlT.1  all  meafureiFQrfprafmuch  as  the  partes  geuen  do 
meafure  the  whole,namely,  which  is’lef&theh  the  double;  and  they*  alfo  meafure  the 
part  taken  away,namely,the  number  G,they  Ihould  alfo  meafure  the  refidue,  namely,a 
number  lefle  then  G”,  which  is  proued  to  be  the  left  number  that  they  do  meafure,which 
is-  impoffible  ♦•  wherefore  the  fecond  number  which  thefaid partes  geuen  do  meafure* 
-muft^exc ceding  G3needes  reache  to  the  double  of  G,  and  the  third  to  the  treble,  and 
jtfie :  fourth  to  the  quadruple,  and  fo  infinitely,  for  thofe  partes  can  neuer  meafure  any 
number  lefle  then  the  numberG. 

By  this  Propofition  alfo  it  is  eafie  to  find  out  the  leaft  number  containing  the  partes 
geuen  ofpartes.As  if  we  would  finae  out  the  leaft  number  which  cantayiieth  one  third  - 
part  of  an  halfe  part,andone  fourth  part  of  a  third  part.red.uce  the  faid  diuers  fraitios 
into  Ample  fraftion  (by  the  common  rule  of  reducing  of  fractions)  namely,  the  third- 
ofan  halfe  into  a  G-xt  part  of  an  whole, and  the  fourth  of  third  into  a  twelfth  part  of  an; 
whole.  And  then  by  this  Probleme  fearch  out  the  leaft  number  which  contayneth  a  fixe 
part  and  a  twelfth  part,and  fo  haue  you  done. 


Hole  to  Unde 
withe feet  tide 
leaft  number 
and  the  third , 
and  jo  forth 


ifinv  tofind  • 
out  the  kef 
number  con - 
taymng  the 
parts  of  parts* 


'J4?  The  end  of  the  feuenth  booke 

ofEuclides  Elcmentes. 


The 


3VI  ^ 


•  i 


.  v'  ty 


*3Y'\ 


rV’  '»  !  '  i  U  t' 


elides  Elementes. 

■■ 

i  1  A 


.SVittV)  iVtf.  V  .  .  i  -.W' :  V*. 

O  V  4  s--  ^ 

Fter  that  Euclide  hath  in  the  feuenth  boc-ke  entreated 
’of theproprieties-df  numbers  in  generall,  and  of  certayne 
1  kl  tide's  thereof  more  fpecial!y,and  of  prime  and  compofed 
^numbers with 6thers:now  in  th,is  eight  booke  he  profecu- 
\  terh  farther*  arid  findeth  out  and  demonftrateth  the  pro¬ 
sper  ties  and  paffions  ofeertayne  other  kindes  of  numbers: 
_  4r  as  of  the  leajd  numbers  in  proportion  ,  and  how  fuch  may 
be  found  out  infinitely  in  whatfoeucr  proportion  ;  which 
^,|f^thifig  is  both  deleftable ,  and  to  great  vfe  .  Alfo  here  is  en¬ 
treated  of  playhe  numbers ,  and  fblide.*  and  of  theyr  fides, 
and  proportion  of  them .  Likewife  of  the  paffions  of  num¬ 
bers  fquare  andcube,and  of  the  Uatu  res  and  conditions  of 
their  fides,  and  of  the  meane  proportionall  numbers  of 
playne,folide,fquare,  and  cube  numbers, with  many  other  thinges  very  requifite  and 
necefiary  to  be  knowne. 


f  T he  jirji  Thcoreme, 


KS 


The  firft  tpropofition . 


If  there  he  numbers  in  continuall proportion  ho^omanjfoeuer ,and  if  their 
extremes  he  prime  the  one  to  the  otherithej  are  the  leaf  of  all  numbers 
that  bane  one  and  the fame  proportion  loith  them , 


j 


[Fppofe  that  the  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  be  A,  B,C,D. 
j  o End  let  their  extreames  namely ,  A  and  D  be  prime  the  one  to 
the  other. T hen  I [ay  that  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D ,  are  the  kaft 

i  of  all  numbers  that  haue  . 

|  one  and  the  fame  pro- 
€)  ■  portion  with  the-.  For  if 
they- be  not, let  E,  F,  G, 
d  H  being  lefe  numbers 
‘ then  A ,  B,  C,  D,be  in 


A. 
B  . 
C  . 
D 


E. 

F . 

G. . 

H. 


the  felfe  fame proportion  that  A  B  C  D  area^End 
forafmuch  as  the  numbers  A,  B,  Q,  D,  are  in  the 
felfe  fame  proportion  that  the  numbers  EjFjG^H, 
are, (f  the  multitude  of  thefe  numbers  E,  F,G,H, 
isequallto  the  multitude  of  thefe  numbers  A,  B,C,D,  therefore  ofequalitie  (  by  the  14.  of 
the feuenth  fas  A  is  toD,foisE  to  H  .But  A  andl )  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other ,  yea  they 
are  prime  and  the  leaf  that  haue  the fame  proportion  with  them. But  the  leasl  numbers  in  a- 
ny  proportion  meajure  the  numbers  that  haue  the  fame  proportion  rvith  them  equally, the 
antecedent  the  antecedent, and  the  confequet  the  confequent  {by  the  21. of  the  feuenth)  xvher 
fore  A  meafureth  E, the  greater  the  lefe:  which  is  impoffible.  Wherefore  the  number sE,  F, 
G,H , being  lefe  then  A,B,Cfi,are  not  in  the fame  proportion  that  A,B,0,T),are,wher~ 
fore  A,  B,-C,D,  are  the  leaf  of all  numbers  which  haue  one  and the  fame  proportion  with 

Xx.i.  them 


The  Argutnet 
of  the  eight 
booky;* 


1 

DemonJlra~ 
tion  leading  te 
an  abfurdnk* 


.  '**  *  -  -»v 

‘CmflruHion, 

Demonstra¬ 
tion  * 


ST"' 


V  <E_\  *- 


:  ‘  \  T  he  eight  he  TZooke 

them  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

"  ■  -  f  j  '  i  ■  "  .V  ■  ■  -  -"s 

f  The  i.  'Trobleme,  T he  2.  Tropojition. 

£ 

T 0  finde  out  the  leajl  numbers  m  continually proportion^  many  as  jhallhe 
required  jin  any  proportion  geuen. 


Kppofi  that  the  proportion  geuen  in  the  lefi  numbers  be  A  to  IS .  It  is  required 
to  finde  out  the  lefi  numbers  in  continuall proportion ,as  many  as  jhdll  be  requi¬ 
red, in  the fame  proportion  that  A  is  to  B  .  Let  there  be  required foure .  And  let 
A  multiplying  him  felfe produce  C :  and  multiplying  B  let  it  produce  B  :  and 
hkewife  let  B  multiplying  him felfe  produce  E .  And  moreouer  let  A  multiplying  thofe  num¬ 
bers  C,E),E, produce  T,G,U :  and  let  B  multiplying  E  produce  K .  xAlnd forafmuch  as  A 
jmfflymghim  fife  produced. C,and  multiplying  B  produced  D,  now  then  the  number  A 
multiplying  two  numbers  A  and  B  produced  C  &  D  .  Wherefore  ( by  the  17. of  the feuenth) 
as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  Gto  B.  Againe,  forafmuch  as  A  multiplying  B  produced  D,  and  B  multi¬ 
plying  him  felfe  produced  E,  therefore  ech  of  thofe  numbers  A  and  B  midtip  lying  B,  bring- 
eth forth  thefe  numbers  B  and  E  .  Wherefore  (by  the  1 2. of  the feuenth )  as  A  is  to  B,f  D 
to  E  .  But  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  C  to  B  .  Wherefore  as  C  is  to  B,fo  is  B  to  E.  And  forafmuch  as 
A  multiplying  C  and  B  produced  F  and  G,  therefore  ( by  the  17  .of the fuenth)as  C  Is  to  B, 
fo  is  F  to  G .  But  as  C  is  to  B,f  is  A  to  B  .  Wherefore  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  F  to  G .  Againe  for¬ 
afmuch  as  A  ‘multiplying B  and  E  produced  G  and  H,  therefore  (  by  the  17. of  the feuenth ) 
as  B  is  to  E,f  isG  to  H  .  But  as  B  is  to  E,fois  AtoB  .  Wherefore  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  G  to  H. 


C 

D 

E 


G 

H 

K 


x^And forafmuch  as  thofe  numbers  A  and  B  multiplying  E produced  H  and  K, therefore  ( by 
the  1 8  .oft he feuenth )  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  H  to  K .  And  it  is  proued,that  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  F  to 
G,  and  G  to  B :  wherefore  as  F  is  to  G,fo  is  G  to  H,and  H  to  K .  Wherefore  thefe  numbers 
C,B,E,and  F,G,H,K,  are  proportionall  in  the fame  proportion,  that  A  is  to  B  .  ‘Jgowl fay , 
that  they  are  alfo  the  lefi.  For  forafmuch  as  A  and  B  are  the  lefi  of  all  numbers  that  haue  the 
fame  proportion  with  them :  but  the  lefi  numbers  that  haue  one  &  the fame  proportion  with 
them  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other  ( by  the  2  4.  of  the feuenth )  :  therefore  A  and  B  are  prime 
the  one  to  the  other :  and  ech  of  thefe  numbers  A  fr  B  multiplying  him felfe  produced  thefe 
numbers  C  and  E,  and  likewife  multiplying  ech  of  thefe  numbers  C  and  E  they  produced  F 
andK .  Wherefore  (by  the  29  .of  the fiuenth)CyE, and E,K ,  arcprimc  the  one  to  the  other. 
But  if  there  be  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  how  many  foeuer,  and  if  their  extremes  be 
prime  the  one  to  the  other }  they  are  the  lefi  of  all  nubers  that  haue  the fame  proportion  with 
them  (by  the  firfi  of  the  eight)  .  Wherefore  thefe  numbers  C,B,E,and  FtG,H,K,are  the  lejl 

■  4  *  of  all 


ofBuclides  Elementes. 


FoLzoz* 


of  all  numbers  that  haue  the  fame  proportion  with  AandB '.  Andforafmuch  as  ( by  the  2f>* 
of the  feuenth)  that  akvaies  happeneth  touching  the  extremes, namely,  that  A  and  B  multi - 
plying  the  numbersproduced  F  and  K  fall  produce  other  prime,  numbers,  namely,  the  ex¬ 
tremes  of flue  numbers  in  continuall proportion,  therefore  (  by  the frsl  of  this  booke)  all fiue 
are  the  lejl  of  that  proportion .  And fo  infnitely :  which,  was  required  to  be  done. 


Y, 


qqC-ordlary. 


Hereby  it  is  manifefl 3tbat  if  three  numbers  being  in  continuall  proporti * 
on3be  the  left  of all  numbers  that  haue  the  fame  proportion  loith  them3 
their  extremes  are  fquares :  and  if  there  he  foure  their  extremes  are  cubes. 
For  the  extremes  of  three  are  produced  of  the  multiplying  of  the  nubersA 
and  B  into  them  felucs.  And  the  extremes  of foure  are  produced  of  the  mul¬ 
tiplying  of  the  rootes  A  and  B  into  the  fquares  C  and  E,  whereby  are  made 
the  cubes  F  and  K. 


The  2.  Theoreme.  The  3. 


uton. 


<>  T  '  «• 


If  there  he  numbers  incontinuall proportion  how  many foeuer ,and  if  they 
be  the  lelt  of  all  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the  fame proportion  loith  the: 
their  extremes jhall  he  prime  the  one  to  the  other. 


extremes  A  and  D  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  T ake{by  the  2  .of the  eight, or 
[by  the  3$ .  of  the feuenth)  the  twoleajl  numbers  that  are  in  the  fame  proportion 
that  A,B,C,  D ,  arc^and  let  the  fame  be  the  numbers  E,F. And  after  that  take  thre  numbers 


A  r  •  '  %  *w  0^  c  f 

Si.  •  •••#(••  •  *  *  •  *  •  •  *  *  •  •  •  •  -4  •  «  «  *  • 

. 


B 


df-i 

Ki 

•  \  Vs 

*  •«* 

w 

' 

* 

^  *  v 


G  *  .  .  ■  *  .......... 

•  '  _  '  '  ’  *  ’  ■ 

JJ  .................  ..  ^  ......  .  .  t.  ,  »  *  • 

•:  i  Vv  4.-  «  W4  H  v  iX.iV  »*J  :  i  . 


E  . . » 


E  » * *• 

■ 


!  .  1  I 

ti  »»*».»«»•«••  , 

*  ‘'.i.  > 

K  •••**»••••••««.* 


"■i\  i,! 

-j  1 


j 

As  %  »  •  •«*••••«.••  »  ■  •  »••••«•  •  § 

M  ....... . . . 

20.,,.... . . 

0 . 


G0,K,  andfo  alvoayes  forward  on  more  ( by  the  former  propofition )  vntill  .the  multitude 
taken  be  equall  to  the  multitude  of  the  numbers geuen  A,  B,C,D .  And  let  th of e  numbers 
be  L,M,N,o.  Wherfore(by  the2<y.of  the  feuenth)  their  extremes  L,0 ,  are  prime  the  one 
to  the  other. For forafmnch  as  E  and  F  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other, and  eche  of them  muL 
'  -  Xx.  ij.  tiplieng 


Tbit  prope/t* 
turn  it  the  <r& 
uerfeoftbt 
firft.  ' 


Vemonttr& 

toon* 


tiplieng  him  fife  produced  G  and  lf,dr  likewif  ech  of theft  G  &  K  multiplitng  him felf pro¬ 
duced  L  dr  O,therfofe(by  the  29  of the ftuenth )G&  K  are prime  the  one  to  the  other, &  ft 
likemfe  are  L  undo  prime  the  one  to  the  other. And forafmuch  at  A,B,C,D,  are  the  leaf  of 


d/l .  ........  ««•' 

B  . . . 

C . . . . 

V . 


v  <  * 


E  ... 
F  .... 


G 

n 

t 


L  .. 
M  .. 

0.9 


■ 

all  numbers  that  haue  the  fame  proportion  with  them,andlikewife  L,  M,N,  0,are  the  leaB 
of  all  numbers  that  are  in  the  fame  proportion  that  A,B,C,D,are,and  the  multitude  of theft 
numbers  A,B,C,D,  is  equal!  to  the  multitude  of theft L,M,N,0  .'therfore  euery  one  of  theft 
A,B,C,D,  is  equall  vnte  euery  one  of  theft  L,M,N,0 .  Wherefore  A  is  equall  vnto  L ,  and 
D  is- equall  vritoO.  And forafmuch  as  L  and  O  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other ,  and  L  is  e- 
quall  'vnto  A, and  0  is  equall  vnto  D  :  therfore  Aandt>  an  prime  the  one  to  the  other: 
1  f  ''as  required  to  be  preued. 


tern 


The  2.  Probkme.  The4*PropofitiQn*  .. 

(proportions  in  the  lea  ft  numbers  how  manyfoeuer  beyng  geuen3  to  finds 
out  the  le&T numbers  in  continuall proportion  in  the  faid proportions geue. 


Vppofe  that  the  proportions  in  the  leaB  numbers geuen, be  AtoB,  C  to  I),  and 
E  to  F .  It  is  required  tofnde  out  the  leaB  numbers  in  continuall proportion,  in 
the fame  proportion  that  A  is  to  B,and  that  C  is  to  D,and  that  E  is  to  F.  T ake 
the  leaB  number  whom  B  and  C  do  meaftre, and  let  the  fame  be  G.  i^And  how 
often  B  meafureth  G,ft  many  times  let  A  meaftre  H.  And  how  ofte  C  meafureth  G,fo  many 
Two  eafea  in  times  let  1)  meaftre  K.  ‘Flow  E  either  meafureth  K  or  meafureth  it  not. Fit B  let  if  meaftre 
this  prepojitto.  it.  And  how  often  E  meafureth  Kfo  many  times  let  F  meaftre  L.  And  forafmuch  as  how 
Tbef.rB  cafe «  often  A  meafureth  H,fo  many  times  doth  B  meaftre  G ;  therfore  by  the  17.  oftheftuenth, 
as  A  is  to  Bft  is  H  to  G.And  by  the  fame  redfo  as  C  is  to  D  j Jo  is  G  to  K,  andmOreouet  as  E 
is  to  F  fo  is  K  to  L.  Wherfcre  theft  numbers  H,G,K,L,  are  in  continuall  proportion ,  and 
in  the  fame  proportion  that  A  is  to  B,  and  that  C  is  to  D,and moreoutr  thdt  E  is  to  F.  I 
'Vemonfira-  ftd  aft  dre  w  thofe  proportions. F  or  ifff ,  G,  K,  L,  be  no  t  the  leaf  nunfi? 

tion  leading  to  bets  in  continuall proportion, and  tn  the  fame  proportions  that  A  is  to  B,  and  C  toD ,  and 
an  abftrdiue .  E  to  F,then  are  there  ftme  numbers  lejfe  then  H,  G,K,L,  in  the  fame  proportions  that  A 
istoBandGtoD,andEtoFs  ktthoft  numbers  be  N,X,MjO  .  And forafmuch  as  A  is  t$ 


FoLi&i* 


eL 

3,  fo  is  2V  to  X\ :  andAyadd  B  are the  lejlfbut  the  UaftjwcJfihri. '  'M 
thofe  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the  fame  ‘proportion  with  them  B 

antecede 
the  .21. 


V.t'J 


£  . 

kfure  X.Put  the  l.P/i  Ft  nii/mhpr  Sviinwp  V.  "«a/}  f?  ’  '  '  £ 

V*-,  i  \  V  ■  *••  'x  ,  '  f  .’"V  ^ 

w  &  >,T»  4  ■*>.  ,  '  - 

which  is  imp  oft  hie .  Wherfore  there fall  not  beany  lejfe  numbers  H  ... 

thenH,G,K,L,  mcontinuall proportion,  'arid  in  the  fadpe  pro-  G 
portions  that  A  is  to  B,andC  to  D  And  £  to  F.  '  '  f  f\\  'jfrffff.'  ' 

But  now fuppdfe  that  'E  meafure  noYK'.Andhy  the  jfiofthe  L  .  . .  fff 

feuenth,take  the  least  number  whome  E  and  K  meafure,  and  let 
the ft ante  be  CM.  And  how  often  K  meafureth  CM,  fo  often  let  2*0 ... 
either  of  thefe  G  and  H  meafure  either  of  theft  Fhjind  X ,  X  ......  ,  ’ 

And  how  often  E  meafureth  Mfo  often  let  F  meafure  0  -  And  M  .......... 

forafmuch  as  how  often  G  meafureth  N,fo  often  doth  H  meafure  0 . . 

Xf her  fore  as  It  is  to  G,fo  is  X  to  Ef  But  as  His  to  G,fo  is.  A  to  £ 

Wherfore  as  eM  is  to  Bfo  is  X  to  EC  And  by  the  fame  reafon  aid  is  to  DfoisNJoM.  A- 
gaine, forafmuch  as  how  often  E  meafureth' Mfo  often  F meafureth  0,therforeasFisto  F 
fo  isjCMJoQ .  Wherfore  X,l%MrQ,  are  in  continiiall proportion, And  in  the fmeproporti 
dnflhatldjf  is  io  B, add  ft  op, and  E  to  F.  I  fay  alfo  that 
theydr&htl£aPHdifppopdrtion.Fcr'ifX,Fr,M,0,be  A... 

Arditfk^ffmcdntfifdb'ipydpdrfionyandinthefamepro^ ' '  B  .... 

ppriioyrsthat  Ais  to  B,dnd  C  top  and  Eto  F,  then  fall 

thfe  be f/pinUmferilpfthen  X,N,M,0 ,  in  continual!  C  ...  ? 

pr  (forth fandinthefiMe proportions  that  A  is to  B,  and 

C  top \and  k  fo  F  .  Lct  ifie  fame  be  the  numbers  P,  R,  S, 

ky  Qinffor  that  as  P  is  toRfo  is  A  to  B,  a/idp-f  and  B  '£'  .... 

are, the  leaf fut the  kail  numbers  meafure  thofe  numbers  F  ..... 

tBit  haue  one  &thefameprdportio  with  them  equally, the  - 
greater  the  greater, and  the  lefe  the  lefe, that  is, the  antece-  H  .  .  . 

dent  the  antecedent, and  the  confequent  the  confequent  by  G  ... 
the  2 1.  of the feuenthjherforeB  meafureth R.  And  by  the  K  ....... 

fame  reafon  alfo  C  meafureth  R.  Wherefore  B  and  C  mea- 

f urc  R.yff^rfoje  the  leaf  pumher whom  BmdC meafure  X  _ 

lM£l!£m^i£reR  (by  thep:  ofihefeuenth),Buttbeleft  '&£. .. ..... 

number  whom  B  and  C  meafure  is  G, wherfore  G  meafureth  M  ............ 

R.  And  as  &  is  to  Rfo  is  K  to  S.  Wherfore  K meafureth  S.  0  . 

AndE  alfo  meafureth  S .  Wherefore  E and ’K '  meafure  S.  '  (1 

Wherfore. the  leaf  number  whom  E  and  K  meafure,  fall  P  .... 

( by  the felfe  fame)  meafure.  S .  But  the  led  number  whom  .  R  ...... 

Eahd.K  meafure  is.  CEL. Wherefore  CMmeafureth  S  the  S  ..... _ _ 

greater  the  lefe ,which  is  mpofible.. Wherfore  there  are  no  T  k  . . 

numbers  lefe  then  X,N,M,o,in  continual l proportion ,  & 

in  the  Jams proportions  that  A  is  to  B, and  C  to  F,and  E  to  F  .Wherfore  X,N,M,0,  are  the 
leaf  numbers  in  con  tinuallpr  oporti  on, and  in  the  fame  proportions  that  A  is  to  B,  andC  to 
H  ,  and  E  to  F  .•  which  wasreepuired to  £e  done. 

Xx,  if  The 


‘Iheftamd 
cafe * 

Demonflra* 

tion» 


j The  eightbeHoofy 

f  The  j.Theoreme. 


This  propor¬ 
tion  in  num¬ 
bers  anf we¬ 
re  th  to  the 
of  the  fixtb 
touching  par  si 
lelogrammes, 

Cenjlru&ion 

Demortflra- 

Sion* 


s.  Tropofition. 


Tlayne  or fufierf doll  numbers  are  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other 
Iphich  is  compofed  of the fides. 

Vppofe.  that  A  and  B  be  playne  or  fuperjictall  numbers ,  and  let  the  fides  of 
A  be  the  numbers  C  and  D ,  and  let  the  jides  of  B,  be  the  numbers  E  and 
F .  Then  I  fay  that  A  is  to  B  in  that  proportion  that  is  compofed  of the  fries* 


A 

L 

B 

C  . 
D  . 
E  . 
F 

G 

H 

K 


■/»  *  •  v  • . 


Take  ( by  the  fourth  of  the 
eight )  the  leaf  nusnbers  in 
continuall  proportion ,  and 
in  the  fame  proportions  that 
C  is  to  E, and  D  to  F.  And 
let  the  fame  be  the  numbers 
G,  H,  K.-  fo  that  as  C  is  to 
E  fo  letG  betoH,&  asD 
is  toE ,  fo  let  H  be  to  K. 

Wherefore  thofe  numbers. 

G,  H,K  Jiaue  the  proporti¬ 
ons  of  the fdes:  but  the  pro¬ 
portion  ofGtoK.  is  con  pa¬ 
yed  oft  hat  which  G  hath  to  H  and  of that  which  H  hath  to  K :  wherefore  G  is  vnto  K  in 
that  proportion  which  is  compofed  of the jides  Ttdow  I fay  that  as  AistoB  fo  is  G  to  K.For 
let  D  multiplying  E  produce  L .  And forafmuch  as  D  multiplying  C  produced  A, and  mul¬ 
tiplying  E  produced  L  .-therefore ( by  the  \y.ofthejeuenth)as  C  is  to  Efo  is  A  to  L .  But  as 
C  is  to  Efo.is  G  to  H,  wherefore  asG  is  to  H  fo  is  A  to  h .  ^Agayne forafmuch  as  E  mul¬ 
tiplying  D  produced  L  multiplying  V  produced  B  therefore  (by  the  17. of 'the feuenth )a$ 

D  is  to  F  fo  is  L  to  B. But  as  TD  is  to  Vfo  is  H  to  ^wherefore  as  H  is  to  K,jb  is  L  to  B.And 
it  isproued  that  as  G  isHfois  A  to  L .  Wherefore  of  tqualitie  ( by  the  l^.ofthe  feuenth)  as 
G  is  to  K,jb  is  AtoB.  But  G  is  vnto  K  in  that  proportion  which  is  compofed  of  the fides, 
wherefore  A  is  vnto  B  in  that  proportion  which  is  compofed  of the fides  which  was  required 
iobedemonftrated. 


•An  other  de- 
monflratio  af¬ 
ter  Camp  an  e. 


«j[An  other  demonftration  of  the  fame  after  Campane. 

Suppofe  that  AandBbeplainenurobersTand  let  the  fides  ofAbe  the  numbersCandD  :  and lee 
the  numbers  E  and  F  be  the  fides  of  the  number  B  .  And  let  D  multiplying  E  produce  the  number  G, 

The  I  fay  that  the  proportib  of 

AtoB  iscopofed  ofthepropor  A . . .  C  ... 

tios  of  C  to  E  &  D  to  F  that  is,  G..... . .  D . 

of  the  fides  of  the  fuperficial  nu  B  . . . . . . . . . E  .... 

ber  A  to  the  fides  of  the  fuper-  F  . . 

ficiail  number  B  .For  forafmuch 

as  D  multiplying  E  produced  G,and  multiplying  C  it  produced  A,rherefore  by(the  i7.of  the  feuenth) 
A  is  to  G  as  C  is  to  E  :  agayne  forafmuch  as  E  multiplying  D  produced  G  and  multiplying  F  it  produ¬ 
ced!  B, therefore  by  the  fame  G  is  to  B  as  D  is  to  F.  Wherefore  the  proportions  of  the  {ides  namely ,  of 
C  to  £  and  of  D  to  F  are  one  and  the  fame  with  the  proportions  of  A  to  G  and  G  to  B.But(by  the  fifth 
definition  of  the  fixth  )  the  proportion  of  the  extremes  A  to  B  is  compofed  of  the  proportions  of the 
rneane$,namely3of A  to  G  and  G  to  B,which  areproued  to  be  one  and  the  fame  with  the  proportions 
of  the  fides  C  to  E,and  D  to  F.  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  the  fuperficiall  numbers  A  to  B  is  copofect 
of  th  e  proportions  of  the  fides  C  to  E,and  D  to  F. Wherefore  pla  rne.  &c .  which  was  required  to  be 
proued. 

.  '  fThe 


of  Sticiides  Elemenies . 

f  The  Theorem.  T he 


FqLzoj. 


button. 


If  there  he  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  hoi#  many foetter ,  and  if the 
firfi  meafure  not  the  fecond ?  neither  pall  anyone  of the  other  meafure  any 
one  oft  he  other. 


Vi ' 


F.Ppofe  that  there  he  numbers  how  many  ' footer  m  continuall  proportion,  name¬ 
ly  fiuc,  B ,  €,  D ,  E .  And fuppofe  that  A  meafure  not  B.  T hen  l fay,  that  nei¬ 

ther /hall  any  other  of the  numbers  A, B£,D,E,  meafure  any  one  of  the  other. 
|  T hat  A,B,C,D,E,  do  not  in  continuall  order  meafure  one  the  other, it  is  mani- 
feft  .for  A  meafureth  not  B .  Now  I fay, that  neither  (hall  any  other  of  them  meafure  any  Ci¬ 
ther  of  them.  I  fay  that  A jhall  not  meafure  C.  For  how  many  in  multitude  A,B,C,are,  take 
fo  many  of  the  lefl  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the fame  proportion  with  A,  B,  C  (by  the  3  j. 
of  the feuenih)  and  let  the fame  be  F,G,H .  And forafmuch  as  F,Gfi  are  in  the fdfefame 


A 

B 

C 

D 

E 


Demottftrfr 

tiott. 


F  ... . 
G  ....  1 

a . 


proportion  that  A, B,C, are:  and  the  multitude  ofthefe  numbers  A, B,C, is  equallto  the  mul¬ 
titude  ofthofe  numbers  F,G,H,  therefore  ofequalitie  (by  the  14.  of  the feuenth)  at  A  is  to 
C,fo  is  F  to  H.  And  for  that  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  F  to  G,  but  A  meafureth  not  B,  therefore  nei¬ 
ther  doth  F  meafure  G .  Wherefore  F  is  not  vnitie .  ForifF  were  vnitie ,  it  Jhould  meafure 
any  number .  But  F  and  H  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other  (by  the  3  .of the  eight )  „ Wherefore 
F  meafureth  not  H :& as  F  is  to  H,fois  A  to  C,  wherefore  neither  doth  A  meafure  C. In  like 
fort  may  we proue  that  neither  (hall  any  other  of  the  numbers  A,  B,C,D,E,  meafure  am 
other  of  the  numbers  A,B,C,D,E :  which  was  required  to  be  demonflrated.  * 

f  The  s.  Theorems.  The  7  .Vropofitm. 

If  there  he  numbers  in  continuall proportion  how  many  foetter }  and  if  the 
firft  meafure  the  lafi}  it  Jhall  alfo  meafure  the  fecond. 

mpofi  that  there  be  a  multitude  of  numbers  in  continual pr oportion,mmcli.  A, B, 
I  C,D .  And  let  A  the  firf  meafure  D  the  lajl. 

„  J  T  hen  I fay,  that  A  the fir Ft  meafureth  B  the  A  ... 

fecond  .For  if  A  do  not  meafure  B, neither Jhall  any  0-  B _ 

ther  meafure  any  other  (by  the  7. of  the  eight )  :  which  C  . . . 

( byfuppofiti on)is  not  true.ForAis  fuppofed  to  meafure  X>  . ... . ........... 

T>  .  Njnv  then  A  meafuring  D,  fall  alfo  meafure  B; 
which  was  required  to  beproued. 


Dmonjlr*- 
tion  leading  tt 
an  impofiibi- 
line. 


fThe 


JCxaty. 


*<r  'V 


be  ljQoke  f 

JT  Tfe  4. theorem.  .  77*  $;TrQpofitm, 

IfjbetmneiypJiqt^ers  tbw&if$nuwbersin:0ittfaMJl proportion :  how 
, .  continuall  pro * 

'  portion  betwene  other  numbers  ’tybicb  bdue  the Jelfe fame  proportion * 


fffFppofethatbetwene  the  two  numbers  and  B , do fatlin  continuall property 

™  }n  the  nurnbers-G  and  D  .And as  A  is  to  B, fo  let E  btia  F .  Then  I  fay , that 
how  matiy  numbers  in  continuall  proportion.  dofalJhetWehe  A  and  B,fo  many 
numbers  alfo  in  continuall  proportion  fall  there  fall  betwene  E  and  F.  How 
many.  A$&j,C,D  ,are  ifi  multitude ,  take  (by  the  ff.  of thefedeptb)fo  many  of  the  leaf  num¬ 
bers  that  ham  one  and  the fasne  proportion  with  A,B,C,  D ,  and  let  the  fame  be  G,HfK^L. 
Wherefore  their  extremes  G  and  L  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other  ( by  the  $  .of the  eight)  .And 
fordfrmeb  as  A  and  C, and  Li  and  B,are  in  the  fdfe  fame proportion  that  G  &  H,dndFand 
L  are,  and  the  multitude  ofthefe  numbers  A,C,  D,B,is  equalltothe  multitude  of  thefe 
numbers  G,  H,  K}  L  therefore  of  equalitie  ( by  the  14.  of  thefeuenth )  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is 
A  ...  ' 


£> 

B 


•  **%*•»«  >t  I  •  •  « 


G 

B 

K 


L  . . 

*■-  -  j  ,  V«^£  \  •  *  ■  f  ,  m  • 

.  2  v_  ■ 

-  -  ^  #  *  0 

c.  P  '  S  ■*  V..  . 

■tL  N  9  JO  •  w  •  *-•*•••  *'  *  • 


KV 


,  i  W  '•>  ,  ■>  _  -  -  V.  *  I  1  .  • 

C  to  L .  But  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  E  to  j V  <  Wherefore  as  G  is  to  L,fo  is  E  to  F .  But  G  and L  art- 
prime  the  one  ta  the  other :  yea  they  are  prime  and  the  leaB .  But  the  leap  numbers  meafure 
thofe  numbers  that  haue  the fame  proportion  with  them  equally, the  greater  the  greater ,  and 
the  lefethelefe  (by  the  21. of  thefeuenth)  that  is,  the  antecedent ;ihe antecedent,^  the  con- 
fequent,  the  confequent .  Wherefore  how  many  times  G  meafureth  E,fo  many  times  L  mea - 
fureth  F .  Bow  often  G  meafureth  E,fo  often  let  B  meafure  M,and  K  meafure  20  Where¬ 
fore  thefe  numbers  G,B,K,L,  equally  meafure  thefe  numbers  E,M,N,F .  Wherefore  (by 
the  i8.ofthefeueth)thefe  nubers  G ,H ,K ,L,are  in  the felfe fameproportion  that  E,M,N,F, 
are .  But  G,H,K,L,  are  in  the  felfe  fame  proportion  that  A,  C,  D,B,  are :  wherefore  thofe 
numbers  A,  C,  B ,B,are  in  the  felfe fame  proportion  that  E,M,N,F , are .  But  A, C,D,B, are 
in  continuall  proportion  r  wherefore  alfo  E,M,N,F,areincont:imallproportion.Wherfore 
how  many  numbers  in  continuall proportion  fall  betwene  A  and  B  ,fo  many  alfo  in  continu¬ 
all proportion fall  there  betwene  E  and  F :  which  was  required  to  be  demonftrated. 


?£.  A  Corollary  added  by  Flufates. 


B eft vme  tts>o  numberswhofc proportion  it fuperparticuUryor  fuperbipartient ,  there faHeth  *»  meant proportion 

mil.  For  the  kali  numbers  of  that  proporuoa  differ  the  one  from  the  other  ondy  by  value  or  by  two. 

JGut  - 

-r 


o£Gucli$ki3eiMh^^?i£  FoLio69 

But  if  betwene  the  greater  numbers  of  that  proportion  there  fhould  fail  i  means  pfoportiouaiij  then 
{ho  uld  there  fall  alfo  a  meane  proportional!  betwene  the  leal!  numbers  which  haue  the  fame  proporti¬ 
on  by -this -Propofition.,  But  betwene  numbers  differing  onely  by  vnitie  or  by  two,  there  falleth  no 
meane  proportional ,  . 


y  The  7.  Theorem.  The  9.  Propofition. 

•V\j  ,  -•’.-r  *  V"  f '* .  - 1  '  ’  r:  c  \  «•  \  T^{V/y  ‘  V  \\ •, ^ ■  /.;V  •  T :  .  y 

If  two  wmhrs  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other }<md  if betwene  them Jhall  fall 
numbers  in  continudll proportion how  many  numbers  in  continuall pro* 
portion  fall  betwene  them  Romany  alfo  Jhall  fall  in  continudll  proportion 
betwene  either  of  thofe  numbers  and  initie. 

•  . 

N  '■  *-•  '  w'  -'tv, -  .  ....  -  -  •  •  -  •  v •  •  -*  •••  -  •  •  . . 


i  Vppofe  that  there  be  two  numbers  prime  the  one  to  the  other  A  and  B  :  and  let 
there  fall  betwene  them  in  continuall proportion  thefe  numbers  C  and  D  :  and 


let  E  be  vnitie .  T hen  t  fay,  that  how  many  numbers  in  continuall  proportion 
_____  I  fall  betwene  A  and  Bfo  many  alfo  fall fall  in  continuall  proportion  betwene  A 
and  vnitie  E  :  and  likewife  betwene B  and  vnitie  E.  Take  ( by  the  3$,  of the feuenih)the  two 
leaf  numbers  that  are  in  the fame  proportion  that  A,  C,D,B,are:  and  let  the fame  be  F  and 
G;ancl  then  take  three  of  the  leaf  nubersthat  are  in  the  fame  proportion  that  A,C,D,B,are: 
and  let  the fame  be  B,K,L  :  and fo  alwaies  in  order  one  more,  vntill  the  multitude  of  them 
be  equall  to  the  multitude  of  thefe  numbers  A,C,D,B :  and  thofe  being  fo  taken  let  them  be 
M,N,X,0  .  dfow  it  is  manifest,  that  F  multiplying  him  felfe  produced  B, and  multiplying 
H produced  M .  And  G  multiplying  him felfe  produced  L,  andmultiplying  L  produced  O. 
And forafmuch  as  M^N,  X,  0,are(  by  fuppoftion)the  leaf  of  all  numbers  that  haue  the fame 
proportion  with  G,F :  and  A,C,D,B,  are  (by  thefrf  of  the  eight)  the  leaf  of  all  numbers 
that  haue  the  fame proportion  with  G,F :  and  the  multitude  of  thefe  numbers  M,N,X,0, 
is  equall  to  the  multitude  of  thefe  numbers  A,Cf->yB :  therefore  euery one  of thefe  numbers 
M,N,X,0,  is  equall  to  euery  one  of  thefe  numbers  A,C,D,B.  Wherefore  M  is  equall  vnt& 


M  27 

A  27 

E  vnitie 

F  ... 

k 

Kit 

C  36 

G  .... 

L  . . . . 

X 

D  48 

0  64 

B  64. 

A,  and  0  is  equall  vnto  B.  And  forafmuch  as  F  multiplying  him  felfe  produced  ti:  therfore 
F  meafureth  H  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  F :  and  vnitie  E  meafureth  F  by  thofe  vnities 
which  are  in  F :  wherfore(by  the  i$.ofthefcuenth)  vnitie  E,fo  many  times  meafureth  the 
number  F,as  F  meafureth  H :  wherefore  as  vnitie  E  is  to  the  number  F,fo  is  F  to  H.Againe . 
forafmuch  as  F  multiplying  B produced  M,  therfore  B  meafureth  M  by  thofe  vnities  which 
are  in  F .  And  vnitie  E  meafureth  F  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  F :  wherefore  (by  the  felf 
fame)  vnitie  F  fo  many  times  meafureth  F,as  H  meafureth  M .  Wherefore  as  vnitie  F  is  to 
the  number  F,  Jo  is  H  to  t M.  But  itisproucd,that  as  vnitie  E  is  to  the  number  F,fo  is  F  to 
H :  wherefore  as  vnitie  F  is  to  the  number  F,  fo  is  F  to  H,  and  H  to  CM .  But  tM  is  equall 
vnto  A  •  wherefore  as  vnitie  E  is  to  the  number  F,fo  is  F  to  B, (Jr  B  to  A.  And  by  the  fame 
reafon  as  vnitie  E  is  to  the  number  G,fo  is  G  to  L  and  LtoB .  Wherefore  how  many  num¬ 
bers falhn  continuall  proportion  betwene  A  and  B  :  fo  many  numbers  alfo  in  continuall  pro¬ 
portion  fall  there  betwene  vnitie  Eand  the  number  Ay  and  likewife  betwene  vnitie  E 

and 


Conttruftiout 


Demnttnb 

tim 


This  propor¬ 
tion  is  the  coa 
utr/cofthc 
former . 


tonttruttion* 

DmonJIra - 
tion * 


md  the  number  B:  which  ms  required  to  be  demonf rated . 


f  'The  8.  Theoreme.  The  io.  Tropofoion. 

Ifbenvene  two  numbers  and  Vnitie  fall  numbers  in  continuall proportion: 
hoy  many  numbers  in  continuall proportion  fal  betyene  either  of  them  o* 
1 mitiejh  many  alfo  Jhail  there  fall  in  continuall  proportion  betwene  them . 


V Ppofe  that  betwene  the  two  numbers  A,  and  vnitie  C,  do  fall  thefe  numbers  in 
continuall  proportion  T>,E,andV,G.ThenJ fay  that  how  many  numbers  in  con - 
timiall proportion  there  are  betwene  either  of  thefe  A,  B,  and  vnitie  C ,  fo  many 


J S  •  •  •  ¥■ 

A  27 

€  vnitie 

D  ... 

JPJ  •  •  •  9  fj,**  *;»  i  t  ■ 

K  36 

JP  , 

C . 

L  48 

&  r  .-  .Vv.  . •  * 

B  6  Of 

numbers  alfo  in  continuall  proportion  fall  there  fall  betwene  A  and  B .  Let  D  multiply¬ 
ing  F  produce  H  ,and  let  D  multiplying  H  produce  K,  and  like  wife  let  F  multiplying  H 
produce  L.i^lnd for  that  byfuppoftion  as  vnitie  C  is  to  the  number  D  fo  is  D  to  ^there¬ 
fore  bow  many  times  vnitie  C  meafureth  the  number  XDfo  many  times  doth  D  mcafure  E. 
But  vnitie  C  meafureth  D  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  D  ••  wherefore  D  meafureth  E  by 
thofe  vnities  which  are  in  D  .Wherefore  D  multiplying  himfelfe  produceth  E .  Againe  for 
that  as  vnitie  Q  is  to  the  number  Y>fo  is  E  to  A,  therefore  how  many  times  vnitie  C  mea¬ 
fureth  the  number  Dfo  many  times  E  meafureth  A.  Bui  vnitie  C  meafureth  D,  by  thofe 
vnities  winch  are  in  D*  therefore  E  meafureth  A  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  D  .  Where¬ 
fore  D  multilying  E  produced  A .  And  by  the fame  reafon  F  multiplying  himfelfe  produced 
G,and  multiplying  G  produced  B .  ^And forafmuch  as  D  multiplying  himfelfe  produced 
E,and  multiplying  F  produced  H,  therefore  (by  the  17.  of the feuenth  )asDis  to  F  fo  is  E  to 
FI  .And  by  the fame  reafon  as  D  is  to  F  fo  is  H^G.  Wherefore  as  E  is  to  H  ,foisH  to  G. 
Agayne forafmuch  as  D  multiplying^ produced  A,and  multiplying  VL  produced  K,  there¬ 
fore^  the  1 7.0ft he  feueth)as  E  is  to  H ,fo  is  A  to  K  .  But  as  E  is  to  H,fo  is  D  to  E, there¬ 
fore  asD  is  toV7fois  AtoK  .  Againe  forafmuch  as  D  multiplying  H  produced  K,and  F 
multiplyingH  produced  L,  therefore  (by  the  17.  of  the  feuenth  )  asDistoE  ,foisK  to  L. 
But  as  D  is  to  Efo  is  AtoK,  wherfore  as  A  is  to  K,fo  isKtoL.  Againe forafmuch  asF 
multiplying  H  produced  L  and  multiplying  G  produced^,  therefore  (by  the  17.  of  the 
feuenth)  as  H  is  to  Gfo  is  L  to  B.But  as  H  is  to  Gfp  is  D  to  F ,  wherefore  as  D  is  toEfo  is 
L  to  B .  And  it  is  proued  that  as  D  is  to  F  fo  is  A  to  K ,and  KtoL,  and  L  to  B. Wherfore 
the  numbers  A,K,L,B^r<?  continuall  proportion .  Wherefore  how  many  numbers  in  conti¬ 
nuall  proportion fall  betwene  either  of  thefe  numbers  A,B  ,dr  vnitie  C  fo  many  alfo  in  con¬ 
tinuall proportion fall  there  betwene  the  numbers  A and  B :  which  was  required  to  be  proued* 

V  s  !  ^ 

M  •  *  '  1  *.  "  ’  .  i  '•  .  ■  -  .  . 

%  The  9.  T heoreme.  The  is.  Tropojifm. 

Betwene  two fquare.  numbers  there  is  one  meane proportional  number.  And 


of Mkmmks.  Fol  icy* 

but  *tohibh the  Jtde, 

)  Fvp[e  that  there  betwo  fquare  numbers  A  and  B,  and  left  be fide  of  A  beC,  & 
!  lit  the  fide  ofB  be  Jj-.Tbeh  I  fay  that  betweneihefe fquare  numbers  A  and  B, 


£  . 
I)  .  .  .  . 
B  . 


I  r  <  s  *  I  f  "  ”  ...  -  JJJ  - -  "  —  / 

r\there  is  one  meane  proportioned  number,  and  alfo  that  A  is  vnto  B  in  double 

_  {proportion  of  that 'which  Css  to  D  .Let  fj  multiplieng  D  produce  E.  Andforaf- 

much  as  A  is  a  fquare  rawer -/fi  the fde.  thereof  is  C,,  ,  ,  .  .  f, , . . . . 

.therfore  C  multiplieng  himfelfe  produced  4-  And  by  . , 
the fame  reafonD ,  multiplieng  him f elf e  produced  . 

T(ow forafnuch  as  C  multi pheng  C  produced  A,  and 
multiplieng  D  produced  E,therfore  {by  the  ij.ofthe 
feuenth )  as  C  is  to  Dfo  is  A  to  E.  Again  e forafnuch 
as  C  multiplieng  D  produced  E,  and  D  multiplieng  himfelfe produced  B,  therefore  thefe 
two  numbers  C  and  D  multiplieng  one  number  yiamely  ,f>  produce  E  and  B.W  her  fore  {by 
the  1 8 .  of  the  feuenth )  as  C  is  to  D  fo  is  E  to  B.  But  as  C  is  to  D  ,fo  is  A  to  E.  Wb  erefore  as 
A  is  to  Efo  is  E  to  B.  Wherefore  betwene  thefe  fquare  numbers  A  and  B,  there  is  one  meane 
proportionallnumber , namely  ,E .  2{oiv  alfo  I  fay  that  A  is  vnto  B  in  double  proportion  of 
that  which  C.is  to  D .  F orforafmuch  as  there  are  three  numbers  in  continuall proportion,  A, 
E,B,  t before  {by  the  so.  definition  of t  he ft ft)  A  is  vnto  B  in  double  preportio  of  that  which 
A  is  to  E.  But  as  A  is  to  E,fo  is  CtoD  .Wherefore  A  is  vnto  B  in  double  proportion  of  that 
which  the fide  Cis  vnto  the fde  D  :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


ff  The  jo.  Theorems. 


The  i2.  Trofofition. 


{ 'Betwene  two  cube  numbers  there  are  two  meane  proportional!  numbers* 
jdnd  the  one  cube  is  to  the  other  cube  in  treble  proportion  of that  Ichich  the 
Jideof the  one  is  to  the  fide  of  the  other. 

Vppofe  that  there  he  two  cube  numbers  A  and  B,  and  let  the fide  of Abe  C,  and  let 
the fide  ofB  be  D. Then  I fay  that  betwene  thofe  cube  numbers  A  and  B,  there  are 
two  meane  proportional!  numbers, and  that  A  is  vnto  B  in  treble  proportion  oftha  t 
which  C  is  to  D.Let  C  multiplieng  himfelfe  produce  E^and  multiplieng  D  let  it  produce  F, 
and  let  D  multiplieng  himfelfe produce  G.  And  let  G  multiplieng  F  produce  H,  and  let  JO 

^ . — . 

:  u . . . . 

K  . . . . . ....... . 


B 


t . .  C  • « • 
D 

-LA  •  »  *  • 


E 

F 


*  -  •  ■-»  . •  -  V.  v.  •,  .  ,  ...  .  .  •  I  '  _  '  ‘  ■  .. 

multiplieng  F produce  K.And forqfmuch  as  A  is  q  cube,  number, and  the  fde  therofis  C,& 
G  multiplieng  himfelfe produceth  E  jherfore  C  multiplieng  E produceth  A.  And by  the  fame 

reafm 


The  fir (l  pan 
of  this  pro; o- 
ftion  demon- 
plated. 


The  feesrd 
pan  demon- 
prated. 


Cotiftruftm* 


The  fir f  part 
of  .his  propo¬ 
sition  demon- 
Prated? 


’Thefecotid 
pan  demon • 
prated* 


reafon.  for  that  D  multiplieng  himfdfe produced  Gather  fore  D  multiplieng  6  produceth  B, 
And for afmuch  as  C  mnitipliengC  and  D  produced E  and  F :  th erf  ore  by  the  17. of  the f ft „ 
as  C is  to  Dfo  is  E  to  F.And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo,as  C  is  to  Dfo  is  F  to  G.  Againe  for  a f 
muchas  C  multiplieng  E  and  F  produced  A  and  Bjherfore  as  E  is  to  Ffo  is  A  to  B. But  as 
E  is to  F  fo  is  C  to  D .  Wh  erf  ore  as  C  is  to  JD.fo  is  A  to  B.  Againe for  afmuch  as  eche  of thefe 

, \  >  *  .  ■  '  •  1  *  ■  f  ,*  V  61 

\  eg  .  •  •  >/*.  •  .  .  r  v  ,  •«  ,  J 

A _ _ 

B . . . . . . 

*" . . . .  r 

B  . . . . . . . .  ’ 

(T  *  -  k  1 

c ... 

2) .... 

■  \  >.  '  •  ■  a  ■■■  ■ 

p  ■■  7.  -  .  !■  v 

J ~j  ••••«  »  *  *  » 

F  Tv  ■'  *  .  *i  . . 

4  »«*•»»  *  i  •  #  .  ► 

G . . 

•  -  '  .-v-  .  'r<  ■  '.  ,,  ,  7  ,•  ,  _  .  .  /  ,  , 

numbers  C  and  D  multiplieng  F  produced  B  and  it,  therfore  (by  the  18  .of  the  feuenth )  as 
C  is  to  Dfo  is  H  to  Is.  Againe for  afmuch  as  D  multiplieng  F  and  G  produced  Kef  B  :  ther¬ 
fore  ( by  the  in. of  the  feuenth)  asF  is  to  Gfo  is  K  to  B.  But  as  F  is  to  Gfo  is  C  to  D,  where¬ 
fore  as  C  is  to  D  fo  is  K  to  B.  And  it  is  prousd  that  as  C  is  to  D  fo  is  A  to  B, and  B  to  K,  and 
K  to  B  :  wherfore  betwene  thefe  cube  numbers  <^A and B,  there  are  twomeane proportionall 
numbers  ghat  is, II  and  K. 

jgow  alfo  I  fay, that  A  is  vnto  B  in  treble  proportion  of  that  which  C  is  to  D.  For  foraf- 
'much  as  there  are foure  numbers  proportionall  A,H,K,B,  therfore  (by  the  10.  defnition  of 
thefft )  A  is  vnto  B  in  treble  proportion  of that  which  A  is  vnto  B. But  as  A  is  vnto  Bfo  is 
C  to  I), wh  erf  ore  oi  is  vnto  B  in  treble  proportion  of  that  which  C  is  to  D  ;  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be proued. 

fThe  1 1. 'Theorems.  The  iy.Tropofition. 

if  there  fe  numbers  if  continual!  proportion  ho~%>  many fo  euer,and  ech 
multiplying  himfelfe  produce  certqyne  numbers,  the  numbers  of them  pro* 
duced  fhallbe proportinall .  jind  if  thofe  numbers geuen  at  the  beginning 
multiplying  the  numbers  produced  produce  other  number sf hey  alfo fhalbe 

. .  pYoporfmalhand fof?a}litbe  continuinginfjmtely. 


jj  43&‘  the  nubcrs  D,E,F,  &  multiplying  the  nuhers  D,E,F,  let  the  bring  forth  the  tim¬ 
bers  G,Yi,¥L.The  1  fay  that!)  ,E,l\arc  in  cotinuallproportio,  and  alfo  that  G,H,K, are  in 
C  ..  cotinuallproportio. For  it  is  manifefi  that  the  nubers’D(E,Y,  are J quare  numbers ,  f  that 

the  n iibers  G,H.,YL,are  cube  nubers.  Let  A  multiplying  B produce  L. And  let  A  f  B  mul- 
. ... 7 . .  .  tiplyingh  produce  M  and  N  .And  againe  let  B  multiplying  C  produce  X :  and  let  B  and  C 

'Bmonttra-  multiplying  X  produce  0  andV .  No.w  by  the  difcourfe  of  the  propofiti on  going  beforewc 
tkh.  ’  v  ■  May  ■ 


. 


ofSuclides  Elements  % 


FoLioSt 


A  si 

S  4 

X>  4 

L  8 

E  16 

X  p 

F  6\ 

G  8 

M  16 
N  p 

H  64 

O  128 
P  256 

K  ji* 

c  8 


mayproue  thatT),  L,  E,  and alfo  G,  M* 

N,H  ,are  in  continuall proportion  and  in 
the  fame  proportion  that  A  isto~£>  ■  and 
likewife  tbat}i,'X.,V  ,and  alfo  ¥1,0  ,P  ,K, 
are  in  continuall  proportion  and  m  the 
fame  proportion  that  B  is  to  C .  But  as  A 
is  to  Bfo  is  BtoC.  Wherefore  D,  L,  E, 
are  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion  mth 
•E,X  ,¥  -and  moreouer  G,M,N  >H,are  in 
one  and  the  fame  proportion  with  H  ,  O, 

¥,K,:and  the  multitude  of  the fe  numbers 
D,L,E  ,is  e quail  to  the  multitude  ofthefe 
numbers  E,X,  F  l,  and  liketvife  the  multi - 
tude  of  thefe  numbers  G,  M,  N,  H,  ise- 
q stall  to  the  multitude  of  thefe  numbers 
H,0  ,P  ,K,- wherefore  of  equality  ( by  the  iq.ofthe feuenth)as  D  is  to  E,fo  is  E  to  V,  And  as 
G  is  to  H  fo  is  H  to  Iv  .-which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


ffT'he  12.  Theoreme. 


The  14.  Trofofition. 


If  a  fquare  number  meafure  a fquare  number 3  the fide  alfo  of  the  one jhaU 
me  afire  the fide  of the  other .  find  if the fide  of the  one  meafure  the fide  of 
the  other 3  the  fquare  number  alfo Jhall  meafure  the  fquare  number. 

Fppofe  that  there  be  two  fquare  numbers  A  and  B,  and  let  the fides  of  them  be 
C  and  D  •  and  let  A  meafure  B .  Wherefore  C  alfo  jhall  meafure  D.  Let  C  mul¬ 
tiplying  D produce  E .  Wherefore  ( by  the  17. and  18. of  the  feuenth,  and  13. of 
the  ei fit)  thofe  numbers  A 5  E,B,  are  in  continuall  proportion,  and  are  in  the 
fame  proportion  thatC  is  to  D  .  And forafmuchas  A,E,B,arein  continuall  proportioned 
Ameafureth  B,  therefore  ( by  the  7. of  the  eight )  Ameafureth  E.  But  as  A  is  to  E,fo  is  C  to 
D:  wherefore  C  meafureth  D . 

A . . . . 

E . 

B . . . . . . . 


C  .... 
D  .... 


Butnowfuppofe  that  the  fide  C  do  meafure  the  fide  Ts: Then  I fay, that  the fquare  number 
A  alfo  meafureth  the  fquare  number  B .  For  the fame  order  of  con  fruition  remayning,we 
may  in  like fort  proue,  that  the  numbers  A,E,B,are  in  continuall ' proportion  in  the  fame 
proportion,  that  C  is  to  T> .  And  for  that  as  C  is  to  D  ,fo  is  A  to  E,  but  C  meafureth  D :  there¬ 
fore  A  meafureth  E :  and  l. A,E,B,are  in  contimallproportion:  wherefore  A  meafureth  B. 
If  therefore  a  fquare  number  meafure  a  fquare  number, the fide  alfo  of the  one  jhall  meafure 
the  fide  of  the  other.  And  if  the fide  of  the  one  meafure  the fide  of  the  other,  the fquare  num¬ 
ber  alfo  jhall  meafure  the  fquare  number :  which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated . 


yf  The  13.  Theoreme. 


ve  is. 


<o  niton. 


Ij  a  cube  number  meafure  a  cube  number  3  the  fide  alfo  of  the  one  fba  ll  meet * 

Tyy,  fire 


The  fir  ft  pari 
of  this  propo« 
fiiion , 


The  feiond 
part  is  t  he 
conuerte  ofths 


The  eight  he  *Boo/{e 

fare  the  fade  of the  other .  And  if the  fide  of the  one  meafare  the fide  of the 
other  j  the  cube  number  alfo  jhall  meafare  the  cube  number. 


Fppofe  that  the  cube  number  A  do  meafure  the  cube  number  B,  and  let  the  fide 
of  A  be  C,  and  the  fide  of B  be  D.T  hen  I fay,  that  C  meafureth  D  .  Let  C  mul- 
tiplying  him  felfe  produce  E,&  multiplying  D  let  it  produce  F.And  let  D  muU 

_ tiplying  him  felfe  produce  G.  And  moreouer  let  C  and  D  multiplying  F  produce 

Tke  fir  ft  part  }i  and  I(.  1 low  it  is  manifefi  ( by  the  17  .and  1  $ .  of  the feuenth,and  12.  of the  eight )  that 
sstnspropo-  thofenumbers  E,F,G,  and  alfo  A,H,K,B,are  in  continuall proportion*  &  in  the  fame  pro- 
*  *  portion  that  C  is  to  T>  .  J And forafimuch  as  A,H,K,B,  are  in  continuall proportion,  and  A 

meafureth  B,  therefore  {by  the  7. of  the  eight)  A  alfo  meafureth  H .  But  as  A  is  to  H3fo  is  C 
to  D  .  Wherefore  C  alfo  meafureth  D. 


A 

ti 

K 


7 be  fecotui  But  novo  fuppofe  that  the  fide  C  do  meafure  the  fide  Z> .  T hen  I fay,  that  the  cube  number 

part  a  the  A  alfo  meafureth  the  cube  number  B .  Tor  the  fame  order  of  confiruciton  being  kept,  in  like 

conuerfe  of the  fort  may  we  proue,  that  A,H,K,B,are  in  continuall proportion,  and  in  the fame  proportion 
firfi»  that  C  is  to  D  ,  Andforafmuch  as  C  meafureth  D,  but  as  C  is  to  D,fo  is  A  to  H,  therefore  A 

meafureth  H :  wherefore  A  alfo  meafureth  B .  if  therefore  a  cube  number  meafure  a  cube 
number,  the fide  alfo  of the  one  full  meafure  the  fide  of  the  other .  And  if  the fide  of  the  one 
meafurethe  fideofthe  other,  the  cube  number  alfo  jhall  meafure  the  cube  number :  which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 


yjThe  14.  Theoremc. 


The  16.  (propofition. 


%A  negat'me 
proportion. 
The  first  pari 
of  this  propo- 
fition, 

Tbefecond 
part  is  the  co- 
uer/eiftbe 
jirsl. 


If  a fquare  number  meafure  not  afquare  number y  neither  Jhall  the  fide  of 
the  one  meafare  the  fide  of  the  other.  And  if  the  fide  of  the  one  meafure  not 
the fide  of the  other }  neither  jhall  the  fquare  number  meafare  the  fquare 
number. 

\  Fppofe  that  A  and  B  be  two  fquare  numbers ,  and  let 
\  the fide  of  A  be  C  -•  and  let  the  fide  ofB  be  D  .  And  be 
that  A  meafureth  not  B  .  Then  I  fay,  that  neither 
fall  C  meafure  D  .  For  if C  do  meafure  D,  then  {by  the  ly-.of 
the  eight )  A  alfo  meafureth  B.But  A  by  fuppofition  meafureth 
not  B :  wherefore  neither  doth  C  meafure  D . 

But  now  a 7am e  fuppofe  that  the fide  C  meafure  not  the fide  D  .  Then  I  fay,  that  neither 
fall  the fquare  number  A  meafure  the fquare  number  B  *  For  if  A  do  meafure  B3  then Jhalji 

C  {by 


A 

B 

C 

D 


cjc8uclide$  Elemmtes.  Foldop* 

iffy  the!  c\..nf  the  eight)meafure D .  But  (by  fuppoftion)  C meafureth  not  D  .Wherefore 
neither  doth  A  meafure  B :  which  rods  required  to -be fretted. 


he  is.  Theoreme. 


The  17-  f'ropojitian. 


fide  of  the  other ^neither fihdll  the  cube  niter  meafure  the  cube  number. 

''ie 
For  if 

Cdo  meafure  D,  then  ( by  the  1 5 .  of  the  eight)  A  alfo fall  meafure  B.  But  (bjfuf- 
fofition)  A  rneof nr cth  not  B  :  wherefore  nei¬ 
ther  fall  C  meafure  D.  A  . 

But  now  fuff  of e  that  the fide  C  meafure  not  B  . . 

the  fide  1)  .  Then  I  fay,  that  neither  full  the 

cube  number  A  meafure  the  cube  number  B.  C  . . 

For  ifcyL  do  meafure  B ,  then  alfo  (  by  the  15.  D  ... 

of  the  eight)  full  C  meafure  D. Bui  (by  fitfpo- 

fition )  Cmeafureth  not  D  .  Wherefore  neither full  A  meafure  B :  which  was  required  to  be 
froued.  ......... 

f  The  id.  Theoreme.  The  iS.fropofition. 

IdelVene  two  like  flame  or fuperfciall  numbers  there  is  one  meane  propor* 
tionall  number.  And  the  one  like  plain e  number  is  to  the  other  like  plains 
number  in  double  proportion  of  that  ybich  the fide  of  like  proportion ?  is  to 
the fide  of  like  proportion. 

84  Fffofe  that  there  be  two  like  flame  or  fuferftciall  numbers  A  fig  B.  And  let  the  fides 
|*jj  °f  n  be  the  nubers  C,D:  and  the fides  cfB  be  the  numbers  E,  F.  Andforafmuch  as 
H  like  flaine  numbers  are  thofie  which  baue  their  fides  proportionality  the  2  2. defini¬ 
tion  of  the feuenth)  therefore  as  C  is  to  Jffo  is  E  to  E  ST  hen  l  fay  that  hetwene  A  andB  there 
is  one  meane  proportionall  number,  and  that  ' 

A  is  rvnto  B  in  double  propor  tip  of  that  which  A  . 

C  is  vnto  E ,  or  of  that  which  D  is  vnto  F,  G. ...... . . . . . . 

that  is,  of that  which  fide  of  like  proportion  B  . . . . . 

is  to'  fide  pf  like  propor  tion .  For  for  that  asC  ^ 

if  to  D,fo  is  E  fo\F,  therefore  alternately  (  by  n  *  * 

tbeiy.ofthe  feuenth  )  as  C  is  to  Efo  is  D  to 
F.  And foyaf much  as  A  is  a  plaine  or fuperfi-  E  ... 

viallnumber ,  and  the  fides  thereof  are  Cand  F ........ . 

I): therefore  D  multiplying  C  produced  A. 

And  by  the  fame  reaf on  alfo  E  multiplying  F produced  B  .  Let  D  multiplying  E produce  G  . 
And  forafmuch  as  D  multiply ingC  produced  A,  and  multiply  ing  E produced  G  ,  therefore 
(by  t he  1 7  .of the  feuenth)  as  C  is  to  Efo  is  A  to  G.But  as  C  is  to  E,fo  is  D  toF,  wherefore  as 
P  is  to  F,fo  is  A  to  G.  Againeforafmnch  as  E  multiplying  F>  produced  G ,  and  multiplying 
f  produced  B  therefore  (by  the  ly.ofthe feuenth  )  as  1)  is  to  F ,  fo  is  G  to  B.  But  it  isprouei 
'A  Ty.tj.  that 


•A  vegatiue 
propo/itiom 

The  firfl  part 
of  this  propo- 
fitiou. 

The  fe  coni 
part  is  the  co¬ 
if  er/e  of  tbs 
firfi. 


Bemnflra- 
tion  ofthefirB 
part  of  this 
propofitim <, 


The  eiphtbe  'Booke 


Demouftr <*- 
tion  of  the 
Jccond  part. 


that  as  D  is  to  Ffo  is  A  to  G:  wherfore  as  A  is  to  Gfo  is  G  to  $  Wherefore  thefe  numbers  A, 
GfB,  are  in  continuallpr or  ortion  Wherefore  betwene  A  and  B  there  is  one  meane proportio¬ 
nally  number. 

Tim  alfo  I fay  that  A  is  vnto  B  in  dooble proportio  of that  which fide  of  like  proporti¬ 
on  is  to fide  of  like  proportion ,  that  is  }of that  which  C  is  vnto  E  5  or  of  that  which  D  is  vnto 
E. For  forafmuch  as  A ,  G,B,are in  continuall proportion ,  therefore  (by  the  io.  definition  of 
the fift)A  is  vnto  B  in  double  proportion  of  that  which  A  is  vnto  G*  But  as  A  is  to  G  ,fo  is  C 
to  Eyand  D  to  F  nv  here  fore  A  is  vnto  B  in  double  proportion  of that  which  C  is  to  Eyr  D  to 
F :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 


y[  T  he  17.  T  heoreme.  T  h  19.  Tropofoion . 

Betwene  two  like  folide  numbers, there  are  two  meane  proportionall  num* 
hers.  And  the  one  like  folide  number,  is  to  the  other  like  folide  number  in 
treble  proportion  of that  ~tohicb  Jtde  of  like  proportion  is  to  fde  of  lyke 
proportion. 

Eppofe  that  there  be  two  like  folide  numbers  0/  and  B.  <^And  let  the  fides  of  the 
I  number  eAy  be  the  numbers  C,D,E.  i_And  let  the fides  of  the  number  B,  be  the 

numbers  FyGyII.  c.And forafmuch  as  (by  the  22.  definition  of  the  feuenth)  Ifkc 
folide  numbers  haue  their  fides  proport  to¬ 
nally  before  as  C  is  to  Dfo  is  F  to  G,  and  < _A . 

as  D  is  to  Efo  is  G  to  H.  Then  1  fay  that  2^ . . 

hetwens  A  and  B,  there  are  two  meane  pro-  X  . . 

portionall  numbers.  <^And  that  A  is  vnto  B  B  . . . 

in  treble  proportion  of  that  which  C  is  to  Fy 

or  of  that  which  D  is  to  G,  or  moreouer  of  C  .. 

that  which  E  is  vnto  H.  D  . . 

-  •  / 

For  let  C  multiplieng  D  produce  K.And  E  .. 

Demon  (Ira-  let  F  multiplieng  G  produce  L.  ^And  for - 

tion  of  the  frit  afinuch  as  CyD yareinthefelffamepropor-  F  ... 

IS  tio  that  F,Gy  are,  &  of C  &D  is  produced  G  ... 

‘  Kyand  op  F  and  G  is  produced  L,  therefore  H  ... 

I<  and  L  are  like  plaine  numbers  .And  ther - 

fore  betwene  thofe  numbers  K  and  L,  there  K  . ... 

is  one  meane  proportionall  number  (by  the  M . 

1 8  .of  the feuenth) Let  the fame  be  M.Wher  L  . _. 

fore  M  is  produced  of  D  and  Fy  as  it  is  ma- 

nifeft  by  the  propefition  goyng  before  Wher fore  as  K  is  to  M,fo  isM  to  L.  And  forafmuch 
as  D  mult  ipli  eng  C  produced  Kyand  multiplieng  F  produced  M :  therf  ore  ( by  the  17.  of the 
feuenth )  as  C  is  to  Ffo  is  K  to  M,but  as  K  is  to  Mfo  is  M  to  L  Wherfore  thefe  numbers  K 
M,Lyare  in  continuall  proportion  and  in  the fame  proportion  that  C  is  to  D .  And for  that 
as  C  is  to  Dfo  is  F  to  Gjherfore  alternately  (by  the  i^.ofthe feuenth )  as  C  is  to  Fyfo  is  D 
to  G  .Againe  for  that  as  D  is  to  Ey fo  is  G  to  Hyt her  fore  alternately  alfo  as  D  is  to  G,fo  is  E 
to  H. Wherfore  thefe  numbers  K^M,L,are  in  continuallpr  oportionynd  in  the  fame  propor¬ 
tion  that  C  is  to  F,and  that  D  is  to  Gyand  moreouer  that  E  is  to  U. Now  let  E  and  U  multt- 
pliengM  produce  N  andX.i_And forafmuch  as  A  is  a folide  number,  and  the  fides  thereof 
areCyDyE  ^therefore  E  multiplieng  that  which  is  produced  ofC  and  D,  froduceth  A.  But 
that  which  is produced  of  C  and  D  is  K.  Wherfore  E  multiplieng  Kproduceth  A.  And  (by 
the fame  reafonH  multiplieng  that  which  is  produced  ofF  and  Gy  hat  is  multiplieng  Lpro 

duceth 


ofSucliiies  Elemmteu  FoLuo, 

duceth  B.  And  forafmuch  as  £  multipliemg  K produced  A %and mtdtiplieng  M produced  JSty 
therfore  ( by  the  ly.ofihefeiicth ),  as  K  is  to  M,fo  is  A  to  N.But  as  K  is  to  Mfois  C  to  F,dr 
I)  to  GjandnioreoHcr  E  to  H jherfere as  G  is  to  F^and  3  to  (7,  and  E  to  If fo  is  A  to  N.  A- 
gdyne forafmuch  as  E  muluptiengM  produced  N.^and  H  multppliengM \produced X>  ther¬ 
fore  ( by  the  1 8  -of  the  fenenth)  as  E  is  to  H,fo  is  fifioX.But  as  E  is  to  Hfois  Cto  f3  and  D 
UG^herforeasCjStof^dDjoG^indEtoHfoisA to  N^andElJoX.  Againe  foraf- 
nliich  as  II muliiplicngM produced X^and multiplieng  L produced Bfherefore  ( by  the  17. 
if  the feuenthfds  M  is  to  Ljo  isXlfoB-Bdt  as  MistoLfois  C  ioEyindB  to  Gjmd  E  to  H 
therfore  as  Gh  to  l\and  D  to  GfindE  tbH fobs  not  onely  X  to  Bfibut  alfo  A  to  If  and  If.  to 
Xy/herfcfethefcJnumbers  AJfipxfj^re  in  cohiiniiall proportion,  and  that  in  iheproporfb 
tins  ofth^fdes-JJafmoreodythat'Ais  vnto  Bwireble  proportion  of thdtpvhich fide  of  like  Bbefecond 
proportion,, is  to  fide  of like  proporiiQnyhdt  isyof that  which  the  number  C  hath  to  the  mm-  Part* 
her  F  j>r  of  that  which  JO  hadk'ffG'yop  inoreouer  if  that  which F  'hath  to  H.  For  forafmuch 
as  there arefoure  numbers  in  continual proportion 4hatis,AyN',XyB'fh'erfdre  (by  the  io.de- 
f nit  ion  of the fft )  A  is  vnto  B  in  treble  proportion  of  that  which  A  is  vnto  N.  But  as  A  is  to 
Nfo  is  it proued  that  C  is  to  Fyand  3  to  G ^andmorediier  E  to  H.  Wherefore  A  isvhtk  B  in 
treble  proportion  of  that  which fide  of  like  proportion  is  vnto  fide  of  like  proportion  f hat  is  of 
that  which  the  number  C  is  to  the  number  F  find  of  that  which  JD  is  to  Gy  andmoreouer  of 
thatwhichE  istoH :  Which  was  required  to  be  proued'. . 

ft  1  he  i2.  Theorems.  The  20.  Idropofltioru 

Ifhetwene  two  numbers  there  he  one  meane  proportionall  number:  thofe 
numbers  are  like plaine  numbers. 

Vppofe  that  betwene  the  two  numbers  A  andB  there  be  one  meane  proportionall 
number,  and  let  the  fame  be  C.T hen  I  fay,  that  thofe  numbers  A  and  B  are  like  *  ^sprobofi- 
plaine  numbers .  Take  (by  the  35  .of the feuenth )  two  of  the  lead  numbers  that  ^erEohheiC 
haue  one  dr  the  fame  proportion  with  A,C,B  :  and  let  the fame  be  the  numbers  propa/itim. 
3,E.  Wherefore  as  D  is  to  E,  fo  is  A  to  C,  but  as  A  is  to  C,fo  is  C  to  B,  wherefore  as  3  is  to  *  Coniimitm. 
E,  fo  is  C  to  B.  Wherefore  how  many  times  D  meafuretb  A,fio  many  times  doth  E  meafure 
G  Allow  many  times  D  meafidreih  A,  fo  m<tny  'dwiiies let  there  beinF .  Wherefore  F  multi¬ 
plying  3  produceih  ArarJmtdtiplyingE  it  .  . 

producethG  s  wherefore  A  is  a  plaine  number:  *  *.  A... . .. 

imd  the  fides  therof are  3  and  F4bytke17.de -  C  ..... _ ... ...... _ _ _ 

fnition  of  the  feuenth) ,  Againe fqrdfinuch  as  B  A<\  1 ........ . . . . .  .V .... ........... 

Brand  E  are  the  lefi  numbers  that  kaue. one  &  'A  V  :  .  '  s 

the  fame  prdportionwithC,B,therefore(by  the  D .  ..  '  v  - 

Xxwfthe  feuenth)  how  many  times  3  meafiu-  E  ... . 

reth  C y  fo  many  times  doth  E  meafure  B.  How  :  -  .  , 

tiften  Emeafureth  By  fo  many  vnitiesiet  there  F  ...... 

he  in  G  .Wherefore  E  meafuretb  B  by  thofe  v-.  G  . .... ....  .  ' 

nities  which  are  in  G: wherefore  G  multiply-*  Aw  ,0  .  .  / 

ing  Eproduceth  B:  wherefore  B  is  a  plaine  mmherxfhythe ,  iy,  definition  of  the feuenth).  pcmnffjS 
And  the  fides  thereof  are  E  and  G .  Wherefore  thofe  two  numbers  A  and  B  are  two  plaine  tion .  J  * 
numbers .  1 fay  moreouer  that  they  are  like .  For  forafmuih  as  F  multiplying  E produced C; 

'and G multiplying  E  produced  B  ■?  therefore  (by  the  iy. of  the feuenth)  as  Eis  to  G,  foisCto 
B,  but  as  C  is  to  B,fo  is  3  to  E,  wherefore  as  3  is  toEfo  isF  to  G.  Wherefore  A  and  B  are 
like  plaine  numbers, for  their fides  are  proportionall.:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

TyJij.  the 


ffTbe  />.  Tbeoreme.  The  2i.^Propofiion. 


This  propor¬ 
tion  is  the  con- 
uerfeoftheiy * 
proportion* 

ConffrUftion. 


- '  .  Ifbetwene  two  numbers , there  be  two  meane proportionall  numbers,  thofe 
■/V  numbers  are  tike  folide  numbers. 

yppofe  that  betwene  two  numbers  A  and  B,  there  be  two  meane  proportional 
numbers  C,D  .T hen  I fay  that  A  and  B  are  like  folide  numbers. T ake(  by  the  3$ 
of  the  feuenth, or  i. of  the  eight)  three  of  the  leatt  numbers  that  haue  one  and 
the fame  proportion  with  A,C,D,B,and  let  the  fame  be  E,F,G.  Wherefore  (by 
the  3  .of the  eight)  their  extremes  E,G  are  prime  the  onetothe  other.  kjfnd forafmuch  as 
betwcne  the  numbers  E  and  G  there  is  one  meane  proportionall  number :  therfore(by  the  2  o 
of  the  eight )  they  are  likeplaine  nUmbers.Suppofe  that  the fides  of E,be  H  and  K.  And  let 
thefides  of  Gybe  L  and  M.How  it  is  manifest  that  thefe  numbers  E,E,G,  are  in  contimall 

'  ■  '  '  ■; 

A  . . 

:  c . . 

jy . . . . . » . . . 

B  . . . . . . . . . . . . 


H  ... 
K  ... 
N  ... 


DemonHra- 

(SOK * 


proportion, and  in  the fame-proportion  that  H  is  to  L,and  that  K  is  to  M.  And  forafmuch  M 
EyF,G  are  the  least  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the fame  proportion  with  A,CyD,  therefore 
ofequalitie(  by  the  l^.ofthe feuenth)asEis  to  G,fo  is  AtoD.  But  E,G,are(by  the  3.  of  the 
eight ) prime  number s,yea  they  are prime  and  the  leaf, but  the  leaH  numbers  (by  the  21 .  of 
the feuenth)  meafure  thofe  numbers  that  haue  one  cr  the fame  proportion  with  them  equal¬ 
ly , the  greater  the  greater  yand  the  lejfe  the  lejfe,that  is, the  antecedent  the  antecedent,  &  the 
confequent  the  confequent:  therf ore  how  many  times  E  meafureth  Afomany  times  G  meaa 
fureth  D.  How  many  tnnes  E  meafureth  A, fo  many  unities  let  there  be  in  N.Wherefore  N. 
multiplieng  E,produceth  A. But  E  is  produced  of the  numbers  H,K.  Wherfore  N  multiplu 
eng  that  which  is  produced  of H,K, produce  th  A.  Wherefore  A  is  a  folide  number,  and  the 
(ides  t her  of are  H,K,N.  Agayne,for.afmuch  as  E,F,G,are  the  UaH  numbers  that  haue  one 
and  the  fame  proportion  with  C,D,B,  therefore  how  many  times  E  meafureth  C,  f  ?  many 
tmes  G  meafureth  B  . Bow  ofte times  G  mea fureth  B,fo  many  unities  let  there  be  in  X.Wher* 
foreG  meafureth  B  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  X.  Wherfore  X  multiplieng  G produceth  B . 
But  G  is pf  oduced  of  the  numbers  L,Mr  Wherefore  X  multiplieng  that  number  which  is  pro* 
duccd  of L  and  Myproduceth  B.WherforeB  is  a folide  number  ,and  thefides  therefore  L,M 
X  Wherfore  A,B  are  folide  numbers. I fay  moreouerthat  they  are  like folide  numbers.  Fdk 
forafmuch  as  Hj.nd  X  multiplieng  E produced  A  andGvtherfore  by  the  18  .of  the  feuenth j 


ofSgAidesMfms <$&.•  Fol.m. 

-■ 

as  rNjs  *0  X,fojf.Alo..C,thtt.is£tO(M'.But as  E is  tfi  'Bto,LA#dX p  M :  therefore 

as  H  is  to  Lfo  is  K  to  M',and  N  to  X.  And.  H,K,N,arethe Jides  of  A,  andlikewife  L,M,X, 
qrr,  the. bA.  .*  which  was  required  to  be  potted. 


5  f  The  20.  Theoreme-.  The  22.  Tropofition. 


If  three  numbers  he  in  pontinuall  proportion  ,  and  if thefirfl  be  a  fquarg 
number  jhe  third  alfo jhall  be  a Jjuare  number,  I 


;fth  Vppofe  that  there  he  three,  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  A,  B,  C,  and  let  the 

be  a  fquare  number .  T hen  1 fay  that  n  n 

the  third  is  alfo  a  fquare  number .  For for -  A  " .  tioti 

afmuch  as  betwene  A  andC  there  is  one  meanepro-  **  ■’ 

portionall  number, namely  B, therefore  (by  the  20  .of  ^  ‘  • - - -  * . *-•  *  ‘ 

the  eight)  A  and  C  are  like  playne  numbers  .But  A  is  a fquare  number.  Wherefore  C  alfo  is  a 
fquare  number:  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


f  The  21.  Theoreme. 


The  23.  (Propofition. 


1  ■ 


Iffoure  numbers  be  in  continuall  proportion,  and  if the  fir H  be  a  cube nu* 
her, the  fourth  alfo  Jhall  be  a  cube  number.  * 


rPjL^-vJ?  yppofe  that  there  be  foure  numbers  in  A  . 

continuall proportion  AJi,C,F>.And  B 


let  A  be  a  cube  number.  The  l  fay  that  C 


Demmilu* 

(torn 


D  alfo  is  a  cube  number.  Fop  for  afmuch  as  be-  D . . ‘ . . 

twene  A  and  D  there  are  two  meant  proportio¬ 
nal  numbers  B,C.T h  erf  ore  A,  Z>  are  like folide  numbers  (by  the  21. of  this  booke )  But  A  is 
a  cube  number, wherf  or eD  a  lfo  is  a  cube  number :  which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated. 


22.  Theoreme.  The 2f.fPropofition. 

■» 

,  :  ..  *".■  !;  r%.’"  r.-  ;'j  J:  •  "  •  •  '  .  -  ••  •  -  .  r,  ■’ 

If tm  numbers  be  in  the  fame  proportio  that  a  fquare  number  is  to  a fquare 
number, and  fthefirft  be  afquare  number, the Jeconcl  alfo  Jhall  be  a fquare 
number.  * 


", 


Y;Vt  it  mV,-.-  » 


A 


WJ1  ...  B  be  in  the fm?  proportion,  that  the  fquare 

>^v!  number  C  is  vnto  the 

ire  mber  fi  sAnd  .  A.... 

\A  H  dfquare  nil-.  . , 


*  .  • 


her.  T hen  I  jay  that  B  alfo  is  a  B\ 

fquare  number.  For  for  afmuch  C  . ...... 

as  C  and  Bare fquare numbers. . . . 

ThcrfurgQ p.nd„  D  are  like pjaine . . .  D,.  . . . 

numbers  Wherf. ore  (by  the  18 .  of 

the  eight jbetwene  C  and  D  there  is  one  meant  proportionall  number. But  as  C  is  to  D,fois  A 
to  B  .Wherf ore  betwene  lAT  and  B  there  is  one  meant  proportionall  number  (by  the  8 .  of  the 
eight)  But  A  is  afquare  number  .Wherf ore  (by  then  *pf the  eight)  B  alfo,  is  a fquare  number, 
wb’fh  wasgeqwred  to  be proued. 

Ty.  iiij.  The 


Demonstra¬ 

tion. 


^  r 


mm 

f[  The  23.  Theoreme. 

If  two  numbers  be  in  the fame  proportion  the  One  to  the  other P  that  a  cube 
number  is  to  a  cube  number  find  if the fir  ft  be  a  cube  number fthe fecond  aU 
fo  fhall  be  a  cube  number. 


Vemonftra- 
riou » 

-v  >1.'.* 


/VV'vOU^*  V 


Fppofc  that  two  numbers  A  andB  be  in  the  fameproporti  0  the  me  to  the  other > 
that  the  cube  nuberC  is  vnto  the  cube  number  D  .  And  let  A  be  a  cube  number . 
,  T hen  I  fay.  that  B  alfo  is  a  cube  nuber.For forafmuch  as  C,B}  are  cube  nuberSy 
*§  therfonC,D  are  like foUdemmber s^wher for e{by  the  19. of  the  right)  betrvent 


^  ••  i  •••••••  «• 

JF  *  •••••  «  i  •«•«  •«•••  • » • 

^  •  I  •  •  ••  • 


•VVv 

■V'  i 

Jl'yvA  •(  ..-QV- 


«W'"-  •». r  4'  ,  *• 

•  >■  '  -  » •  ?■»  » 


•  ‘-y:\  f.  -  •  i.W'-i  .\\ 

. 


c .... 

— 96 

~144 

F>.2l6 


'f-'VliV'V. 


1 


■  ,v  a  vm  \v.  Y-.  r  •  uwn  vwtf  H  '• 

C  and  D  there  are  two proportion  all  numbers  .But  how  many  numbers fall  in  continual pro¬ 
portion  betwene  C  and  D,fo  many  ( by  the'S  .of the  eight) fal  there  betwene  the  numbers  that 
haue  the  fame  proportion  with  them..  Wherefore  betwene  A  andB  there  are  two  meant,  pro- 
-v  portionall  numbers  which  let  beJB  and  F.And forafmuch  as  there  are foure  numbers  in  con- 

tmmllproportiQnynamelyyWFiFyFyB^and  ts  a  cube  number  y  therefore  (by  the  23  .of the 

eight )B  a[fo  is  a  cube  number.:  which  was  required  to  be  demon (l rated. 

'  ••  "  !  ■  ;V w.,  •  tw'Vt.CX  vy  V  ‘ 

i\’,  i  ’  #  A  Corollary  added  by  FlufTates. 

„  ■  Betwene  a  fquare  number  and  a  number  that  is  not  a  fquare  number,  falleth  not  th^ 

\a j. fat proportion  of  one  fquare  number  to  an  other. For  if  the  firft  be  a  fquare  number,  the 
fecond  alfo  fliould  be  a  fquare  number  which  is  contrary  to  the  fupppfition.  Likewife 
betwene  a  cube  mimber,and  a  number  that  is  no  cube  rtUrhber  falleth  not  the  propor* 
ti  on  of  one  cube  number  to  an  other.Forifthefirftbea  cube  number,  the  fecond  alfo 
ftyuld  be  a  cube  number, which  i*  contrary  to  thefuppofition,  &  therfpre  impoffible. 

i'vU.^tss\Tr  . 


added  by 
V inflate 


'  -  ALq  \  ^ .  ■  l  '  K  j  .  . 

f  The 24.  Theoreme.  The  26.  Tropojthon,  . 


*V'r-  't 

Cottftm&hy* 


Like  plqyne  numbers ,are  tn  the  fame  proportion  the  onejo  the  other,  that 
a  quare  dumber  ts  tod  quare  number.  u 

■Ji  Jl  !*wt trtnvp w  j ,  -s 

Vppofe  that  A  and  B  belike  plaine  numbers .  Then  I  fry  thaf  A  is  •tinto  B  in  the 
fameproportio  that  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number. For forafmuch  asA,B, 

are  like  plaine  numbers ,  there- .  r  *  Vi  rfl  •  ■ ■  tv 

fore  betwene  A  andB  there  falleth  one  • '  A.  ..v  .v.  .  =V 


meane 
the  rig 


ie proportional  nuberfby  the  iS.of  •  C . . . v.  .F.. ...... . 

ight}.  Let  there fal fuch  a  number ,•  •  •  B  ......... ............... . . .  .  * 

and  let  the  fame  be  C.And(by'the  35  .of  n  )  i  f 

thefofe0i')  take'-fhe  'Ihree  teaft-mn^"  £  ’  '  .  .  '  ; 

fairs  that  haue  one  and  the  fame  proper F  "■  :g' 
tFohWith  A  y  C ,  B}  and  let  the  fame  be-*  * . ' 


Wa*'*  *  •  '  • 


.  JV  .:>v> 


,  j  ■  fti  \U< 


ofcucuaes  tuememes. 


r oi. in. 


D,E,  F :  wherefore  (  by  the  corollary  of  the  2.0ft he  eight)  their  extremes ,  that  is  B,  F,  are 
fquare  numbers. And for  that  as  B  is  to  FfoisAto  B ,  (by  the  i^.of the feueth) :  and  B,  F, 
'are fquare  number s.T herfore  A  is  vnto  B  in  that  proportion, that  a  fquare  nuber  is  vnto  a 
fquare  number -.which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


T  he  2  s.T  heoreme. 


T  he  27.(PropoJit'wn. 


Like folide  numbers  dre  in  the fame  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  a 
cube  number  is  to  a  cube  number. 


Fppofe  that  a  A  and  B  be  like  folide  numbers .  T hen  1 fay  that  A  is  vnto  B,in  the 
fame  proportion ,  that  a  cube  numbe  is  to  to  a  cube  number. For  forafmuch  as  A,B, 
are  like  folide  numbers.  T her ef ore  ( by  the  19  .of  the  eight )  betwene  AandB  there  Contttuftiou 


A 
C 
B 
B  , 

E. 

F 

G 

H 


Vemonflra* 


fall  two  means proportionall  numbers.  Let  there  fall  two  fuch  numbers,  and  let  the  fame  be 
C  and  B  .  And  take( by  the  35. of 'the feuenth)the  leatt  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the  fame 
proportion  with  A,C,B,B,  and  equall  alfo  with  the  in  multitude,  and  let  the  fame  be  E,  F , 

G,  H  .Wherfore(by  the  corollary  of  the  2. of  the  eight)their  extreames,  that  is, EH,  are  cube 
numbers.  But  as  E  is  to  Hfois  A  to B.  Wherefore  A  is  vnto  B  in  the fame  proportion,  that  a 
cube  number  isto  a  cube  number:  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

«[  A  Corollary  added  by  Flufates. 

Jf  two  numbers  be  in  the  fame  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a fquare  number  is  to  a  fqua  re 

number :  thofe  two  numbers  frail  behkefuperficiatlnumbers.  And  if  they  be  in  the famepropor -  Corollary 

tion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a  cube  number  is  to  a  cube  number,  they  frail  be  like folide  nubers.  added  by 

g  Flufates * 

Firlt  let  the  number  A  haue  vnto  the  number  B  the  fame  proportion,that  the  fquare  number  C  hath 
to  the  fquare  numberD.  Then  Ifay,that  A  andB  are  like  fuperficiall  nubers.  For  forafmuch  as  betwene 
the  fquare  numbers  C  and  D  there  falleth  a  meane  proportionall  (by  the  1  i.of  this  booke)  there  {hall 


B 

A 


D 

C 


alfo  betwene  A  and  B  (which  haue  one  and  the  fame  proportion  with  C  and  D)  fall  a  meane  proportio¬ 
nall  (by  the  8. of  this  booke).  Wherefore  A  and  Bare  like  fuperficiall  nubers(by  the  ao.ofthis  booke). 
But  if  A  be  vnto  B,as  the  cube  number  C,  is  to  the  cube  number  D.Then  are  A  &  B  like  folide  num¬ 
bers  .  For  forafmuch  as  C  and  D  are  cube  numbers, there  falleth  betwene  them  two  meane  proportxo- 


A 

B 


C  . 
D 


nail  numbers  (by  the  m  .of  this  booke) .  And  therefore  (by  the  8  .of  the  fame)  betwene  A  and  B  (which 
are  in  the  fame  proportion  that  C  is  to  D)  there  falleth, alfo  two  meane  proportionall  aumbers.Wher- 
iorc  (by  the  zi.  of  this  booke)  A  and  B  are  like  folide  numbers.. 


H-  An 


w4tt  other  Co¬ 
rollary  added 
by  Flufixteu 


•  V«  •  w-%  .  T  w;'.  1\.'S  i  S 


The  eighthe  *Boo%e 

#  An  other  Corollary  added  alfo  by  F Inflates* 

/’  ,C\  i  ••  -  )y  \:\vv..  ~  '  i 

if  A  number  multiplying  u pjuure  number  .produce  nor  a fjunre  number  :  the fajd  number  multiplying  fballlt 
no  fquare  number .  j-or  if  it  fliould  be  a  fquare  number,  then  fliould  it  and  the  number  multiplied  being 
like  fuperficiall  numbers  (by  reafon  they  are  fquare  numbers  )  haue  a  meane  proportionall  (  by  the  18. 
of  thys booke  )  .  And  the  number  produced  of  the  fayd  meane  fliould  be  equall  to  the  number 
contayned  vnder  the  extremes>which  are  fquare  numbers  (by  the  10.  of  the  feuenth). 
Wherefore  the  number  produced  of  the  extremes  being  equall  to  the  fquare  num¬ 
ber  produced  of  the  meane3  Ihould  be  a  fquare  number.  But  the  feyd  number 
by  fuppofition ,  is  no  fquare  number  .  Wherefore  neither  is  the 
number  multiplying  the  fquare  number,a  fquare  number. 

The  firft  part  of  the  frit  Corollary  is  the  conuerfe  of  the  2  tf.Propofition 
of  this  booke,  and  hath  fome  vfe  in  the  tenth  booke  .  The  fecond 
part  of  the  fame  alfo  is  the  conuerfe  of  the  27.  Propor¬ 
tion  of  the  fame. 

.  .j *  '.V,  \  '.Vu:  '  \  X  *  ,  *  X  • . 

*  %r  X  -  X  X . 

The  end  of  the  eighth  booke 

ofEuclides  Eiementes. 


SV.v"  •  -.1  . 

■  :*  v  •  ■  ’ 

flstd  O 

tri'.S'.  f 

J.’cd;  :>■  •*.: 


rim* 


i  -f  - 


elides  Elementes. 


this  ninth  booke  2j«r//^continueth his 
purpofe  touching  numbers  :  partly  profecuting  thynges 
more  fully,  which  were  before  fomewhat  fpoken  of,  as  of 
fquare  and  cube  numbers :  and  partly  fetting  out  the  na¬ 
tures  and  proprieties  offuch  kindes  of  number,  as  haue 
not  yet  bene  entreated  of:  which  yet  are  moft  neceflary 
to  beknowen  .  As  are  numbers  euen,and  odde :  whofe 
d  conditionsarein  this  booke  largely  taught, 
with  their  compofitions,and  fubdudhons  of  the  one  from 
the  other  :  with  many  other  generall  and  ipeciallthinges 
to  be  notedjWorthy  the  knowledge. 


fThe  i.Theoreme.  The  i.  Tropojition. 

If  two  like  plaine  numbers  multiplying  the  one  the  other  produce  any  mm • 
her:  the  number  of them  produced fall  he  a fquare  number. 

•  [-'-*■  '  X  5  *i  Uf:  O  i*.  *  - *  j  •  "*.  y  . 

|  Eppofethat  o/  and  B  be  two  like  plaine  numbers  .  And  let  A 
|  multiplying  B produce  the  number  C  .  Then  l  fay,thatCisa 
\  fquare  number .  For  let  o/  multiplying  him  felfe produce  D. 
Wherefore  D  is  a  fquare  number .  And  forafmuch  as  c- Amulti - 
plying  him  felfe  produced  D ,  and  multiplying  B  produced  C, 
therefore  (by  the  17.  of  the  feuenth)  as  A  is  to  Bfo  is  D  to  C. 
I  And forafmuch  as  A,  B,  are  like  plaine  numbers,  therefore  (  by 
j  the  i 8 .  of  theieighi )  betwene  0/  and  B  there pallet h  a  means 
proportionall  number  .  But  if  betwene  two  numbers  fall  num¬ 
bers  in  continuall proportion,  how  ma¬ 
ny  numbers  fall  betwene  themfo  many  A  .... 

alfo  (by  the  f  of the  eight) fallthere  .  . '. 

fall  betwene  the  numbers  that  haue  the  B  ..... . , . . 

fame  proportion  with  them .  Wherfore 

betwene  C  and  D  alfo  there  falleth  a  D  . . 

meane proportionall  number .  But  D  is  .  . . . 

a  fquare  number.  Wherfore(by  the  22 .  C  . . ...if ... 

of  the  eight)  C  alfo  is  a fquare  number: 
which  was  required  to  be proued. 


"  77 - - 


If  The  2.  T beoreme.  T he  2.  Tropofifton. 

If  two  numbers  multiplying  the  one  the  other  produce  a  fquare  number  1 
thofe  numbers  are  like  plaine  numbers. 

Suppoft 


The  Argtmet 
of  the  ninth  . 

hooks* 


Demonfirtz 

tm . 


Theeighthe^BcQ^e 


This  propor¬ 
tion  is  the  con 
ttnr is  of  the 
former. 


Vppofe  that  two  numbers 
A  and  B  multiplying  the 
one  the  other  do  produce 
C  a  fquare  number.  T  hen 


B 


D 


Demonstra¬ 

tion, 


J fiy,that  A  and  B  are  likeplaine  num¬ 
bers  .  For  let  A  multiplying  him  felfe  . . . . 

produce  D  .  Wherefore  D  is  a  fquare  C  . . . . . . ' . ...... 

number .  And  forafnuch  as  A  multi¬ 
plying  him  felfe  produced  D,  and  multiplying  B  produced  C,  therefore  ( by  the  //.  of the fe- 
uenth)  as  A.  is  to  B,foisD  to  C.  Andforafmuch  as  D  is  a  fquare  number;  and fo  Ukewife  is 
C,  therefore  D  and  C  are  like plaine  numbers .  Wherefore  betrvene  D  and  C  there  is  (  by  the 
j  S.  of  the  eight )  one  meane proportionall  number .  But  as  D  is  to  C,fo  is  A  to  B.  Wherefore 
( by  the  S. of  the  eight )  betwene  A  and  B  there  is  one  meane  proportionall  number .  But  if  be - 
twenetrvo  numbers  there  be  one  meane proportionall  number,  thofe  numbers  are  (by  the  20. 
of  the  eight)  like  plaine  numbers  .Wherefore  A  and  B  are  likeplaine  numbers  :  which  was 
required  to  be  proued. 

^  AC  oroUary  added  by  Campane. 

Hereby  it  is. manife ft,  that  two  fquare  numbers  multiply  ed  the  one  into  the  other  do  ahvayet 
CoroUary  produce  a  fquare  number .  For  they  are  like  fiiperficiall  numbers,  and  therefore  the  num- 
aided  by  ber  produced  of  them ;  is  (by  the  hr  ft  of  this  booke)  a  fquare  number .  But  a fquare  num- 

Campane,  y(r  mukiplyed  into  4  number  not  fquare,  produceth  a  number  not fquare .  For  if  they  (hould  pro¬ 

duce  a  fquare  number,  they  (hould  be  like  fuperficiall  numbers  (by  this  Propofition)  . 
But  they  are  not .  Wherefore  they  produce  a  number  not  fquare .  But  if  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber  multiply  ed  into  an  other  number  produce  a fquare  number ,  that  other  number  Jha/l  be  a  fquare 
number  .  For  by  this  Propofition  that  other  number  is  like  vnto  the  fquare  number 
whichmultiplyeth  it,  and  therefore  is  a  fquare  number .  But  if  a  fquare  number  multiply- 
ed  into  an  other  number  produce  a  number  not fquare,  neither JhaR  that  other  number  alfb  be  a fquare 
number  .  Forifitfhouldbeafquarc  number,  then  being  multiplycd  into,  the  fquare 
number  it  ihould  produce  a  fquare  number,by  the  firft  part  of  this  Corollary. 

•  '■>  -  *  ;  A -V 1 .  >  r 

The  3.  Theorem.  The  3 •  Propofition. 

If  a  cube  number  multiplying  himfelfe  produce  a  number /he  number pro • 
duced  fhall  he  a  cube  number. 


,  ^  j  the  number  C,and  let  C  multiplieng  himfelfe  produce  the  number  D.Tforv  it  is 
mam  fell  that  C  multiplieng  D  produceth  A(by  the  20  .definition  of the feueth) 


"B 


Demonstra¬ 

tion, 


Al  ,  •  •  • . 
B  .... 
C  .. 
Vnitie  . 


\\  \\  y^vvV.v'vA  v  \4.0 Vi 

i  V  I 

.  _ 

.is‘44 


1  w 


And forafnuch  as  C  multiplieng  himfelfe produced  Djherfore  C  mtafmtih  D  bp  thofe  w* 

f  v,  ’,  mm 


of Suclides  Element e$%  FoLiifa 

fifties  which  are  in  C.But  unitie  atfo  meafureth  C  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  C. Wherfore 
as  vnitie  is  to  C,fo  is  CtoD.  Againe  forafmuch  as  C  multiplieng  D  produceth  A:  therefore 
D  meafureth  A  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  C.  But  unitie  meafureth  C  by  thofe  unities 
which  are  in  C:  wherefore  as  unitie  is  to  C,fo  is  D  to  A.  But  as  vnitie  is  to  Cfo  is  CtoD, 
wherfore  as  unitie  is  to  cfo  is  CtoD  &  D  to  A. Wherefore  betwene  unitie  &  A  there  are 
two  meane proportional! 'number  s  ,namely  ,C  ,D .  Againe  forafmuch  as  A  multiplieng  him- 
felfe produced  B,  therefore  A  meafureth  B  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  A .  But  unitie  alfo 
meafureth  A  by  thofe  unities  which  are  in  A.  Wherfore  as  unitie  is  to  A,fo  is  A  to  B  .But  be¬ 
twene  A  and  vnitie,  there  are  two  meane proportionall numbers.  Wherfore  betwene  cA  and 
B  alfo  there  are  two  meane  proportionall  numbers  by  the  8.  of the  eight.  But  if  betwene  two 
numbers, there  be  two  meane  proportionall  numbers,  and  if thefrf  be  a  cube  number,  the 
fourth  alfo fall  be  a  cube  number  by  the  21. of  the  eight.  But  A  is  a  cube  number, wherefore 
B  alfo  is  a  cube  number  •  which  was  required  to  be proued . 


tfThe  i.Tkeoreme.  The  4.  Tropofitkn.  — 

If <*  cube  number  multiplieng  a  cube  number ,  produce  any  number  p  the 
number  produced full  be  a  cube  number. 

Fppofe  that  the  cube  number  A  multiplieng  the  cube  number  B,do produce  the  nu- 
ber  Cflhin  1 fay  that  Cis  a  cube  number.  For  let  A  multiplieng  him  felfe  produce 
D  .  Wherefore  D  is  a  cube  number  (by  the  prop  option  going  before )  .  cAnd 
for aj much  as  multiplieng 

him  felfe produced  D,  and  mul-  A.. .  D  64 

tiplieng  B, it  produced  C :  ther -  . .  ptf 

fore  ( by  the  17.  of  the feuenth )  . .  14.4. 

as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  D  to  C.  ^And  B . .  C  ziS 

forafmuch  as  A  and  B  are  cube 

numbers,therfore  A  and B  are  likefolide  numbers. Wherfore  betwene  A  and B(by  the  ip. of 
the  eight)  there  are  two  meane  proportionall  numbers. Wherefore  alfo(  by  the  8. of  the  fame) 
betwene  D  and  C  there  are  two  meane proportionall  numbers. But  D  is  a  cube  number. When 
fore  C  alfo  is  a  cube  number  (by  the  23  .of the  eight )  which  was  required  to  be  demonf rated. 

f  T be  s.  T heoreme.  T he  s.  Tropojttion. 

If  a  cube  number  multiplying  any  number  produce  a  cube  nuber :  the  nufn* 
her  multiply ed  is  a  cube  number. 

Vppofe  that  the  cube  number  A^  multiplying  the  number  B,do  produce  a  cube 
number, namely, C.  T hen  1 fay,  that  Bis  a  cube  number .  For  let  A  multiplying 
him  felfe  produce  D  .  Wherefore  (by  the  3  .of the  ninth )  D  is  a  cube  nuber.  And 
\ forafmuch  as  A  multiplying  him  felfe  produced  D,and  multiplying  B, it produ¬ 
ced  C >  therefore  ( by  the  17. of  the feuenth )  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  D  to  C.  And forafmuch  as  D 

cA . . . . . 

B  . .  . . 


D  7  2  p 

C  1728  5  * 

-  .  ■  .... 

and  C  are  cube  numbers,  they  are  alfo  like folide  nubers .  Wherefore  (by  the  ip.  of  the  eight ) 
betwene  D  and  C  there  are  two  meane  proportionall  numbers .  But  as  D  is  to  C,fo  is  A  to  B. 

^AA-.k  Whir- 


Vmonjira* 

tfon* 


DmonUra- 
t'm • 


t/l  Coronary 
*<ldei  by 
Camparis. 


DemmUrA- 

mn. 


Dmonftra- 

tiw. 


*TheninthcBookg  : 

Wherefore( ly  the  8  .of the  eight )  betwene  A  and  B  there  are  two  meaneproportiona.il  mm*, 
hers .  But  A  is  a  cube  number .  Wherefore  B  alfo  is  a  cube  number  {by  the.  jty, of  'the  eight): 
which  was  required  to  be proued. 

A  Corollary  added  by  Campane. 

Hereby  it  is  man  if  aft,  that  if  a  cube  number  multiply  a  number  not  cube, it  fall  produce  a  number 
not  cube  .  For  ifit  fhonld  produce  a  cube  number,  then  the  number  multiplyed  Ihouldf 
alfo  beacube  number(by  this  Propofition)  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition .  For 
itisfuppofedtobenocubenumbcr.  <uAndif a  cube  number  multiplying  a  number  produce 
a  number  not  cube,  the  number  multiplyed fall  be  no  cubenimber .  For  if  the  number  multi¬ 
plied  fhould  be  a  cube  number,tbe  number  produced  fhould  alfo  be  a  cube  number  (by 
the4.ofthisbooke)  :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition,  arid impoffible. 


V 


f/  T  he  6.  T  hear  erne.  T  he  6.  Tropojition. 

If  a  number  multiplieng  himfelfe produce  a  cube  number:  then  is  that  num* 
her  alfo  acufc  number. 

Vppofe  that  the  number  A  multiple  A  . . . . . . 

'  him fe  If  do  produce  B  a  cube  nu-  B  729 

her  71  hen  I  fay  that  A  alfo  is  a  cube  C  1968} 

number. For  let  A  multiplieng  B  produce  C .  And  forafmuch  as  A  mukiplieng  himfelfe 
produced  B,  fr  multi  pit  eng  B  it  produced  C:  therfore  C  is  a  cube  number.  fyind for  that  A 
multiplieng  himfelfe  produced  B,and  multiplieng  B  it  produced  C,tberfore(by  the  17  .of the 
J etient h )  as  A  is  to  B  fo  is  B  to  C.And  for  that  B  and  C  are  cube  numbers ,  they  are  alfo  like 
folide  numbers  Wherfore(  by  the  19.  of 'the  eight)  betwene  C  and  B  there  are  two  meane pro¬ 
portional  numbers  .But  as  B  is  to  Cfo  is  AtoB  ;  \vherfore{bj  the  8  .of  the  eight)betwene  A 
and  B  there  are  two  meane  proportional  mbers.But  B  is  a  cube  number.  Wherefore  A  alfo  is 
4  cube  number  by  the  23 , of  the  eight:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfi rated. 

f  The  7.  The  or  erne.  The  7.  fropofition. 

If  a  compofed  number  multiplieng  any  number  produce  a  rmmbertthe  nu* 
her  produced  fhallbe  a  folide  number.  "  * 

Vjpofe  that  the  compofed  number  A  multiplieng  the  nuber  Bfo  produce  the  num « 
her  C.T hen  1  fay  that  C  is  a  folide  number  For forafmuch  as  A  is  a  compofed  nu¬ 
ber  pherf  ere feme  number  meafureth  it  {by  the  u\.defnition) .  Let  D  meafure  it. 

A......  C . . . 

B  .  '  .  ;- 

And  bopo  often  D  meafureth  Afo  many  unities  let  there  be  in  E.  Wherefore  E  multiplieng 
I)  pycduceth  A.  And  forafmuch  as  two  numbers  D  and  E, multiplieng  themf clues ,  produce 
iffmioh  A  again e  multiplieng  B  produceih  C  .•  therfore  C  produced  of  three  numbers  muL 
tipliengthe  one  the- other  yuimdy,  D,  E,and  B  is  (by  the  18.  definition  of  the feuenth)a fo- 
tide  number.  And  the fdes  therofarethc  numbers  D}E}B.  if  therefore  a  compofed  number 
Arc,  which  was  required  to  be proued. 

.  f  T.he  8.  Theorems _ _ _  The  g.  Tropofition. 

If  from  Tmitie  there  be  numbers  in  continuall proportion  how  manyfoeuer ; 
the  third  number  from  Imitie  is  a fquare  number,  andfo  are  all  forwards 
.  leaning  one  betwene.  find  thefoupth  number  is  a  cube  number,  and fo  are 
all  forward  leaning  two  betwene.  . And  the  feuenth  is  both  a  cube  number 

-  -  and 


Fol.iij, 

and  alfo  a  fquare  numbey^and fo  are  all forward  leaning  fine  betwene.  .... 

Vppofe  that  from  vnitie  there  be  thefe  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  A,B, 
C,T  ,E,F .  Then  I fay  that  the  third  number from  vnitie, namely, Bis  a fquare 
number, and  fo  are  all  forward leaning  one  betwene, namely  ,D  and  F.And  that 
C  the  fourth  number  is  a  cube  number, and fo  are  allforwarde  leauyng  two  be¬ 
twene.  And  that  F  thefeuenth  number  is  both  a  cube  number  and  alfo  a  fquare  number, and 
fo  are  all  forward  leaning fue  betwene.F  or for  that  as  vnitie  is  to  Afo  is  A  to  B.  Therefore 
how  many  times  vnitie  meafureth  A,fo  many  times  A  meafureth  B  .But  vnitie  meafureth  A 
by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  A, wherefore  A  meafureth  B  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  A. 
Andforafmuch  as  A  meafureth  B  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  A.  Therfore  A  multiplieng 
himfelfe produceth  B  Wherfore  B  is  a  fquare  number.  And  forafmuch  as  thefe  numbers  B, 
C,D,are  in  continuall proportion, and B  is  a fquare  number , therfore  by  the  zi.ofthe  eight, 
D  alfo  is  a  fquare  number .  And  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  F  is  a  fquare  number.  And  in  like 
fort  may  we  prone  that  leaning  alw ay  es  one  betwene, all  the  ref  forward  are fquare  num¬ 
bers. 


JF  7 29 
E  243 


D  ..... 
C  ... 
B  ... 
A... 


Vnitie  .  ' ' 

Flow  alfo  I fay  that  the  fourth  number from  vnitie, that  is,C,is  a  cube  number, and  fo 
are  all  forward  leauingtwo  betwene. For for  that  as  vnitie  is  to  the  number  A,  fo  is  B  to  C, 
therefore  how  many  times  vnitie  meafureth  the  number  A,  fo  many  times  B  meafureth  C. 
But  vnitie  meafureth  A  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  wherfore  B  meafureth  C  by  thofe 

vnities  which  are  in  A  Wherfore  A  multiplieng  B  produceth  C. And forafmuch  as  A  multi - 
plieng  himfelfegroduced  B,and  multiplieng  B  it  produced  C,  therefore  C  is  a  cube  number. 
Andforafmuch  as  C,D,E,F , are  in  continuall  proportion. But  C  is  a  cube  number  therefore 
(by  the  23.  of  the  eight )  F  alfo  is  a  cube  number . 

And  it  isproued,that  F  being  thefeuenth  number  from  vnitie  is  alfo  a  fquare  number. 
Wherfore  F  is  both  a  cube  number, and  alfo  a  fquare  number. In  like fort  may  weproue,that 
leaning  alwaies fue  betwene^all  the  refforwarde,  are  numbers  both  cube  and  alfo  fquare: 
which  was  required  to  beproued. 


jf  The  9.  Theoreme.  The  p.TropoJition. 

IffromTmitie  he  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  how  many  foeuer :  and 
tf  that  number  "Which  followeth  next  after  Tmitie  he  a  fquare  number  f  hen 
all  the  ref  following  alfo  he  fquare  numbers .  jind  if  that  number  which 
followeth  next  after  Tnutie  be  a  cube  number  P  then  all  the  ref  following 
fall  be  cube  numbers. 

Vppofe  that  from  vnitie  there  be  thefe  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  A,  B, 
C,F>  ,E,F .  And  let  A  which  followeth  next  vnto  vnitie  be  a  fquare  number . 
T hen  I  fay,  that  all  the  ref following  alfo  are fquare  numbers .  T  hat  the  third 
number, namely  ,B, is  a  fquare  number, &  fo  all  forward  leaning  one  betwene, it 
is  plaine  by  the  Fropofition  next  going  before. I fay  alfo  that  all  the  ref  are fquare  numbers. 
For, forafmuch  as  A,B,C,are  in  continuall  proportion,  and  A  is  a  fquare  number,  therfore 
(by  the  22.  of  the  eight)  C  alfo  is  a  fquare  number.  Againe forafmuch  as  B,C,t),are  in  con¬ 
sul A.  ij.  tinuall 


Demonttmi-* 

onoftbe 
fir  ft  pan* 


The ' fecund 
part  demon - 
ftmed . 


DemcnftratB 
of  the  third 
parU 


BemonUra- 

tion  of  the  fit  ft 
part  of  this 
propoftm* 


The feeond 
part  demon - 
firated. 


Vemontfratt- 
on  of  the 
fir fl  part  lea¬ 
ding  to  an  ah" 
Jurditie. 


e 


Squares. 


Cubes. 


tinuall proportion, and  B  is  a  [quart  num¬ 
ber, t  her  fore  J)  alfo  (by  the  22. of  the eight) 
is  a  fquare  number  .  In  like  fort  may  we 
proue,  that  all  the  ref  are  fquare  numbers. 

But  norv  fuppofe  that  A  be  d  cube  num¬ 
ber  .  Then  1 fay,  that  all  the  ref  following 
are  cube  numbers ,T hat  the  fourth  from  v- 
nitie,  that  is,  C  is  a  cube  number,  and  fo  all 
forward  leauing  two  betwene ,  it  is  plaine 
(by  the  Propoftion  going  before)  .  Now  I 
fay,  that  all  the  ref  alfo  are  cube  numbers. 

For,  for  that  as  vnitie  is  to  A,fo  is  A  to  B: 
therefore  how  many  times  vnitie  meafu - 
reth  A,fo  many  times  A  meafureth  B.  But 
vnitie  meafureth  A  by  thofe  unities  which 
are  in  A.  Wherefore  A  alfo  meafureth  B  by 
thofe  vniti.es  which  are  in  A ,  Wherefore  A 

multiplying  him  fife  produceth  B.  But  A  is  a  cube  number .  But  if  a  cube  number  multiply - 
ing  him  fife  produce  any  number ,  the  number  produced,  is  (by  the  3.  of  the  ninth)  a  cube 
number.  Wherefore  Bis  a  cube  number .  And forafnuch  as  there  are foure  numbers  in  con - 
tinuall  proportion  A,B,  C,  D,  and  A  is  a  cube  number ,  therefore  D  alfo  (by  the  23.  of  the 
eight)  is  a  cube  number .  And  by  the fame  reafon  E  alfo  is  a  cube  number ,  and  in  like fort 
,  are  all  the  reft following:  which  was  required to  be proued. 


f  The  10.  T  hear  erne. 


The  10.  Tropojition. 


If  from  Vnitie  be  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  how  many foeuer,  and 
if  that  number  "Whichfolloweth  next  after  Vnitie  be  not  a  fquare  mm* 
her,  then  is  none  of the  reji  following  a fquare  number  excepting  the  third 
from  fnitie >  andfo  all forward  leauing  one  betwene .  And  if  that  number 
"Which followed?  next  after  Vnitie  be  not  a  cube  number ,  neither  is  any  of 
the  ref  following  a  cube  number,  excepting  tire fourth from  Vnitie x  andfo 
all  forward  leauing  two  betwene,  ■ ' ' 

V ppofe  that  from  vnitie  be  thefe  numbers  in  continual! proportion  A,BtC,D,E,F. 
And  let  A  which followeth  next  after  vnitie  be  no fquare  number.  T hen  I fay, that 
neither  is  am  of  the rejl  a  fquare  number, exceptingthe  third  from  vnitie, dr  foall 
forward  leauing  one  betwene, namely, B,E>,F, which  are  fquare  numbers  (  by  the  S.  of  this 
bcoke)  .  For  if  it  be pofible,  let  C  be  a  fquare  number.  But  B  alfo  is  a  fquare  number.  Wher- 
foreBis  vnto  C  in  that proportion  that  afquare  number  is  to  a fquare  number .  But  as  Bis 

Vnitie  .  ■  -  .. 

A  ... 

B  ... . .  • 

C  . . . . 

*• »• •  ••• ...A....... .«»•«. a « .......... ....... 

E  243 
F  yi9 


t*C, 


0, 


Fol.zid. 


J»-C,  ftiS’tFdfto  B  ^Wherefore  A  is  vnto  8  in  that  proportion  that  afquarenumler  is  to* 
fquare  number .  But  B  is  a  fquare  number.  Wherefore  A  alfo  is  a  fquare  number  (by  the  24. 
of  the.  eight )  •*  which  is  contrary  to  ihefuppofition.  Wherefore  C  is  pot  a fquare  number.  And 
by  the  fame  reafon  pone  of  all  theotheris  afquare  number, excepting  the  third from  vnitie, 
andfo  all  forward  leaning  one  betwene. 

But  mnvfuppofc  that.  A  be. not. a .  cube  number  .  'then  1 fay,  that  none  of  all  the  resl  is  a 
Cube  nrnnber.^ceptmgJ'h^fomtkfrmivnipies&fuaUforward leaning  two  betwene^name- 
ly,C,andF>  which  ( by  the  8. of this  booke) are  cube  numbers .  For  if  it  be  pofible,  let  D  be 
a  cube  number .  ButC  alfo  is  a  cube  number  (by  the  8. of  the  ninth )  .For  it  is  the fourth  from 
*. vnitie .  But  as  C  is  to  i>,  fo  is  B  to  C .  Wherefore  B  is  vnto  C ,  in  that  proportion  that  a  cube 
number  is  to  a  cube  dumber .  ButCisa  cube  number.  Wherefore  B  alfo  is  a  cube  number  (by 
the  2 $  .of  the  eight)  .  And  as  vnitie  is  to  A,  fo  is  A  to  B  .  But  vnitie  meafureth  0/  by  theft 
vnities  which  are  in  A .  Wherefore  A  meafureth  B  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  AWherfort 
A  multiplying  him  felfe  produceth  B  a  cube  number .  But  ifanumber  multiplying  him 
felfe  produce' a  tube number  ,thenis  that  number alfo a  cube  number  (by  the  6. of  the  ninth). 
Wherefore  A  is  a  cube  number :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppoftion  .  Wherefore  D  is  not  a 
cube  number .  In  like fort  may  we  proue,  that  neither  is  any  of  the  ref  a  cube  number, excep¬ 
ting  the  fourth  from  vnitie ,  and  fo  all  forward  leaning  two  betwene :  which  was  required  to 
bepromd . 


ff  The  1 1.  Theorem?.  The  11.  (Proportion . 

If  from  Vnitie  he  numbers  in  continuall proportion  ho^o  many  foeitef  tht 
lefie  meafureth  the greater  by fame  one  of  them  lohich  are  before  in  tht 
faid  proportionall  numbers. 

< '  •'  1  •'  ■  '  •  1  '  •  ■-  --  \  . -  „  •  '■  1  .  ; 

■■  *  -.v "v.  <  it1/:  ■  .-V:,  \  \\\ v.* '-Yt  -■  t.  S  _  t  ' 

Vppofe  that  from  vnitie  A  bethefe numbers  in  continuall  proportion  B,C,D,E 
Then  I  fay  that  of  thefi  numbers  B}C>I)3E:  B  being  the  lefe, meafureth  E  thegrec, 
— :  ter  by  one  of thefe  numbers  C  or  D.  For  for  that  as  vnitie  A  is  vnto  the  number  B, 
fp  is  D  to  E,therfore  how  many  times  vnitie  A  meafureth 

the  number  Bfo  many  times  D  meafureth  E  :  wherefore  E  . . 

alternately  (by  the  15. of  the feuenth)how  many  times  vni-  D . 

tie  A  meafureth  the  number  D  ,  fo  many  times  B  me  a-  C  ... . 

f troth  E .  But  vnitie  A  meafureth  D  by  thofe  vnities  B  .. 

which  are  in  D  .  Wherefore  B  alfo  meafureth  E  by  thofe  A . 
vnitieswhick  arein  T).  Wherefore  B  the  lejfe ,  msafu- 

reth  E  the  greater  byfome  one  of  the  numbers  which  went  before  E  in  the  proportional 
numbers.  Andfo  likewife  may  we  proue  that  B  meafureth  D  by  fome  one  of  the  numbers  B 
C}D,namely,by  C.^Andfo  of  the  ref .  if ther fore  from  vnitie  &c.  Which  was  required  U 


TJSF,  ’-.Vi  Vi- 


f  The  12.  Theorem?.  fTheiz.^Propofition. 

If  from  fnitle  be  numbers  iuconthiuall  proportion  bo^o  many  foeuer7  hoot 
many. prime  numbers  meafkretheleaUJh  many  al/o  foalmwfure  the  mm 
her  lohich  folloiceth  next  after^nitie. 


Demon ftr4~ 
tiott  of  the  ft* 
ton  A  pan  lea*  , 
ding  alfo  to 
an  ab/urditko 


Demonffra* 
tion . 


Vt*nonftu~ 


Vppofe  that from  with  be  thefe  numbers  in  continuall proportion  A,B,C,D.  Tht 
\j fay  'that  how  many  primenubers  meafure  D,fo  many  alfo  do  meafure  A.Suppofe 
j  that  fome  prime  number  namely  ,E, do  meafure  D.T hi  I  fay  that  E  alfo  meajureth 
A, which  is  next  vnto  v%itie.For  ifE  do  not  meafure  A  And  Eisa  prime  number, but  eue- 
ry  number  is  toeuery  number  which  it  meafureth  not  a  prime  number  ( by  the  31.  of  the  fe¬ 
uenth  ) .  Wherefore  A  and  E  are  prime  numbers  the  one  to  the 'other.  Andforafmuch  as  E 
ti*n  leading  to  meafureth  D  ,] let  it  meafure  D  by  the  number  F.  Wherefore  E  multiplieng  F  produceth  D. 
an  abjurditte ,  Agairie  forafmuch  as  A  meafureth  D  by  thofe  vnities  which  are  in  C, therefore  A  multipli¬ 
eng  C  produceth  D.But  E  alfo  multiplieng  F  produced  D ,  wherfore  that  which  is  produced 
of  the  numbers  A,C  is  e  quail  to  that  which  is  produced  of the  numbers  E,F.  Wherfore  as  A 
istoEfois  F  toC.But  A  ,£  ,are prime  numbers, yea  they are prime  and  the  leaf .But  the  lejl 
numbers  meafure  the  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the  fame  proportion  with  them  equally  by 
the  ii.o ft  he feuenth,, namely, the  antecedent  the  antecedent,  and  the  confequent  the  confe - 
quent .IVherfore  E  meafureth  C.Let  it  meafure  it  by  G.  Wherefore  E  multiplieng  G produ¬ 
ceth  C.But  A  alfo  multiplieng  B  produceth  C.  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  the  mm- 


Vnitie. 

A..C, 

B  .............. 

C  . . . 

D  2  <6 


‘4: 

vi 


ll  • .  »-■ .  * . . . 


G  ...... 

F  128 


hers  o 4,B,is  e quail  to  that  which  is  produced  of the  numbers  E,G  .Wherfore  as is  to  Ep 
fo  is  G  to  B.But  A,E  are  prime  numbers, yea  they  are  prime  and  the  leaf.  But  the  leaf  num¬ 
ber  sf  by  the  2 1  .of the  feuenth)  meafure  the  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the fame  proportion 
with,  the  equally, namely, the  antcccdct  the  antecedet,&  the  cofequet  the  confeqet. Wherfore 
E  meafureth  B.Let  it  meafure  it  by  H.  Wherefore  E  multiplieng  H  produceth  B.But  A  alfo 
multiplieng  himfelfe  produceth  B, wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  the  numbers  E,H,  is 
equall  to  that  which  is  produced  oft  he  number  A  Wherfore  as  E  is  to  A,fo  is  A  to  H  .But  A 
E  arc  prim&nubers,yea  they  are  prime  &  the  lsajl,but  theleaJi  numbers(by  the  11. of  thefe- 
i  ,  uenth)  t&eafure  the  numbers  that  haue  on\  and  the fame  proportion  with  the  equally , name- 

l  ly,  the  antecedet  the  antecedent , and  the  cofequent  the  confequent. Wherfore  E  meafureth  A 

*  and  it  alfo  doth  not  meafure  it  by  fuppoftion, which  is  impofible. Wherfore  A  and  E  are  not 

prime  the  one  to  the  other,  wherfore  they  are  comp  0 fed. B ut  all  compofed  numbers  are  meafu- 
hd  of fom'efrifffe number, wherfore  A  and  E  are  meajured  by  fome  prime  number.  And  for 
afmuch as  E  is fuppofcd  to  be  a prime  number.  But  a prime  number  is  not  (by  the  definition) 
meafnred  by  any  other  number  but  of  himfelfe. Wherfore  E  meafureth  A  and  E, wherfore  E 
meafureth  A, and  it  alfo  meafureth  D  .Wherfore  E  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A  and  D.  And 
in  like fort  may  weproue  that  how  many  prime  numbers  meafure  D,  fo  many  alfo fall  mta- 
fire  A  :  which  was  required  to  be  prouid.  ' 


#  An  other  more  briefe  demonftration  after Flufates. 

\An  other  de-  r  Siippofethatfi'Ofrt  vnitiebenubers  In  cocintiall  proportion  how  many  fo  euerjnamelyjAjB,C,D,, 

mondratio  af-  And  let  fome  prime  nuber,namcly,£  meafure  the  lad  nuber  which  is  D  .The  1  lay  that  the  fame  E  mea 
ter  Fluffjtes  fureth  A  which  is  the  next  number  vnto  vnitie.  For  if  E  doo  not  meafure  A,  then  are  they  prime^the 

^  *  one  t»che  other  by  the  1 1  .of  the  feuenth  .  And  forafmuch  as  A, 0,0,0 .are  proportional!  from  vmtie# 

■  »V  ^  ,  ther- 


ofSuclides  Elmentef.  Folzij • 

therefore  A  multiplying  himfelfeprdduceth  B.WherforeBand  E  arc  prime  Vnitie  ' 
numbers  (  by thci7.ofthefcuenthJj . .  Andforafinuthas  A  multiplying  B  A  4  $ 

produceth  C,  therefore  C  is  to  Ealfb  a  prime  number  by  the  of  the  fe  B  16  ,  f 

ttenth.Aod  iikewife  infinitely  A- multiplying  C  produceth  D  :  wherefore  D  C  vf 

and  E  are  prime  numbers  the  one  to  the  other  (by  the  fame  16.  of  the  fe-  D  %'>&  It 

uenth>.  Wherefore  Emeafureth  not  Das  it  was  fuppofed, which  is  abfurd,  E  a  J 

wherefore  the  prime  number  E  meafureth  A,  whiche  is  nexte  vnto  vnitie: 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

tf  The  ij.  Theorem?.  The  is.TropoJition. 

If  from  Tonitie  be  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  how  many  foeuer ,  and 
tf  that  *ip hick  followeth  next  after  Vnitie  be  a  prime  number:  then Jhall  no 
other  number  meafure  the  great? ft  number,  but  thofe  onely  iohich  are  be* 
fore  in  the  fayd proportional!,  numbers . 

Fppcfethat from  vnitie  be  the fe  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  A,B,C,Df 
and  let  that  which  followeth  next  after  vnitie,  that  is.  A,  be  a  prime  number. 
j  T  hen  1 fay,  that  no  other  number  befdes  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,  meafureth  the 

,  _ _ jgreatef  number  of  them  which  is  D  .  For  if it  bepofible,let  E  meafure  t>  .And 

let  E  be  none  of  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,D  .Now  it  is  manifeft  that  E  is  not  a prime  number. 
For  ifE  be  a  prime  number  do  alfo  meafure  D ,  it  (hall  likewife  meafure  A  being  a  prime 
number  and  not  being  one  and  the  fame  with  A,  by  the former  Propofticn  :  which  is  im~ 
poftble .  Wherefore  E  is  not  a  prime  number .  Wherefore  it  is  a  compofed  number.  But  euerj 
compofed  number  ( by  the  33  .of the fetiemh )  is  meafured  by feme  prime  number . 

x> . . ; . . . . 

c  . . . 

B  ......... 

aA.  «  «  • 

Ynitit  •  . 

.  e  — - — — . 

H  * - - 

C  - : - 

F  - - i - r- - 


Now  /  fay  %t hat  no  other  prime  nuher.  befdes  lA (hall  meafure  E.  For  if  any  other  prime 
ruber  do  meafure  E,  &  E  meafureth  D ,  therfore  that  number  alfo jhall  meafure  D  (by  the 
$. common  fentence  of  the feuenth )  .Wherfore  it  jhal alfo  meafure  A  (by  the propoftion  next 
going  before )  being  a  prime  number  and  not  being  one  and  the fame  with  A :  which  is  im - 
pofible .  Wherefore  onely  the  prime  number  0/  meafureth  E  which  meafureth  thegreatef 
number  D . 

fAndforafmuch  as  E  meafureth  X>,  let  it  meafure  it  by  F .  Now  /  fay,  that  F  is  none  of 
thefe  numbers  A, B,C .  For  if F  be  one  and  the fame  with  any  of thefe  numbers  A,  B,C^  and 
it  meafureth  D  by  £,  therefore  one  of  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,  meafureth  D  by  E.  But  one  of 
thefe  numbers  A,B,C,  meafureth  D  by  fome  one  of  thefe  numbers  A,Bg,  therefore  E is  one 
and. the  fame  with  one  of  theft  numbers  A,B,C  .•  which  is  contrary  to  the fuppofition.Wher- 
fore  F  it  not  one  and  the  fame  with  any  of  thefe  numbers  A,B\C. 

In  like  fort  may  weproue,  that  onely  the  prime  number  A  meafureth  F,  pruning frjl  that 

AAjijj.  F  is 


Demottflr *- 
t ion  leading  to 
anabfurditH* 


%Att  other  dt- 
monfiratio  af¬ 
ter  lamp  arte. 


JF  is  not  d  primi  fiuihber.  For  if F  he  a  prime  number,  and  it  meafureth  3,  therefore  bdtfi 
meafureth  A  being  a  prime  number ,am  not  being  ope  arid  the  fame  with  CA, by  the  former 
Proportion :  which  is  impofible .  Wherefore  F  is  not  a  prime  number:  wherefore  it  is  a  com¬ 
posed  number,  and  therefore  fome  prhne  number  Jhall  meafure  it  .Now  I fay,  that  no  other 
prink  number  befides  A  Jhall  meafure  it.  For  if  any  other  prime  number  do  meafure  F,  and 
F  meafureth  3,  thereforethat  number  jhall  meafure  3  (by  the  s -common  fentence  of  the fe- 
uenth  )  .  Wherefore  it jhall  alfo  meafure  A  (by  the  former  Proportion  )  being  a  prime  num¬ 
ber  and  not  beipg  one  and  the  fame  with  A :  which  is  impofihlc  •  Wherefore  onely  the  prime 
number  A  meafureth  F .  And  forafmuch  as  E  meafureth  3  by  F,  therefore  E  multiplying 
F produceth  3  .ButA  alfo  multiplying  C produceth  3  ,  therefore  that  which  is  produced 

t> . . . . . 

<?  ......A.. . . 


B  *  •  * ■»  •  • 
A  . . .  ■ 
Vnitie  .  ' 


if  A  intoC,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of E  into  F  .Wherfore proportionally  as  A  is 
to  E,fo  is  F  to  C .  But  A  meafureth  E .  Wherefore  F  meafureth  G .  Let  F  meafure  C  by  G. 
And  in  like  fort  may  we  proue,  that  G  is  not  one  and  the fame  with  any  of  thefe  numbers  A , 
B,  C ,  and  t hat  G  is  a  compofed  number,  and alfo  that  onely  the  prime  number  A  meafureth 
it .  And  forafmuch  as  F  meafureth  C  by  G, therefore  G  multiplying  F produced  C.  But  A  al¬ 
fo  multiplying  B  produced  C .  Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  B,  ise  quail  to  that 
which  is  produced  of F  into  G .  Wherefore  proportionally  as  o/ is  to  F,fo  is  G  to  B  . '  But  A 
meafureth  F .  Wherefore  G  alfo  meafureth  B .  Let  G  meafure  B  by  H.  Now  in  like  fori  as  be¬ 
fore  may  we  proue ,  that  H  is  not  one  and  the fame  with  A, and  that  H  is  a  compofed  number , 
and  meafured  onely  of  the  prime  number  A.  Andforafmuch  as  G  meafureth  B  by thofe  uni¬ 
ties  which  are  in  H,  therfore  G  multiplying  H produced  B  \  But  A  multiplying  him  felfe  pro¬ 
duced  B.  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of H  into  Gjs  e quail  to  the fquare  numberwhich 
is  produced  of  A.  Wherefore  as  H  is  to  A,fo  is  A  to  G.  But  A  meafureth  G.  Wherfore  H  mea¬ 
fureth  A  being  a  prime  number  and  not  being  one  and  the  fame  with  it :  which  is  ahfurde. 
W kcrfore'M-  other  n timber  befides  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,  meafureth  the  greatefi  number  D: 
which  was  required to  be  demonfir ated. 


An  other  demonftration  of  the  fame  after  Campane. 

*  - 

^Suppoftjth^tE  not  being  one  andthe  famewiththe  numbers  A,  B,  C,Ddoo  meafure  the  num¬ 
ber  D.And  let  it  meafure  it  by  the  number  F  .  And’forafnruch  as  -^beinga  prime  number  meafureth 
thenumber  DjWhich  is  produced  ofE  into  E :  therefore  by  the  31.  of  the  feueth,A  meafureth  either  B 
or  E ^etirmejfure  E.  Now  forafmuch  as  D  is  produced  of  A  into  C, and  alfo  of  E  into  F :  therefore  by., 
tlie  fecpnd  part  of  tn^xji.bf  the  feuenth,^is  to  E,as  F  is  to  C.But^  meafureth  E:  wherefore  F  meafu- 
fetb  C.L2t'it''meafare'"it  by  G.  Wherefore  by  the /i.  ofthe  feuenth  ^fhall  meafure  either  F  or  G  .  Lee 
ettneafureF  .Wherefore  as  before  by  the  fecoiid  part  of  thereof  the  feuenth  G  {hall,  meafure  B^.  Let  it 
meafure  it  by  H.  blow  then  as  before  itfolloweth  by  the  32.  ofthe  feuenth  that  A  fhall  meafure  either 
.G  ori^-.Kfupppfe  tba^it  meafure  G.  Wherefore  by  the  fecond  part  ofthe  2o.of the  feuenth  H  fhall  mea- 
tbir'e  m8o  hhfifelfe  is  produced  B ,  and'  of  H  into  Q  alfo  is  produced  B)  If  therefore  H  be  not 

u’i  ..vd 3  -x  equal! 


Fol.%  18. 

cquallvnto  A,A{hiU.  be  no  prime  number  .Which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition.Sutif  it  be  equal!  vfl^ 
to  ^f,then  euery  one  of  thefe  numbers  6”,F,E,fliall  be  fome  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D,  by  the  u. 

Vnitie  ,  '  .  ■ 

A  * . . 

«.•««.*«.  ‘"t 

f  C  .. . V.... . . 

b  . . . . . . . . 


E 

E 

G 

H 


propofition  of  the  ninth  repeted  as  often  as  neede  requireth  .  Wherefore  E  is  pot  a  number diuerfe 
from  them,  but  is  one  and  the  lame  with  fome  one  of  them :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppoficion,wher 
fore  that  is  mauifell  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


f  T be  14.  T beoreme.  T be  14.  Tropofition. 

If  there  be  geuen  the  leaf  number ptohom  certayne  prime  numbers  geuen , 
do  menfurr.no  other  prime  number fall  meafure  that  nuber ?  bejides  tbofe 
prime  numbers  geuen. 

V ppofe  that  the  leaf  number  whom  thefe  prime  numbers  B,C,Dfo  meafure, be  A. 
Then  I  fay  that  no  other  prime  number  befdes  B,C ,  D,meafureth  A. 1  For  if  it  be 
pofiblefet  E  being  a  prime  number  meafure  A, and  let  E  be  none  of  thefe  numbers 
B)C,D.  i^Andforafnuch  as  E  meafu- 

reih  A,  let  it  meafure  it  by  F.  Wherfore  0/ . . . 

FmuhipliengF  produceth^A.  \And  B  .. 
thefe  prime  numbers  B,C,D,  meafure  C  ... 

A.Eut  if  two  numbers  multiplieng  the  D  . 

one  the  other  produce  any  number.  And 

if  fome  prime  number  meafure  that  E  _ _ 

which  is  produced ,  it fall  alfo  meafure  F  . . . .  —  - 

one  ofthofe  numbers  which  were  put  at 

the  beginning  (by  the  3  2. of  the feuenth)  Wherfore  thofe  numbers  B,C,D,  meafure  one  of 
thefe  numbers  E  or  F.But  they  meafure  not  Efor  Ets  a  prime  number,  and  is  not  one  and 
the  fame  with  anyone  of thefe  numbers  B  ,C ,D .  Wherfore  they  meafure  F  being  teffe  then 
A  which  is  impofible.  For  lA is  fuppofed  to  be  the  leaf  whom  B,C,D,  meafure.  ''Wherefore 
no  prime  number  befdes  B,C,D,meafureth  k_A  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf rated. 

A  propofition  added  by  Campane. 


Vernon  fire* 
ium  leading  m 
mdjwmm 


iv. 


ff  there  be  numbers  hoW  many  foeuer  in  continuall  proportion  being  the  leaf  in  that  proportion: 

a  number  meafurwg  one  oft  hem  ,Jha/l  be  a  number  not  prime  to  one  of  the  tWo  leaf  numbers  in  that 
proportion. 

, .  SuPPofc  1 f  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  how  many  foeuer  namely  A,  n,  C,  Z7,E  A  brcbofittm 
which  let  be  the  lead  that  haue  the  fame  proportion  with  them:  and  let  the  two  lead  numbers  in  that  aided bt 
propoi  tion.be  F  and  G  .  ^nd  let  fome  number  as  H  meafure  fome  one  of  the  numbers  A,  B,  C,  D,  E, 
namely,  C.  Then  I  fay  that  H  is  a  number  not  prime  either  to  F  or  G.  Take(by  the  a. of  the  eight )  the 

three 


Canfimtlhn, 


Vemnflr*- 


«;■ , 


Thenintb'Bookg 


three  lcafl  numbers  in  > 

the  proportion  of  to,  A  ie 

It ;  which  let  be  P,  d,f.  K  8 

R.^nd  afterward  fower  '  P.,..  .  *  a#/ 

(by  thefame)whichlet  F..  L  f% 

be  K,L3M3N:  &fo  for-  H  .  . .  C  3 6 

ward  till  you  come  to  G  . . .  M  if 

the  multitude  of  the  R  . . .  D 

numbers  geuen  ^5yC,  v  N  47 

D,E,Now  it  is  manifeft  E  81 

(  by  the  demonftration 


of  the  fecond  of  the  eight)  that  F  multiplyed  by  P,  Q^and  R  produceth  K3L,  M ;  and  that  F  m  ultiplyed 
"by  K3LsM,N  produceth ^3«3C3D.-tnd  forafmuch  as  H  meaiureth  C :  therfore H iseithcr to F  or  toM 
notprimef  by  the  corollary  of  the.3i.0f  the  feuenth  added  by  Capane _)Ifit  be  not  prime  vnto  F:  the  is 
that  manifeft  which  was  required  to  be  proued-SutifH  be  not  prime  vntoM.The  fhalit  not  be  prime 
either  to  F  or  to  R(by  the  fame  corollary ) .  If  agayne  it  be  not  prime  vnto  F,  then  is  that  proaed  which 
Was  required.  Sutifit  be  not  prime  vntoR,then(by  the  fame  corollary  jihallitbea  number  not  prime 
vnto  G  (which  produceth  R  by  the  a. of  the  eighty  but  G  isoneofthe  two  leaftnumbers  F  or  G  which 
are  in  the  proportion  of  the  numbers  geuen  at  the  beginning  A, B,  C»  D,E  .If  therefore  there  he  num¬ 
bers  how  many  foeuer.  &c .which  was  required  to  beproued. 


f  The  is.Tbeoreme.  The  is.Trofojttioh 1 

If  three  numbers  in  continuall propm'tian  he  ’the  leaf  of  all  numbers  that 
haue  one  and  the fame  proportion  "frith  them :  euerj  two  of them  added  to* 

get  her f?all  be  prime  to  the  third. 

. ...  - 

;  Fppofe  that  there  be  three  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  A,B,C,  being  the  left 
w  of  all  numbers  that  haue  one  and.  the  fame  proportion  with  them.  Then  Jfay,  that 
euery  two  of  thefe  numbers  A,B  ,C, added  together ,  are prime  to  the  third:  name-* 
ly,  that  A,B ,  is  prime  to  C ,  and  B,C,  to  A ,  and  A,  C,  to  B.  Take  ( by  the  3s-  of the feuenth y 
two  of  the  leaf  numbers  that  haue  one  and  the fame  proportion  with  AyB,C,  &  let  the fame 
be  the  numbers  B  E,and  E  F . 

T(ow  it  is  manifeft  (by  the  fayd 3 $ . Propofition)that  D  E  multiplying  him  felfe produced 
Ay  and  multiplying  E  F  produced  B,  and  moreouerE  E  multiplying  him felfe  produced  C, : 

KSlnd forafmuch  as  B  E  and  E  F  are  thebeaft  in  that  proportion,  they  are  alfo  prime  the 
one  to  the  other  (by  the  2^. of  the feuenth )  .But 

if two  numbers  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other,  A  . .  B  . . . 

then  both  of  the  added  together, fall  be  prime  C  . . 

to  either  of  them  (by  the  30.  of  the feuenth).  B  ...  E  ....  F 

Wherefore  the  whole  number  B  F  is  prime  to 

either  ofthefenubers  B  E& EF.  But  D  E  alfo  is  prime  vnto  E  F  .WherforeB  F>&DB 
are  prime  vnto  E  F  Wherfore  that  which,  is produced  of  BE  into  BE,  is( by  the  2d. of  the  fe 
ue  lb) prime  vnto  EF  .But  if  two  nubers  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other ,th at  which  is  produced 
of  the  one  of  the  into  himfelfe,is  prime  to  the  other  (by  the  27.  of  the feueth).  Wherfore  that 
which  is  produced  of B  F  into  B  E,  is  prime  to  that  which  is  produced  ofE  F  into  him  felfe. 
But  that  which  is  produced  ofF  B  into  B  E,  is  the fquare  nuber  which  is  produced  of  B  E 
into  him  felfe  together  with  that  which  is  produced  ofB'E  into  EF  (by  the  3  .of the fecond}. 
Wherfore  the  fquare  nuber  which  is  produced  of  BE  together  with  that  which  is  produced  of 
BE  into  E  F,is  prime  to  that  which  is  produced  ofEF  into  himfelf.But  that  which  is  prod# 
ced  ofB  E  into  him  felfe, is  the  number  A,fy  that  which  is  produced  ofB  E  into  E  E,is  the 
number  B:  and  that  which  is  produced  ofE  F  into  himfelfe,is  the  number  C.  Wherefore  the 
numbers  added  together  are prime  vnto  C. 

By  the 


of Euclidcs  ElementeU  PaLiig* 

By  the  like  demonftration  alfo  may  we  B  C _ 

jfVue,  that  the  numbers  ByCrare  prime  mu  A . 

the  number  A. 

Now  alft  1  fay, that  the  numbers  A,C,  are  prime  into  the  number  B« 

Forforafmuch  as  D  F  is  prime  to  either  of 

theft  D  E  and  E  F  ;•  therefore  that  which  is  A  .........  C  ....... v . 

produced  of DF  into  him felfisp..  rime  to  that-  B  . . 

which  is  produced  of  I)  E  into  E  E.  But  that  D  ...  E  ....  F 
which  is  produced  ofD  F  into  him  felfe ,  is  i r- 

guall  to  -theft dare  numbers  which  are  produced  of  D  E  and  E  F  together  with  that  number 
which  is  produced  of. D  E  into  E  F,twife  ( by  the  4. of  the  fecond) .  Wherefore  thefquare  nu- 
hers  which  are  produced  ofD  E  and  E  F  together  with  that  which  is  produced  of  D  E  into 
E  F  twife  are  prime  to  that  which  is  produced  of D  E  into  E  E.And  by  diuifon  a/fo(by  the 
$0. of  the feuenth )  thefquare  numbers  produced  ofD  E  and  E  F, together  with  that  which 
is  produced  of  D  E  into  E  F  once  are  prime  to  that  which  is  produced  cfDE  into  EE  .A- 
gaine  (by  the  fame  3  0. of  the feuenth)  the fquare  nubers produced  ofDE  and  E  F, are prime 
to  that  which  is  produced  ofD  E  into  E  F.  But  that  which  is  produced  of D  E  into  him  felfe 
is  A,  and  that  which  is  produced  of  E  F  into  him  felfe  is  C,  and  that  which  is  produced  of 
D  E  into  E  F,is  B  .  Wherefore  the  numbers  A,C,  added  together  are  prime  into  the  num¬ 
ber  B  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


This  latter  part  of  the  demon  fixation,  which  proueth  thatthe  numbers  A;&  C  are 
prime  vnto  Rj  isfomewhat  obicurely  put  of  T been .  And  therefore  I  will  here  make  it 
playner. 

.  Forafmuch  as  either  of  the  numbers  D  E, and  E  Fis  prime  to  the  whole  D  F :  (as  hath  before  bene 
proued)  therefore  that  which  is  produced  of  D  E  into  E  F(which  is  the  number  B  )  is  prime  vnto  D  Fj 
by  the  ztf.ofthe  feuenth. Wherefore  by  the  z7.of the  fame  that  which  is  produced  ofD  F  into  hirafdfe 
(which  is  the  number  compofed  of  A  and  C  and  of  the  double  of  B  by  the4.  of  the  fecond  )  thall  be 
prime  vnto  B.  Wherefore  it  folio  weth  that  the  numbercompofed  of  A  and  C  is  prime  vnto  B. For  if  a 
number  compofed  of  two  numbers.be  prime  to  one  of  the  faid  two  numbers, as  here  the  number  com 
pofed  of  A  and  C  taken  as  one  number  and  of  the  double  of  B,  is  prime  vnto  the  double  of  B  *  then  the 
two  numbers  whereof  the  number  is  compofed,  namely  ,  the  numbercompofed  of  A  and  C ,  and  the 
double  of  B  Hull  be  prime  the  one  to  the  otherfby  the  30  of  the  feuenth)  .  And  therefore  the  number 
compofed  of  A  and  C  fhall  be  prime  to  B  taken  once.Eof  if  any  number  fhould  meafure  the  two  num¬ 
bers, namely  the  number  compofed  of  A  and  C, and  the  number  B,  it  fhould  alfo  meafure  the  number 
compofed  of  A  and  C, and  the  double  ofB  (by  the  j .  common  fentencc  of  the  feuenth)  :  which  is  not 
ppfiibl  c,for  that  they  are  proued  to  be  prime  numbers. - 

b  Here  Kauc I  added  an  other  demonflnif  ion  of  the  . former  Proportion  after  Cam- 
pant,  which  proueth  that  in  nubers  bow  many  foeuer ,  which  is  there  proued  onely  tou¬ 
ching  three  numbers :  and  the  demonltration  fsemeth  fomwhat  moreperfpicous  then 
T/7favjdemonftration.And  thus  heputteth  the  propofition. 

If  numbers  hoto  many  foeuer  being  in  continua.il  proportion  be  the  leaf  that  haueons  &  the Jams 
proportion  With  themeeuery  oneofthemjha/be  to  the  number  compofed  of  the  rest  prime, 

Suppofe  thattherebe  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  how  many  foeuer,  and  the  leaf!  in 
their  proportion :  namely,^, B,G,D.Then  I  fay  that  euery  one  ofthem,  as  for  example  firllD  ,  is  prime 
to  the  number  compofed  ofthe  red, namely, of  ^,^,C.For  if  it  be  not,let  fome  number,  namely  E  mea 
lure  D,and  the  number  compofed  of-l.nJiZ.  Take  the  two  leaf!  numbers  in  the  fame  proportion  that 
■'^jQDare  (  by  .the  3  y.  of  the  feuenth  )  which  let 
be  F,G..'/nd  forafmuch  as  E  meafureth  one  of thefe 

number  ^,B,C,D,  the. fame  Efhalbe  a  number  not  _  L  *  ’  “ 

prime  either  to  F  or  to  G  (by  the  proportion  before  F  * ‘  r 

added  bv  Camrone  nfmr  rh<»  ,»  s«tG.  ■'  •  * 


Demnitrath 
at  to  prone 
that  the  num*> 
bets  A  and  C 
are  prime  to 
B* 


Vmonffra- 
tiott  leadings 
an  abjurduts!? 


A  8 

B  rat 


added  by  Campane  after  the  14, propofition  jwher- 
fore  feme  number  fhall  meafure  E  and  one  of  thefe 
mtmbers  F or  G :  which  let  be  H.  ^nd  forafmuch  as 
If  meafureth  E,it fhall  alfo  meafure D, which  num¬ 
ber  D  the  number  E  alfo  meafureth  (  by  they,  com¬ 
mon  lentence  of  the  feuenth).Morcouer  forafmuch 
ipHfby  fuppoution)  meafureth  one  cf thefe  num- 


E- 

H- 


AB  C  3* 
A  B  D  47 


C  it 
D 


bars- 


A 


T be  ninth  'Booke 

ibers  F  or  G, the  fame  H  (hall  meafure  all  the  meanes  betwene  AandDby  the  feme  comon  fentfee.For 
either  ofthefe  numbers  F  or  G  produceth  all  the  meanes  by  the  next  numbers  in  continuall  proporti¬ 
on  and  in  the  fame  proportion  with  them  fas  by  1,1*,  K )  by  the  fecond  of  the  eight .  Agayne  foralmuch 
as  H  meafureth  E,which(by  fuppofition Jmeafureth  the  whole  A,  B,  C :  the  fame  H  Inall  alfo  meafure 
the  whole  A,B,  C  (by  the  forefayd  common  fentence)  and  it  meafureth  the  part  taken  away ,  namely, 
the  meanes  B,C  (as  it  hath  bene  proued)wherefore  it  alfo  meafureth  the  rendtie  A(by  the  4.common 
fentence  of  the  feuenth)  wherefore  H  meafureth  the  extreames  D  and  A ,  which  are  prime  the  one  to 
the  other(by  the  3  .of  the  eight)which  wercabfurd .  Wherefore  D  is  a  number  prime  to  the  number 
compofed  of  the  reft, namely,ofA,B,C. 

Secondly  I  lay  that  this'is  fo  in  euery  one  of  them:  namely  that  C  is  a  prime  number  to  the  num¬ 
ber  compofed  of  A,B,D.For  if  not, then  as  before  let  E  meafure  C,and  the  number  compofed  of  A,B, 
D:whichElhalbe  a  number  not  prime  either  to  For  to  G  (  by  the  former  propofition  added  by  Cam- 
panejwherefore  let  H  meafure  them  .And  forafmuch  as  H  meafureth  £,it  fhall  alfo  meafure  the  whole 
A,  B,  C,  D  whom  E  meafureth  .And  forafmuch  as  H  meafureth  one  of  chefe  numbers  F  or  G ,  it  fhall 
meafure  one  of  the  extreames  A  or  D:  which  are  produced  of  F  or  G(by  the  fecond  of  the  eight)  if  they 
bemultipl  edinto  the  meanes  L  or  K. And  moreouer  the  fame  H  fhall  meafure  the  meames,  B  C  (  by 
the  f  .common  fentence  of  the  feuenth  )when  as  by  fuppofition  it  meafureth  either  F  or  G.which  mea¬ 
fure  B,Cf  by  the  fecond  of  the  eight).  But  the  fame  H  meafureth  the  whole  A,B,C,  D  as  we  haue  pro¬ 
ued, for  that  it  meafureth  E.Wherefore  it  fhall  alfo  meafure  the  refidue,namely,the  number  compofed 
of  the  extreames  A  andD  (by  the  4. common  fentence  of  the  feuenth  )  .  And  it  meafureth  one  of  thefe 
AorD  (for  it  meafureth  one  of  thefe  F  or  G  which  produce  A  andD  )  wherefore  the  fame  H  fhall 
meafure  one  of  thefe  A  or  D  andaffo  rhe.otherof  them  f  by  the  former  common  fentence )  which  num 
bers  A  and  Dare  by  the  .3  .of  the  eight  prime  the  one  to  the  other  .Which  were  abfurd  .  This  may  alfo 
be  proued  in  euery  one  of  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,D  .  Wherefore  no  number  fhall  meafure  one  of  thefe 
numbers  A, B,C,  D  and  the  number  compofed  of  the  reft.  Wherefore  they  are  prime  the  one  to  the  o- 
iher :  If  therefore  numbers  how  many  foeuer  .&c :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Here  as  I  prom  {fed*  I  haue  added  Campanes  demonftrations  of  thofe  Propofition  s  in 
numbers,  which  Euciide  in  the  fecond  booke  demonftrated  in  lines  ♦  And  that  in  thys 
place  foimich  the  rather,  for  that  as  we  fee  in  the  demonftration  of  the  15.  Pro¬ 

pofition  feemeth  to  alledgc  the  3.&4.Propofitionofthe  fecond  boke:  which  although 
they  concerne  lines  onely,yetas  wc  there  declared  and  proued,  are  they  true  alfo  in 
numbers. 


The  firft  Propofition  added  by  Camfuwe. 

T hat  number  which  is  produced  cf  the  multiplication  of  one  number  into  numbers  how  many fi* 
euer:  is  equall  to  that  number  which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  fame  number  into 
the  number  compofed  of  them. 


VmonUra- 

#»»* 


This  proueth  that  in  numbers  which  the  firft  of  the  fecond  proued  touching  lines.  Suppofe 
that  the  number  A  being  multiplyed  into  the  number  B,and  into  the  number  C,  andinto  the  number 
D,  deo  produce  the  numbers  E,  F  and  G .  Then  I  fay  that  the  number  produced  of  A  multiplyed  into 
the  number  compofed  of  E,C*and  D  is  equall  to  the  number  compofed  of  E,F,and  G.  For  by  the  con- 
uerfe  of  the  definition  of  a  number  multiplyed ,  whatpart  vnitie  is  of  A  ,  the  felfc  lame  partis  B  of  E» 
and  CofF,and  alfo  D  of G.  Wherefore  . 

by  the  y. of  the  feuenth  what  part  vnitie  **' 

is  of  A,  the  felfe  fame  partis  the  num-  B  ...  C  ....  D  ..... 

ber  compofed  ofB,C,and  D,of  the  num  c.  .  n  1  y  ■»  ■.■»■■■  1.  ,J 

ber  compofed  of  E, F,and  G.  Wherfore  •  •  i .......... . 

by  the  definition  that  which  is  produ- 

ced  of  A  into  the  number  compofed  of  E......  F .  G.... ...... 

B,C,D>  is  equall  to  the  number  compo-  * . .  .r..,...-,  y  <  -  ■  ■ 

fed  of  E,  F,  G  :  which  was  required  to  ........................ 

be  proued. 


The  fecond  Propofition. 


That  number  which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  numbers  how  many  foeuer  into  oiteu£~ 
her  i  is  equall  to  that  number  which  is  produced  of the  multiplication  of  the  Humber  compofed  of 
them  into  the  fame  number , 

-  *'  .  Thy* 


of Guclides  Elemented  Fol.no . 

This  is  the  conuerfe  of  the  former.  As  if  die  numbers  B  and  C  and  D  multiplyed  into  the  number 
A  doo  produce  the  numbers  E  and  Fand  G. 

Xhen.  the  number  compofed  of  B,C,D,mul-  B  ...  C  ....  D  ..... 

tfylyed into  the  number^ fhali produce  the  A  .  . 

Hum  her  compofed  of  the  numbers  E ,  F ,  G.  E  ..... .  F .  G. ......... 

W hich  thing  is  eafiy  proued  by  the  irf.of  the 
feuenthand  by  the  former  propofition. 

Tr.  r*r  C)  *  A*  *)  a’  I  -  -  ~i  J  A  ,{ 

«[  The  third  Propofition. 


T  hat  number  which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  numbers  how  many  footer  into  other 
numbers  how  mdnyfoeuer,  is  equall  to  that  number  which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of 
the  number  compofed  ofthofefirfi  numbers ,  into  the  number  compofed  ofthefe  latter  numbers. 

As  if  the  numbers  A,B,G  doo  multiply  the  numbers  D,E.Fjech  one  eche  other }  and  if  the  num¬ 
bers  produced  be  added  together .  Then  I  fay  that  the 

number  compofed  of  the  numbers  produced  is  equall  to  A..  B  ...  C  . 

the  number  produced  of  the  number  compofed  of  the  D  . . ..  E  ......  F  . . 

numbers  A,  B,  C  into  the  number  compofea  of  the  num¬ 
bers  D,E5F.  For  by  the  former  propofitio  that  which  is  produced  of  the  number  compofed  of  A, B,C 
into  D  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  euery  one  of  the  fayd  numbers  into  D  :  and  by  the  fame 
reafori  that  which  is  produced  of  the  number  compofed  of  A3B,C  into  E  ,is  equal  to  that  which  is  pro¬ 
duced  of  euery  one  of  the  fayd  numbers  into  E  rand  fo  likewife  that  which  is  produced  of  the  number 
compofed  of  A,B,C  iiito  F  is  equall  to  thatwhich  is  produced  of  euery  one  ofthe  feyd  numbers  into 
F .  But  by  the  firft  of  thefe  propofitions  that  which  is  produced  of  the  number  compofed  of  thefe  num 
bers  A,C,C  into  euery  one  ofthefe  numbers  D,  £,F  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  ofthe  number 
compofed  into  the  number  compofed :  wherefore  that  is  manifeft  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


•[The  fourth  Propofition. 

jf  a  number  be  deuided  into  partes  how  many  foeuer:  that  nuber  which  is  produced  ofthe  Whole 
into  himfelfe ,  is  equall  to  that  number  which  is  produced  ofthe fame  number  into  all  his  partes. 


Thisprouethinnumbersthatwhichthefecondofthefccortdprouedinlines.Asifthe  number 
A,be  deuided  into  thenumbers  B  and  C,  and  D  .  Then  I 
fay,that  that  which  is  produced  of into  himfelfe,  is  e-  . .  A..,.,.... 

quail  to  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  all  the  fayd  num  B  i .  C. ..  D..., 

bersB,C,andD.  For  putting  the  numberE  equall  to.the  -  E . . 

number  A  ,  it  is  manifeft  by  the  firft  of  thefe  propofitions 

that  that  which  is  produced  of  E  into  A,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  E  into  all  the  partes  of 
AiButby  the  common  fentence  thatwhich  is  produced  ofE into  Aisequalto  that  which  is  produced 
qf  A  intohimfelfe:  and  that  which  is  produced  of  E  into  the  partes  of  A  is  equall  to  that  which  is  pro¬ 
duced  of  A  into  the  felfe  feme  partes.  Wherefore  that  is  manifeft  which  was  required  to  be  proued*  ' 

^[The  fift  Propofition. 

*61*,)  Jf  a  number  bedeuidedinto  two  partes,  that  Which  is  produced  ofthe  Whole  into  one  ofthe  partes £ 
=  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  the  felfe  fame  part  into  him  felfe,  and  into  the  other 


B 


A  t  a  •  •  e  . 
I  »  B  •  O 

D  ... 


f  Th|s  proueth  in  numbers  that  which  in  the  3  .of  the  fecond  was  proued  in  lines.For  let  the  num¬ 
ber  A  Ue  deuided  into  the  numbers  B  and  C  .  Then  I  fey  that  that  whichis 
produced  ofA  into  C^is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  C  into  him- 
lelfeandintoB.  For  by  the  16,‘of  the'feUenlh ,  thatwhich  is  produced  of  A 
into  C  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  ofC  into  A.  Now  then  put  the 
number  D  equall  to  the  number  C  .  Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  of 
A  into  C  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  D  into  A  .  But  by  the  firft  of  thefe  propofitions  that 
which  is  produced  of  D  into  A  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  D  into  B  and  of  D  into  C.  Wher- 
fore  forafmueh as  that  Which  is  produced  of  t>  into  A  and  into  B  and  into  C  is  equall  to  that  which  is 
produced  of  G  in  to  A  ,and  in  to  B  ,an  d  in  to  himfelfe ,  by  reafop  .-of  the  equalitie  of  C  and  D :  that  is  ma« 
•8$$ .toj be  proued. 

\  *•  v  *•**  *  A. 


4isi.i 


BB.j. 


tfThe 


This  prbbcfl 
tion  is  the  c&° 
net fe  ofthe 
former , 


Vemonflrfr 

tioti* 


Thitdnf We¬ 
rt  th  to  tbei. 
ofthe  fecond* 

Vemonflrd- 

tton* 


Thtsenfwe- 
rethtothe 3* 
ofthe  tbirdee 

BmwUrfa 

tion* 


\\  * 


The  fixt  Propofition. 


:oi  orf? 


:  -tbr 


■.% 


1/4  number  be  deuided  into  twopartes:  that  Which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  Whole 
into  him. felfe,is  equall  to. that  Which  ij  produced  oft  he  multiplication  of  either  of the partes  into 
himfelfe,  and  of  the  one  into  the  other  twife.  H 


Tint  attftee- 
nthto  the  4. 
of  the  fecond, 

Demonjlra - 
rnn. 


This  proueth  in  numbers  that  which  the  fourth  of  the  fecond  proued  touching  lines.  As  if  the 
number  A  be  deuided  into  the  numbers  B  and  C.  ThenI  lay  that  A 

that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  himfelf  is  equal  to  that  which  is  R 

produced  of  B  into  himfelfe,and  ofC  into  himfelfe ,  and  ofB  into  *  *  *  ’  ”  * 

C  t  wife.  For  by  the  4  of  thcfe  propofitions,  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  himfelfe,  is  equall  to  that 
Which  is  produced  ofAintoB,and  into  C.But  that  which  is  produced  ofAintoB,  is  equall  to  that 
which  is  produced  of  B  into  himfelfe  and  into  C  ( by  the  former  propofition) .  And  By  the  lame  thac 
which  is  produced  of  A  into  C  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  C  into  himfelfe  and  into  B  .  And 
forafmuch  as  that  which  is  produced  of  C  into  B  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  B  intti  C  by 
the  i£.  of  die  feuenth,  it  ismanifelt  that  that  is  true  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


This  anfwe- 
rethtothe  5, 
ofthe/econd, 

VemonUra - 

mn% 


n«U 


4  »  *  .  -  >  >  v  '  .  .  .. .  ..  .  .  ...  .  J  v  :  ?  i  V-'  ‘V  ’  r 

cThe  feuenth  Propofition.  o' 

'  -  ■  ■_ 

If  a  number  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes, &  into  two  vnequall  partes :  that  Which  is  produ¬ 
ced  of  the  greater  of  the  vnequall  partes  into  the  lefle,  together  With  the fquare  nuber  of  the  num¬ 
ber  fet  betveene,ts  equall  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  halfe  of  the  whole,. 

This  proueth  in  numbers  that  which  the*,  of  the  fecond  proued  in  lines  .  As  if  the  number 
A  B-  be  deuided  into  two  equall  numbers, which  let  be  A  G,and  C  B  :and  alfo  in  two  vnequal  numbers 
namely,  AD  and  DB,of  which  let  AD  be  the  greater,  and  A  r*  r»  w 

D  B  the  lefie .  Then  1  fay  that  that  which  is  produced  of  the-  r  .  * . 

whole  A  D  into  D  B  together  with  the  fquare  number  of  C  D ,  is  equall  to  the  fauare  number  of  C  B . 
For  by  the  form  er  propofitio  the  fquare  of  C  B  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of.C  D  and!  to  the  fquare  of  D  B, 
and  to  that  which  is  produced  of  B  D  into  CD  twife.  But  that  which  is  produced  of  5  D  into  himfelfe 
and  into  C  D  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  B  D  into  C  B  by  the  firft  of  thcle  propofitions,and 
therefore  vnto  thac  which  is  produced  of  £  D  into  AC.  Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  of  B  D  into 
himfelfe  and  into  C  D  twife  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  B  D  into  A  D  .  Wherefore  by  the 
fame  the  fquare  of  C  B  exceedeth  that  which  is  produced  of  BD  into  AD  by  the  fquare  of  C  D ;  wher- 
fore  that  is  raanifeil  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


^[The  8  .Propofition* 


r  ( T 


If  a  number  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes,  and  if vnto  it  be  added  an  other  number:  that 
Which  is  produced  of  the  multiplication  of  the  whole  being  compojed  into  the  number  added \  to¬ 
gether  With  the fquare  of the  halfe,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  number  compeftd  of  the  hafe 
and  the  number  added. 


*  T-nW 


This  an  five - 
reth  to  the  6. 
@f the fecond. 

Vemonftra- 

Uoth 


-MUiV-W 


This  proueth  in  numbers  that  which  the  6.  of  the  fecond  proued  touching  lines.  For  luppofe  that 
the  numbed  B  be  deuided  into  equall  numbers ■,  which  let  be  AC  and  C M :  and  vnto  ir  adde  the 
number  B  D .  Then  I  lay ,  that  that  which  is  produced  of  the  whole  AD  into  D  M  together  with  the 
fquare  ofiJC,is  equal!  to  the  fquare  ofC-D  .For  by  the  s.ofthefc  ar  t!  rt 

propofitios  the  fquare  of  cr  jD  is  equal  to  the  fquare  of  £>  to 

the  fquare  of  £  C, and  to  that  which  is  produced  of  D  B into  BC  twife.  But  by  the  x.of  thefe  propoliti- 
©ns,thac  which  is  produced  of£  D  into  himfelfe  and  into  if  C  twife  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produ¬ 
ced  of  B  D  into D  A  (  for  a  Cand  C  B  are  equall )  wherefore  the  fquare  of  CD  exceedeth  that  which  i* 
produced  of  B  D  into  D  A  by  the  fquare  of  CB .  Wherefore  that  is  raanifell  which  was  required  » 
be  proued. 


mt  2i ; 


Zi 


•[The  p.  Propofition. 

If  a  number  he  deuided  into  two  partes :  that  which  is  produced  of  the  wholenumber  into  him 
Jetfe  together  With  that  whichisproducedef one  ofthepartes  into  him  ft  If  as  equall  tot  hat  which 
is  produced  of  the  Whole  into  thefqyd  parttwifi  together  with  that  which  is  produced  of  the  oth& 


part  mt« 

sd'A  \r 


Th is 


of  Sue  tides  Elements  s. 


FcLiih 


»  This  proueth  in  numbers  that  which  the  7.  of  the  fecond  proued  in  lines  .  For  let  the  number^ 
be  deuided  into  the  numbers  B  and  D .  Then  I  fay  that  the  fquare  of  A  together  with  the  fquare  of  D 
is  equall  to  that  which  i  s  prod  uced  of  A  into  D  twife  together  with  the  . 

fquare  of  B  *.  For  it  is  manifdll:  by  the  6.  of  thefe  propofitions  that  the  R  n 

fquare  of  A  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  B  and  D  together  with  that  which  .  *  “* 

is  produced  ofi?  into  D  twife  .Wherefore  the  fquare  of  A  together  with  the  fquare  of  O ,  is  equal!  to 
two  fquares  of  D,  and  to  that  which  is  produced  of  D  into  B  twife  together  with  the  fquare  of  B,  But 
by  the  firfl:  of  thefe  propofitions  two  fquares  of  o,and  that  which  is  produced  of  Pinto  B  twife  is  e- 
qualltothat  which  is  produced  of  P  into  -4  twife.  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  P  into  A  twife 
together  with  the  iquare  o£B,is  equall  to  the  fquare  o£a  together  with  the  fquare  of  D :  wherfore  that 
is  mamfeft  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

«{[  The  lo.propofition. 

If  a  number  be  deuided  into  two  partes, and  vnto  it  be  added  a  number  equall  to  one  of  the  parts; 
the fquare  of  the  Whole  number  compofed, is  equall  to  the  quadruple  of  that  Which  is  produced  of 
the firfi  number  into  the  number  added  together  With  the fquare  of  the  other  part. 

This  proueth  in  numbers, that  which  the  S.of  the  fecond  proued  in  lines.  Suppofe  that  the  num¬ 
ber  AS  be  deuided  into the  numbers  AC  and  C2?,vnto  which  a  r.  n  n 

adde  the  number  B  D,  which  let  be  equal!  to  the  number  C  B. 

Then  I  fay  that  the  fquare  of  the  whole  num  ber  compofed,  namely,  A  It, is  equall  to  that  which  is  pro¬ 
duced  of  AB  into  B  D  fower  times  together  with  the  fquare  of  A  C.  For  by  the  <  .of  thefe  propofitions 
the  fquare  of  A  D,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  a  B  and  to  the  fquare  of  B  D  together  with  that  which  is  pro¬ 
duced  olA  B  into  B  D  twife  .And  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  3  D  is  equal  to  the  fquare  CB:  therfore  the 
fquare  of  A  D  {ball  be  equall  to  the  fquare  of  AB  and  to  thefquare  of  C  £  together  with  that  which  is 
produced  of  A  B  into  B  D  twife  .  But  by  the  former  propofition  the  fquare  of  AB  together  with  the 
fquare  of  C  B,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  AC  together  with  that  which  is  produced  of  AB  into  B  C  twife 
wherfore  thefquare  o  l  A  Di  s  equal  to  that  which  is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  D  twife,and  to  that  which 
is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C  twife  together  with  thefquare  of A  C.And  for  that  that  which  is  produced 
of  A  B  into  bc  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  AB  into  B  Ds  therefore  is  that  manifell  which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 

#  The  n.propofition. 

If  a  number  be  deuided  into  fWo  equall  partes ,  and  into  two  vnequall  partes:  the  fquares  of  the 
two  vnequall  partes  taken  together, are  double  to  the fquare  of  the  halfe ,  and  to  the fquare  of  the 
excefe  of  the  greater  part  aboue  the  lefejhe  fajd  two  fquares  b  eing  added  together . 

This  proueth  in  numbers  that  which  the  9.  of  the  fecond  proued  in  lines .  For  fuppofe  that  the 
numbers  B  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes -.which  let  be  and  C  B, and  into  two  vnequall  parts, 
which  let  be  AD  and  D  B. Then  I  fay  that  the  fquares  of  the  two  numbers  AD  8c  D  B,  taken  together, 
are  double  to  the  two  fquares  of  the  two  numbers  A  C  and  C  D,  taken  together.  For  by  the  6.  of  thefe 
propofitions  the  Iquare  of  A  D  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  .  r  n  -r 

A  C  and  CD,  and  to  that  which  is produced  of^rc  into  CD  ■  . .  '“'••*  U,‘'  B 

twife  .And  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of^Cis  equal  to  the  fquare  of  CB,  the  fquare  of  AD  lhal  be  equall 
to  the  fquare  of  B  C  &  to  the  fquare  of  CP  together  with  that  which  is  produced  of  BC  into  C  D  twife. 
Wherefore  the  fquare  of  A  D  together  with  the  fquare  of  B  D,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  B  C,  and  to  the 
fquare  of  C  D  and  to  that  which  is  produced  of  BC  into  C  D  twife  together  with  the  fquare  of  B  P.Biit 
that  which  is  produced  of  B  C  into  C  P  twife  together  with  the  fquare  of  B  D,  is  equall  to  the  Iquare  of 
B  c  and  to  the  fquare  of  C  D  by  the  9.  of  thefe  propofitions.Wherfore  the  fquares  of  the  two  numbers 
A  D  and  D  B  are  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  two  numbers  B  C  and  C  D,  taken  twife.  And  therefore  the 
fquares  of  the  two  numbers  A  D  and  D  B  are  double  to  the  fquares  of  the  two  numbers  B  C  and  C  Dt 
that  is  AC  and  C  P(for  the  numbers^  C  and  £  C are  by  fuppofition  equall)  wherfore  that  is  manifeft 
which  was  required  to  be  proued . 

#  The  i2.propo(mon. 

If a  number  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes,  and  unto  it  be  added  an  other  number :  the  fquare 
cf  the  whole  number  compofed  together  With  the  fquare  of  the  number  added,is  double  to  the 
fquare  of  the  halfe ,  together 'fifth  the  fquare  of  the  number  compofed  of  the  halfe  and  the  num-* 
.^fer  added. 

.  _  BB.ij.  This 


This  anftvf* 
reth  to  the  7, 
of  the  fecond, 

DemonUra- 

tiotto 


Thitdnfwe  ■ 
retb  to  the  8. 
of  the  fecond, 

Demonffmi* 

6m, 


This  an  five* 
reth  to  the  <ft 
of  the  fecond, 

DemnStrct- 
tion . 


Tbh&tifwe* 
retb  to  the  jo. 
of  the fecond. 

Demonftra- 

tien. 


*/£  vegmut 

fropojitio) h 

Dstnc-nflr a- 
tion  leading  to 
an  irnpofibi  - 

hue. 


Ufmonttr'- 
tion  leading  to 
an  abfurditie . 


This  proueth  in  numbers  that  which  the  ro.ofthe  fecond  proued  in  lines.  Suppofe  that  the  num* 
bet  A  8.  be  deuided  into  two  equall  numbers  AC  and  C.B:  ana  vnto  itadde  the  number  B  D;  Then  l 

fay  that  the  fquare  of  .^.o  together  with  the  fquare  of  B  D,is  J  r  n  n 

double  to  the  fquare  of  AC  together  with  the  fquare  of  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  • 

CD  .  For  forafmuch  as  the  number  CD  is  deuided  into  two  partes,  and  vnto  it  is  added  the 

number  A  C  which  is  equall  to  one  of  the  partes  ( namely ,  to  C  8)  therefore  by  theio.  of  thefe 
proportions ,  the  fquare  of  AD  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  C£>  into  C^  foure  times  to¬ 
gether  with  the  fquare  of  B  D.  And  forafmuch  as  AC  is  equall  to  CB,  therefore  the  fquare  of  AD, 
is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  DC  into  CB  fower  times  together  with  the  fquare  of  B  ZJ.Wher- 
fore  the-fquare  of  AD  together  with  the  fquare  of  D  B,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  DC  into 
c  B  fower  times  toge  ther  with  two  fquares  of  B  D  .  But  by  the  9.  of  chefe  propofition  s,  that  which  is 
produced  of  DC  into  C  B  fower  times  together  with  two  fquares  of  BD  is  double  to  the  fquare  of  CD 
together  with  the  fquare  of  C  B  ( for  the  fquare  of  CD  together  with  the  fquare  of  C  B  is  equal  to  that 
which  is  produced  of  D  C  into  C  B  twife  together  with  one  fquare  of  C  B)  .  Wherefore  forafmuch  as 
the  fquare  of  C  B  is  equal!  to  the  fquare  of  A  cqthat  is  manifdt :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

#The  if  proportion. 

It  is  impofible  to  deuide  a  number  in fuch forte :  that  that  which  is  contayned vnder  the  Veholt 
and  one  of the  partes  fusil  be  equall  to  the ■  fquare  of  the  other  part. 

That  which  the  1 1. of  the  fecond  taught  to  be  doone  in  linesris  here  proued  to  be  impofliblet© 
be  doone  in  numbers. For  fnppofe  that  there  be  a  number  whatfoeuer  namely  WB  ,  Then  I  fay,  that  it 
is  impofiible  to  deuide  it  in  fuch  fort  as  is  required  in  the  propofition .  For  fo  fhould  it  be  deuided  ac¬ 
cording  to  a  proportion  hailing  a  meane  and  two  ex-  .  r  p  n  n 

treames.But  ifit  bepoffible,  let  the  number  A  B  befo  1  .  ' ' ' '  ’* 

deuided  in  C.And  as  A  B  is  to  B  C,fo  let  B  C  be  to  C  ^.Wherefore  A  C  fhall  be  lefie  then  C  B  .  Now 
then  take  away  from  C  B  a  number  equall  to  A  C  which  let  be  C  D.  And  forafmuch  as  the  proportion 
of  the  'whole  A  B  to  the  whole  B  C,is  as  die  proportion  of  the  part  taken  away  from  A  B,  namely  ,B  C 
to  the  part  taken  away  from  BC, namely, C  D:  therefore  the  proportion  of  the  refidue  of  A  B,  namely, 
A  C,to  the  refidue  of  B.C, namely, to  B  D,  is  as  the  proportion  ofthe  whole  A  B  to  the  whole  B  C  fby 
the  1 1. of  the  feuenth )  .Wherefore  B  C  is  to  C  D,as  C  D  is  to  D  B .  Wherfqre  C  D  is  greater  then  D  B. 
Wherefore  fubtrahingDE  out  of  CD,fo  that  let  D  E  be  equall  to  D  B  :  the  proportion  of  B  C  to  C  D 
is  as  the  propordo  of  C  D  to  DE.Wherfore  the  refidue  of  C  B,namely,D  B,fhal  be  to  the  refidue  of  C 
D,namely,to  CE,as  the  proportion  of  the  whole  B  C  to  the  Whole  C  D.Wherfore  C  E  may  befubtra- 
hed  out  of  E  D :  wherforethere  llialbe  no  end  of  thisfubtra&ion  '.which  is  impolfible. 

f  T be  1 6, Theorem?.  The  1 6.  Propofition. 

If two  numbers  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other fthe fecond fall  not  he  to  any 
other  number ?as  the firft  is  to  the  fecond. 

V>'  . 

Vppofe  that  thefe  two  numbers  0/  and  B  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other .  Then  1 
fay  that  B  is  not  to  any  other  nuber  as  A  is  to  B.  For  ifit  be poftble,as  A  is  to  By 
fo  let  B  be  to  C.Now  A  and  Bare  prime  numbers  yea  they  are  prime  and  the  left 

_  by  the  2  3  .ofthe feuenth.  But  ( by  the  'll. of  the feuenth)  the  leafl  meafure  the 

numbers  that  haste  one  and  the fame  proportion  with  them  equally  ,the 
antecedent  the  antecedent, and  the  confequent  the  confequent.  Where¬ 
fore  the  antecedent  A ,meafureth  the  antecedent  B,  and  it  meafureth 
alfo  it  felfe.Wherfore  A  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A&B  being  prime 
the  one  to  the  other, which  is  impofiible.Wherforc  as  A  is  to  B,fo  is  not 
B  to  C :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


CAf 

B 

C 


ft  The  n.Theoreme. 


The  17.  Uropofition. 


If  there  he  numbers  in  continuall proportion  how  many foeueryandf  theyr 

'  ' ' . extremes 


ofSuclides  EUmmteL 


FoLm . 


extremes  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other  >  the  lefte ft  all  not  be  to  any  other 
number the  firfl  is  to  the  fecond. 

•  '  V*.  ,  .  ,  •  *  •  •  •  •  \  .  V-  A V  X  -  '  N  .  -  '  .  ■  .  .  .  '  -  ■ 

,  I  •  . 

Vmfi  that  there  be  thefe  number  sin  continuall  proportion  A,  B,C,D, and  let 
their  extremes  A  and  D  be  prime  the  one  to  the  other.  T hen  /  fay  that  D  is  not 
to  any  other  number  as  A  is  to  B.For  if  it  be  pofible/is  A  is  to  B,fo  let  D  be  to 

_ _ _ EftVberfore  alternately  by  the  i$.of  the  feucnth, as  A  is  to  D,fo  is  B  to  E.  But 

A  and  D  are  prime-,  yea  they  are  prime  and 
the  least, But  the  least  numbers  (by  the  21.  of 
the feuenth)  me  a f ure  the  numbers  that  hdiie 
one  and  the  fame proportid  with  them  equal¬ 
ly  ,the  antecedent  the  antecedent, and  the  con 
fequent. Wherefore  the  antecedent  A  meafu- 
reth  the  antecedent  B:  but  as  A  is-toBfo  is  B 
to  C.Wherfore  B  alfo  meafureth  C.Wherfore  A  alfo  meafureth  C  (by  the  s-commo  fentence 
of  the feuenthfand forafmuch  as  B  is  to  Cfo  is  C  to  D,but  B  meafureth  C.Wherfore  C  mea¬ 
fureth  D.ButA  meafureth  C.Wherfore  A  alfo  meafureth  D  by  the fame  common  fentencey 
and  it  alfo  meafureth  it  felfe.  Wherefore  A  meafureth  thefe  numbers  A  and  D  being  prime 
the  one  to  the  other, which  is  impofible.Wherfore  D  is  not  to  any  other  number  as  A  is  to  B: 
which  was  required  to  be pmued. 

if  The  18.  Theorems.  The  iS.Tropo/ition. 

Two  numbers  beifiggeuehj  to fearche  out  if  it  be  pofiible  a  third  number 
in  proportion  iotih  them.  a  ' ‘  • 


A 

B 

c 

D 

E 


Eppcfe  that  the.  two  numbers geuen  be  A  and  B.It  is  required  to fearche  Out  if  it  be 
pof$k  a  third  number,  proportionall with  them. New  A,B  are  either  prime  the  one 

...  _ _jothe  other  or  not  prime  .If they  be  prime, then  (by  the  16  .of the  ninth)  itismani- 

nifeft  that  it  is  impoffibl.e.toftnde  out  a.  third  number  proportional  with  them. But  now fup- 
pofe  that  A  B  be  not  prime,  the  one  to  the  other.  And  let  B  multiplieng  himfelfe  produce  C. 
Now  A  either  meafureth  C,  or  meafureth  it  not.  Fir  ft, let  it  meafureitand  that  by  D.Wher- 
fore  A  multiplieng  D  produceth 
C.Mut  B  alfo  multiplieng  himfclf  A  .... 

produced  C.  Wperfore  that  which  B  . 

h produced  of  'A  into  D,  is  e quail  . . 

tpthat  whichis  produced  of  B  in¬ 
to  himfelfe.  Whereforefby the fe-  A  ..,, 

cond part  of  the  19 .  of  the feufith)  B 

as  A  is  to  Bfo  is  B  to  D  Wherfpre  E> 

•unto  thefe  numbers  A, B  is  found  C 

out  a  third,  number  in  proportion, . 
namely, D.  a  . 

But  now  fuppofe  that  A  do  not  B _ - 

meafure  C.  Thin  if  ay  that  it  is  D  ■  „-y* 

impofibk  tv  fnde  out  a  third  nu-  C  .... 

her  in  pr  oportion  with  thefe  num 


•  •  •  1  » 


'■  •  ii  •  a 


1  1  k  «  1  «  1  «  f 


A  Yv 


keys  A,B >  For  if it  bepofttble ,  let  there  befounA  outfuch  anumber,  and, let  the fame  be  D, 

BB.iij.  Wherefon 


B  exonera¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  abjarduic. 


Three  cafes 
in  this propofi* 
tion. 

The  fir  ft  cafe. 

The  fecond 
cafe. 


The  third 
cafe. 


1 Dium  cafe! 
in  this propoft- 
tion* 


The  fir  ft  cafe. 


"/he  ft  coni 
eafe. 


The  third 

cafe. 


Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  lifts  equalHo  that  which  is  produced  of  B  into 
himfelfeftmt  that  which  is  produced  of  B  into  himfelfe  is  C  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced 
of  A  into  D  is  equallvnto  C.  Wherfore  A  multiplieng  V  produced  C.  Wherefore  A  meafu¬ 
reth  C  by  D  .But  it  is  fuppofed  alfo  not  to  meafure  it,  which  is  impofible  Wherefore  it  is  not 
pof  ible  to  ftnde  out  a  thirdnumber  in  proportion  with  A  &  B,whenfoeucr  A meafureth  not 
C :  which  was  required  to  be proued. 

f  T he  ip.  Theoreme.  The  ip.  Tropojition. 


T  hree  numbers  heynggeuenfto fearch  out  if  it  he  poftible 
her  proportionally  itb  them. 


num 


A 

B 

C 


•  •  •  •  ' 


conUniiailproportwi ,and  their  extremes  A,C  are  prime  the  one  to  the. other -or 

_ they  art  not  in  continuall proportion, and  their  extremes  are  yet  prime  the  one 

to  the  other:  or  they  are  in  continuall proportion, and  their  extremes  are  not  prime  the  one  to 
the  other:  or  they  areueither  in  continuall proportion,  nor  their  extremes  are  prime  the  one' 
to  the  other.  ..  .  .  /  ; . .  ■ 

lfA,B,C,bi  in  continuall  proportion, and  their  extremes  be  prime  the  one  to  the.  other i: 
it  is  manifest  ( by  the  i  y. of  the  ninth )  that  it  is  impofible  to finde  out  a  fourth  number pro¬ 
portion  all  with  tjoctm  "V  "  '  '  \'V 

But  now  fuppofe  that  A,B,C,be  not  in  continuall 
proportion, and  yet  let  their  extremes  be  prime  the  one  to 
the  other.  Then  Tfiiy  that fo  alfo  it  is  impofible  to  finde 
■cut  a fourth  number  proportional  with  the.  For  if  it  be  "  ; 

pof  ible, let  there  be  found fuch  a  number ,  and  let  the 

fame  be  IXSo  that  as  A  is  to  B,fo  let  C  be  to  D,andasBis  to  Cfoltt  D  beto  E.  And  for  that 
as  A  is  to  Bfiois  C  to  D,andasB  is  Cfe  is  2>  to  E,thcrfore  of  equallitie(by  theia^of the  ft* 
uenthfas  A  is  to  C,fo  is  C  to  E.  But  A  and  C  are  prime 
the  one  to  the  other, yea  they  are  prime, and  the  Uailibut 
the  less  meafure  the  numbers  that  haue  one  &  the  fame 
proportion  with  them  equally  , the  antecedent,  the  ante - 
cedent, and  the  confequent  the  confequent  (by  thezi.of 
the  feuenth ) .  Wherfore  A  meafureth  C, namely, the  an¬ 
tecedent  tire  antecedent,  andst  alfo  meafureth  it  feife.  ’  '  -g  '  r 

wherfore  A  meafureth  tbefe  numbers  o-/  a»d€  being  prime  the  one  to  the  other,  which  is 
impofible  Wherfore  it  is  not  pof  ible  to finde  out  a fourth  number  proport  ion  all  with  theft 
numbers  A,  Sf.  V  ■  "V.  /  :  --p  f'/xA, 

,  Butnoivagaine  fuppofe  that  A, B,C,‘ be  in  A. 

continuall proportion, and  let  A  and  C  not  be  B 

prime  the  one  to  the  other .  T ben  1  fay  that  it  .  *  -  C  . . 
is  pof  ible  to  finde  out  a  fourth  number  pro-  E  ... .  *'.v. 
portionallwith  them. For  let  B  multiplieng.C  •  1ft 216  .  _  .  . 

produce  Et  .  NowxA  either  meafureth  D ,  or  v  h  \  -  y  :  1 

meafureth  it  not.Firf  let  it  meafure  it, and  that  by  E.  Wherfore  A  multiplieng  E  produced 
D.But  B  alfo  multiplieng  C  produced  Eft  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  AE  is  equal  to 
that  which  is  produced  of BCt  wherfore  in  what proportioAistO  Bftny  fame  is  C  to  E  Whet; 
fate  therein found  out  a fiw’th- number -wifk  thefcj?vbersA,B,Gi< 


A 

B 

C 

D. 

E* 


*  «  ••••••  •  *  # 


1  ’•  *  •  *  •  a  »  *  o  « 


iV»  <»«♦»*  ®  9  a  © 


Fol.ip. 

But  now fuppofe  that  Ado  mt  meafure  D  .Then  I  Jay  that  it  is  not poftible  ioftnde  out  a 
fourth  number  proportionall  with  thefe  numbers  A,B,  C.  For  if  it  be poftble,  let  there  be 
found ftch  a  number. and  let  the fame  be  E.  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of<^A  into  E 
is  equalize  that  which  is  produced  of B  into  C..  hut  that  which  is  produced  of  B  into  C  is  JO. 
Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  E  is  e  quail  vnto  D .  Wherefore  A  multiplieng  E 
produced  D,ivherfore  A  meafureth  D,but  it  alfo  meafureth  it  not, which  is  impoftikleWher 
fore  it  is  impoftible  to finds  out  a fourth  number  proportionally  with  thefie  numbers  A}B,C, 
whenfoeuer  A  meafureth  not  D. 

But  now  fuppoj'e 
that  A, B ,C  be  nei¬ 
ther  in  continuall 
proportiogieither  al 
fo  their  extremes  be 
prime  the  one  to  the 
other  .And  let  B  mul 

iiplieng  C  produce  JO.  And  in  like forte  may  we  proue  that  if  Ado  mcafurc  D  }it  is  poffble  to 
finde  out  a  fourth  number  proport ionall  with  them. But  if  it  do  not  meafure  D,the  is  it  vn  - 
pojfble which  was  required  to  be  pr  cued. 


jd  . . . .  ' . 

B  ..... 
C  ..... 
E  - - - 

D1350 


Thefcunb 

cafe. 


fThe  20.  Theoreme. 


The  20.  Proportion. 


Prime  numbers  beinggcuen  how  many  footer ,  there  may  be  geuen  more 
prime  numbers.  v  •  v. 

I  y ??°fi  tba*  the  prime  numbers  geuen  be  B,  C .  Then  1 fay,  that  there  are  jm  ufel  ^ 

\  yet  more  prime  numbers  befides  A  ,B,C. Take  (by  the  38.0ft he feuenth)  the  left  this  pLofi- 
dumber  whom  theft  number s  k^J,B,C  do  meafure y  and  let  the  fame  be  D  E.  tion .  f  ' 
Andvnto D  E  ad.de  vnitie  D  F v  Now  E  F  is  either  a  prime  number  or  not . 

Fir  ft.  let  it  be  a  prime  number  ;t hen  are  there  found  Thfirfl  caR* 

theft  prime  numbers  AyByCyand  EF  more  in  multi-  A  . . 

tude  then  the prime  numbers ftrft  geuen  A,B,C.  B  ...  Th  f  i 

But  now fippbfethat  E  F  be hot' prime .  Wherefore  C . .  safe?*™ 

f owe  prime  number  meafureth  it  (by  the  24..  of  the fe-  E  11+  D  .  F 

ucttth) .  Let  a  prime  nttmber  meafure  it,  namely,  (d.  G  . . . . 

Then  I  fay ,that  G  is  none  of  thefe  numbers  A,B,C. For 

if G  be  one  and  the fame  with  my.  of thefe  A,B,CFut  JyByC, meafure  the  nubcr  D  E:  wher¬ 
fore  G  alfo  meafureth  D  E  :  and  it  alfo  meafureth  the  whole  E  F .Wherefore  G  being  a  num¬ 
ber  fall  meafur e  the  r ejifi ue  DJp  being  ynitje  ;  which  is  impoftible .  Wherefore  G  is  not  one 
arid  thifdme  With  itrtf  of thefe prime  numbers  A,B,C :  and  it  is  alfo  fuppofed  to  be  a  prime 
number.  Wherefore  there  are found  thefe  prime  numbers  A,B,C,G,beinqmore  in  multitude 
then  the  prime  numbers  geuen  A}B,C ;  which  was  required  to  be  demonftrated. 


‘a*-;  v '  ■  :  ■  :if  A^CcroHary. 


By  thy  s  Propofition  it  is  manifeft,that  the  multitude  of  prime  numbers  is  infinite* 

-  '  tr ’  • "  ;•  ■  W-llV  V'  ;  :  •  ■' 

”  .  -  i  p  The  Theorem*  '  The  21.  Proportion. 


|T euen  nUers  how  mar^jfeiiefhfdMeitpgetkr:  tbeToholeJhaU  be  eut 

BB.iiij.  Suppofe 


n 


Dmonjjra- 

tion* 


Demonjlra- 
tion , 


non. 


mu, 


Vppofe  that  thefe  euen  numbers x^A  B,  BC,  CD ,  and  D  E ,  be  added  together* 
T  hen  I fay, that  the  whole  number, namely,  A  E,  is  an  euen  number .  For foraf 
much  as  euery  one  ofthefe  numbers  AB,B  C,CD,  and  D  E,  is  an  euen  num- 
ber, therefore  euery  one  of  them  hath  an  halfe .  Wherefore  the  whole  kA  £  alfa 


hath  an  halfe  .  But  an  euen 
number  (  by  the  def  nation  )  is 
that  which  may  be  deuided  in - . 
to  two  e quail  partes .  Where¬ 
fore  A  E  is  an  euen  number: 
which  was  required  to  beproued. 


Ai  » • » *  - B  **t  *  •  ■  i" C  * 


D 


E 


...  *  Tie  .2 2.  Theorem?. .  The  22.  f’ropofhion. 

-  Ifodde  numbers  how  manyfoeuer  be  added  together }  if  their  multitude . 

he  euen, the  "whole  alfo jhall  be  euen. 

Wppcfe  that  thefe  odde  numbers  A  B,B  C,CD,and  E>  E,  being  euen  in  multitude ,, 
be  added  together .  T hen  I  fay,  that  the  whole  A  E  is  an  euen  number , ,  For  foraf  - 
:  much  as  euery  one  ofthefe  numbers  A  B,B  C,C  D,  and  D  E,  is  an  ocUe  number 
if  ye  take  away  vnitie  frame-  . .  -  • 

uery  one  of  them  pthutwkfch  ""  ‘  '■  ~  * 

remay  neth  of  euery  one  of  the.  A  .....  B . . .  C . D .... . .  .E 

/s  an  euen  It  umber. Wherefore 

they  all  added  together ,  are  1  •  i\  v-  - 

( by  the  21.  of  the  ninth )  an  euen  number :  and  the  multitude  of  the  -unities  taken  away  u 
euen Afheiixf ore  the  whole.  A~E  is  dn  euen  number :  which  was  required  to  beproued . 

:  •  v  V* V  ■  .•  -.f\‘  J  ■  ,•  _V,  •  -}v  ■  ,4  ••  V  \  V*r‘  :  -• 

•_  ■  yfTbe  23.  T  hear  erne.  The  23.  ^ropofitioti. 

Ifodde  numbers  how  many foeuer  he  added  together ,  and  if  the  multitude 
ofthem  he  odde,the  whole  alfo  Jhall  be  odde.  1 

|g>  Vppofe  that  thefe  oUd'e  numbers,  A  B,BC,and  C  2>  being  odde  in  multitude  be  ad- 


Ztemtiffra- 


w. 

v  \  X.  v  ■  -  v  ;V- ; U;  1i  -  -• 

A  m  B  »  *  .  .  1 1‘«  C  ......  E  .  ^ 

•  ..  *.  ’3.  .‘iV  •  'i\'  ■  •  •  ••  ■  ••  ’•  -  - J  ‘ 


alfo  ibytht'  22:  of  the . 

ninth)  is  art  euen  num¬ 
ber.  Whefore  thexyhole 
A  B  is  an  euen  number. 

Eiit  :1>  E  winch  is  vnitie  being  added  to  the  euen  number  A  E?  maketh  the  whole  AD  m 
'oMe  number :  which  was  required  to  be proued - 


r he  24.  Theoreme.  The  if  TrOpoJttion. 

If  from  an  euen  number  he  takeaway  an  euen  number,  thattyhich  remak 
n eth Jhall  he  an  euen  number. 


1  Eppofe  that  A  B  he  an  euen  number ,  and from 

'^fffiffjit  take  away  an  euen  number  C  B.  Then  I  fay  A. . 


**  »  ■■  y  -v  - .  -  „  -  .  j  j  _ ,  .  <  •  >5 

that  that  which  remay  neth,  namely,  AC  is  an 
euen-number.F  or forafmuch  as  A  B  is  An.  euen  „„ 


mu 


0, 


Fol.ziq.* 

turn  number, it  bath  an  halfe.and by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  B  C  hath  ah  halfe.  Wherfore  the 
refidue  C  A  hath  an  halfe  .  Wherfore  C  is  art  euen  number :  which  was  required  to  be  de- 
monf rated.  ,  r 

f  The  2  s.  Theorems.  The  25.  Tropoftmi. 

:  .  •  •  ’  - 

If  from  an  euen  number  he  taken  alt  ay  an  odde  number 3  that  lohich  reman 
nethjhall  be  an  bdde  number. 

ilb  d'ppofe  do  at  A  B  be  an  euen  number ,  and 
take  away  from  it  BC  an  odde  number. 

T  hen  I fay  that  the  ref  due  C  A  is  an  odde  .......  C.  D . B  DemonUra^ 

number  ST ake  away  from  B  C  <unitie  C  D .  Wherfore  um. 

D  Bis  an  euen  number.  i^And  AB  alfois  an  euen 
number, wherefore  there fidue  AD  is  an  euen  num¬ 
ber  {by  the  former  proportion)  But  C  D  which  is  v  nit ie, being  taken  away  from  the  euen  nu- 
btr  A  D  maketh  the  ref  due  A  Can  odde  number :  which  was  required  to  heproued. 


yj  The  26.  Theorems. 


The  26.  Tropoftion. 


If  from  an  odde  number  betaken  ale  ay  an  odde  number 3  that  lohich  re * 
ma pieth  jhall  he  an  euen  number. 

Fppofe  that  A  B  be  an  odde  number ,  and  from  it 

away  an  odde number  B  C.  T  he  I  fay  that  the  A  ....  C . D  .B 

re  ft  due  C  A  is  an  euen  number.  F  or forafnuch  as  TJemtiJlrd* 

A  B  is  an  odde  number ,  take  away from itmnitic  B  D  Wherfore  therefidue  AD  is  euen.  And  tm* 
by  the  fame  reafon  C  D  is  an  euen  number :  wherfore  the  ref  due  C  A  is  an  euen  number  (by 
the  2  4. of this  booke)  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


f  The  2i.  Theoreme. 


The  27.  Tropofition. 


If  from  an  odds  number  be  taken  a  10  ay  an  euen  number 3the  refidue jhall  be 
an  odde  number. 


Vfpcfethat  A  B  be  an  odde  number ,  and  from  it 
take  away  an  euen  number  B  C.T hen  1 fay  that  the 
refidue  C  A  is  an  odde  number.  Take  away  fro  A  B 


A  .  D  ....  C  .....  B 


‘ vnitie  A  D  Wherfore  the  ref  due  D  Bis  an  cue  number,  dr 
B  C is  ( by fuppofition )  euen.Wherfore  the  refidue  C  D  is  an  euen  number.  Wherefore  D  A 
which  is  vnitie,beyng  added  vnto  C  D  which  is  an  euen  number  maketh  the  whole  AC  an 
odde  number :  which  was  required  to  heproued. 


DemnButi* 

tm t 


y[  The  28.  T  heoreme. 


The  28.  Tropoftion. 


I  fan odde  number  m  ultiplien g  an  euen  number  produce  any  number 3  the 
number  produced jJ?  all  be  an  euen  number. 

Suppofe 


Vemnfird- 

tint. 


•  *  9  a  f 


Vppofe  that  being  an  odde  number  multiplieng  B  C  . . . . 
being  an  euen  number, do  produce  the  number  C.T hen  B  .... 

I  fay  that  C  is  an  euen  number.  For  for  afmuch  as  A ... 

multiplieng  B  produced  C,therforeC  is  compofed  offo 
many  numbers  e quail  vnto  B  as  there  be  in  'unities  in  A. But  B  is  an  euen  nuber:  wherfore  C 
is  compofed  offo  many  euen  numbers, as  there  are  n unities  in  A. But  if  eue  numbers  how  ma¬ 
ny  foeuer  be  added  together, the  whole  (by  the  21. of  the  ninth  )is  an  euen  number :  wherfore 
C  is  an  euen  number :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


f  The  29.  Theoreme. 


The  29.  Propofition. 


’DemnUra- 

siofi. 


If  an  odde  number  multiplying  an  odde  number  produce  any  number ,  the 
number  produced Jhalbe  an  odde  number 

Vppofe  that  A  being  an  odde  number  multiplying  B  being  alfo  an  odde  number, 
doo produce  the  number  C.T hen  1  fay  that  C  is  an  odde  number.  For  for afmuch  as 
A  multiplying  B  produced  C ,  therefore  C  is  compofed  of  fo  many  numbers  equall 
•vnto  B  as  there  be  'unities  in  A. But  either  oftbefe  num 

hers  A  and  B  is  an  odde  number .  Wherefore  C  is  com -  C . . 

pofed  of odde  numbers ,  whofe  multitude  alfo  is  odde.  B  ... 

W berfore  (by  the  23  .of the  .ninth )  C  is  an  odde  nuber :  4 . 

which  was  requiredlo  be  demonf  rated. 


ob  A  proportion  added  by  Campane. 

tA  propofition  ^  an  °^e  number  meafare  an  euen  number, it  fall  men  fare  it  by  an  euen  number. 

£prifit  ihould  meafure it  byan  odde  number,  then  of  an  odde  number  multiplyed  into 
a/JF  *  •  aumbcr  ihould  be  produced  an  odde  number, which  by  the  former  propofition  is  impoflible. 

An  other  propofition  added  by  him. 


An  other  ad¬ 
ded  by  him* 


Jf  an  odde  number  mtafare  an  odde  number, it  f  all  meafare  it  by  an  odde  number. 

For  if  it  fliould  meafure  it  by  an  euen  nnmber ,  then  of  an  odde  number  multiplyed  into  an  eue© 
number  (hould  be  produced  an  odde  number  which  by  the  28. of  this  booke  is  impoflible. 

jf  The  30.  T heoreme.  The  30.  Propofition. 

If  an  odde  number  meafure  an  euen  number  ft fhallalfo  meafure  the  halfe 
thereof. 

Vppofe  that  A  being  an  odde  number  doo  meafure  B  being  an  euen  number. Then 
1 fly  that  it fall  meafure  the  halfe  thereof.  For for  afmuch  as  A  meafureth  B  let  it 

wnstra-  — &  meafure  it  by  C.T he  I fay  that  C  is  an  euen  number.Forifnot  then ,  if  it  be poJJibU 

leading,  to  ^ lt  °dde-'A nd for afmuch  as  A  meafureth  B  by  C:  ther- 
\bfardttfe.  fon  A  multiplyingC  produceth  B. Wherfore  B  is  compofed  ... 

of  odde  numbers  whofe  multitude  alfo  is  odde .  Wherfore  B  C  . , 

is  an  odde  number  (  by  the  29.  of this  booke  )  which  is  ab-  B  . . . . . ; , 

furdfor  itisfuppofed  to  be  euen  :  wherefore  C  is  an  euen 

mmber.Wherefore  A  meafureth  B  by  an  euen  number ;  and  C  meafureth  B  by  A.  But  either 

■'V'.V'-  "  '  ’  "  ef 


Vemnffra- 
tion 
ana 


ofSuclides  Ekmenies. 


Fol.zzy. 


eftkefe  numbers  C  and  B  bath  an  half e fart  rwherforeas  C  is  to  Bfois  the  halfe  to  the  balft . 
ButC  meafureth  B  by  A .  Wherefore  the  halfe  ofC  meafureth  the  halfe  ofBby  orf*  wherfore 
A  multiplying  the  halfe  ofC  produeeth  the  halfe  of B.Whcr fore  A  meafureth  the  halfe  of  B: 
and  it  meafureth  it  by  the  halfe  of C  .Wherefore  A  meafureth  the  halfe  of  the  number  B: 
which  was  required  to  be  demon f rated. 

■■■■■■  .  t  ''  v  :  ,  -  ■.  - 

f  The  3 1.  Theorem*.  The  yi.Tropofition. 

'  .  . .  .ii’.wvAk  *.  *  Ak  - 


'U  VVoiv 


If  an  odde  number  be  prime  to  any  number  ft fhalalfo  he  prime  to  the  don* 
hie  thereof.  .  ' 

Vppofe  that  A  being  an  odde  number  be  prime  vnto  the  number  B:  and  let  the  dou¬ 
ble  of B  be  C. Then  l fay  .that  A  is  prime  vnto  C .  For  if A  and  C  be  not  prime  the  DemaoMm 
..„w  ...  one  to  the  other ,  feme  one  number  meafureth  them  both .  Let  there  befuch  a  num-  tm . 
her  which  meafureth  them  both ,and let  the  fame  be  D. 

But  A  is  an  odde  number.  Wherefore  D  alfo  is  an  odde . A. . 

number .  (  F or  if D  which  meafureth  A jbould  bean  B 

euen  number,  then jfhould  A alfo  be,  an  euen  number  (by  C  . . 

the  21.  of this  books)  which  is  cotrary  to  the fuppofiii-  D  — .  -  - 

on. For  A  is  fuppofed  to  be  an  odde  nuber:  &  therefore 

D  alfo  is  an  odde  number  ) .  Andforafmuch  as  D  being  an  odde  number  meafureth  C,  but 
C  is  an  eue  number  ( for  that  it  hath  an  halfe, namely, B )  ,Wherfore(by  the  Fropofition  next 
going  before  )  T)  meafureth  the  halfe  ofC .  But  the  halfe  ofCis  B .  Wherefore  D  meafureth 
B  sand  it  alfo  meafureth  A .  Wherefore  D  meafureth  A  and  B  being  prime  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther :  which  is  abfurde .  Wherefore  no  number  meafureth  the  numbers  A  &C .  Wherfore 
A  is  a  prime  number  vnto  C .  wherefore  thefe  numbers  A  and  C  are  prim  the  one  to  the 
other ;  which  was  required  to  be proued.  " 


ivy 


fThe  3 2.  Theorems.  The  32.  fropofition. 

Euery  nuber  produced  by  the  doubling  of  two  Topwardjs  euenlyeuen  onely. 


-  "i 


Fppofe  that  A  be  the  number  two :  and  from  Avpwarddouble  numbers  how  many 
foetter,  as  B,C,D.T hen  jfay,  that  B,C,  D>  are  numbers  euenly  euen  onely.  That  e- 

„  _ _  uery  one  of  them  iseuenh  euen  ft  is  manifefl : for  euery  oneofthem  is  produced  h  DemnUro* 

the  doubling  of  two.  I  fay  alfo,  that  euery  ontof them  is  euenly  '  tm, 

euen  onely  .Take  vnitie  E.  Andforafmuch  as  from  vnitie  are  D  ... . . . 

cert  aide  numbers  in  continuallproportion,  dr  A  which  follow-  C  . . 

eth  next  after  vnitie  is  a  prime  number, therefore  (by  the  13. of  B  .... 

the  third)  no  number  meafureth  D  being  the greatejl  number  A  . . 

of  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,D,befidesthefelfe  fame  numbers  in  E  vnitie 

proportion  .  But  euery  one  of  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,  is  euenly 

euen .  wherefore  D  is  euenly  euen  onely .  In  like  fort  may  we  proue,  that  euery  one  of  theft 
numbers  A,B,C,  is  euenly  euen  oneh :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

n  '  ■  -  ’  .  n  ~ 

fT he  33.T heoreme. 


*  x 


opo/itwn. 


Si.  , 


Jt  number  lohofe  halfe  part  is  odde  Js  euenly  odde  onely. 


Suppoft 


\  \s 


Vppofe  that  A  be  a  number  whofe  halfe  partis  odde .  T hen  J  fay  that  A  is  euenly 
'  od  onely.  That  it  is  euenly  odde  it  is  manifefi :  for  bis  halfe  being  odde  meafureth 
him  by  an  me  number,  namely, by  2.  ( bythedefini - 


Tkmmflrt- 

*+Tabfurdttic,  ^*5' • 1 faya(f°  *bat  it  is  euenly  odde  onely .  For  if  A  be  euen-  A 


ly  euen, his  halfe  alfo  is  euen. For  (  by  the  definition )  an  euen 
number  meafureth  him  by  an  euen  number .  Wherefore  that  euen  number  which  meafureth 
him  by  an  euen  number jhall  alfo  meafure  the  halfe,  thereof  being  an  odde  number  by  the  4. 
common  fentence  ofthejeuenth  which  is  abfurd.Wherfore  A  is  a  number  euenly  odde  onely: 
which  was  required  to  be proued.  :  ol 

An  other  demonftration  to  proue  the  fame.  ^ 


Suppofe  that  the  number  A  haue  to  his  halfe  an  od  nuber jhamely,  B.The  I  fay  that  A  is  eully  od 
.  j,  ,  ,  onely.  That  itis  euenly  odde  needethno  profe  :  forafmuch  as  the  number  a.  an  euen  number  meafu- 
v*M  wwr  "**  rc£h  the  halfe  thereof  whieh  is  an  odde  number  .Let  C  be  the  number  a.  by  which  B  meafureth  A 

monjlratiou.  ‘  w*  ■* 

B . .  C  .. 

A  »».«»...»  w.w.  »  •  »  •  »  «••••••  ......  ••*■•••«  ...  . 

D  ..........  F  ..... 

ffor  that  A-isfuppofed  to  be  double  vntoA).  And  let  an  euen  number, namely  ,D  meafure  A(  which  is 
perffiblefor-that  A  is  an  euennumber  by  the  definition)by  F.And  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  produced 
of  C  into  B  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  D  into  F,therefore  by  the  19  .of  the  feuenth^as  C  is  to 
D,fois  B  to  FButC  the  number  two  meafureth  D  being  an  euennumber:  wherforeFalfo  meafureth 
B  which  is  the  halfe  of  A.Wheifore  F  isan  odde  number  .For  if  F  were  an  euen  number  then  fhould  it 
make  E  who  me  it  meafureth  an  odde  number  alfo  by  the  ax.  of  this  booke,which  is  contrary  to  the 
fuppofition.And  in  like  manerraay  we  proue  that  all  the  eue  nfibers  which  meafure  the  number  A, do 
meafute  it  by  odde  numbers  .  Wherefore  A  is  a  number  euenly  odde  onely  :  which  was  required  to 
he  proued. 


Sfar*  \i  4 


‘.Vi  vr;.  •  VavV.  •;  .  ,  •*U, 

The  3  iJPropo/ttion. 


fiThe34-T heoreme. 

♦  ^  l-  WV.A  .)  .  W -tf  ^  %  -,ift 

If  a  number  be  neither  doubled  from  tloojior  hath  to  his  half  part  an  odde 
number fit  Jhall  be  a  number  both  euenly  euen  find  euenly  odde. 


Vemmftr** 

OfOff. 

S«K 

•V. m^\Y . 


|  Vppofe  that  the  nuber  A  be  a  nuber  neither  doubled  fro  the  nuber  two,  neither 
\alfo  let  it  haue  to  his  halfe  part  an  odde  nuber. T hen  1  fay  that  A  is  a  nuber  both 
\euenly  euen, and  euenly  odde  . That  A  is  euenly  euen  it  is  manifejl,  for  the  halft 
\thcrof  is  net.  odde,  and  is  meafured  by  the  number  2  .which  is  an  euen  number . 
Flow J  fay  that it is  euenly  odde  alfo. For  if we dettide  A  intotwoequallpartes,and fo  conti - 
nuingfiilUwe full  at  the  length  light  vpondeertaine 

odde.  number  which,  [hall  meafure  A  by  an  turn  num-  A  . . 

ber.For  if ivefiould notlight.vpon fuchan  odde  nu-  .  v 

her, which  meafureth  Aby  an  euennumber,  we  fhould  at  the  length  come  vnto  the  number 
two, and fo  fhould  s^A  be  one  ofthofemmbers  which  are  doubled  from  two  upward, which  U 
contrary  to  thefuppofition.Wherfore  A  is  euenly  odde.  And  it  is  proued  that  it  is  euenly  cub 
wherfore  A  is  a  number  both  euenly  euen  and  euenly  odde  ;  whiche  was  required  to  be  de- 
mbnfirated.  '  jv  .  :■  v/ 


viVV;  ..v, uLm-,vv  i  .  stfc  ;v.  v:  a 

This  propofition  and  the  two  former  manifcftly  declare  that  which  we  noted  vp 
pon  the  tenth  definition  ofthe  feucrith  booke  namely ,  that  Campane and  Flujfttes&nd. 
diuers  other  interpreters  of  Euclide^oncly  T heon  exCcipt)did  not  rightly  vndcrftand  the 
8.and  9.  definitions  of  the  fame  booke  concerning  a  number  euenly  euen,  and  a  num¬ 
ber  euenly  odde .  For  in  the  one  definition  they  adds  yiitp  Euclidts  wordes  extant  in 


QfSnclidvsEkmntes* 


F0L116* 


tfae .Greek?  thi^^donelyf  as^ve  thef  c  n6ted)ao'di.n  the  other  thiscwocd  M. So  that  af-» 
ter  their  definitions  a.n  uniber  caa  not  beeuenly  eu^n  vnlelfe  it.be  .irtealured  ogejyjb#, 
euen  numbersdikewife  a.number.can  not  be  euenly  odde  vnlefle  all  the  euen  numbers 
which  doo  thteafurc  it,  dpomeafure  it  by  an  odde  number .  The  contrary  whereof  .in 
thisprcpofttroti  Wd  nranifeftiyfee  .  Fothere  ftfc/^proueth  that  one  number  may  be 
both  euenly.  euen  and  eirenly  odde.And  in  the  two  former  propplitiohs  he  proued’that 
ibmc  numbers  are  euenly  euen  cnely,and  fome  euenly  odde onely  ;  Which  word  onely 
had  bene  in  vaine  of  him  added, if  no  number  euenly  euen  could  be  meafured  by  an 
odde  number, pr  if'^ll  the  numbers  that  meafure  a  number  euenly  odde  muft  needes 
meafureit  by  ah* odde  number.  Although  Campane  and  F  Inflates  toauoyde  this  ahfurdi- 
ty  bane  wreafted  the  3  2.  proppfition  of  this  booke  fro  the  true  fence  of  theGreekeand 
as  it  is  iRtei  preted  of  The  oh. -So  alfo  hath  F inflates'  wreafted  the-  33V  proportion .  For 
wkiist3i$,Euckd.e  fey  th,"£«V?y  nuber  produced  by  the  .doubling  of two  vpymrd^s  tu  fly  sue only  .-they 
fay,  onely thtyumkerspreduced by  the  doubling of  two, are eajenly  fitep. Likewife  T\KVQZ.,yEaclide 
faiths AxtihfcrWh'ofe  hafk part  is  odd f is  euenly  odde  onely, Fluflaiesfaffn  ,ohely  a  rwtnher  whofe 
half e part  is  odjs  euely  ed.  Which  their  interpretatio  is  not  true, neither  can  be  appiyed  to 
the  propofitions  as  they  are  extat  in  the  Greeke.  In  dede  the  fayd  3  2  .and  3  3 . proporti¬ 
ons  as  they  put  the  aye  true  touching;  thofe  numbers  which  are  euenly  euen  onely ,  or 
euely  ed  onely  .For  no  number  is  euenly  euen  onely,but  thofc  onely  which  are  doubled 
I rbiit-two  Ypward.  Likewife  ftp  numbers  are  euenly  odde  onely,  but  thofe  onely  whofe 
iralfe  is  an  bdde;.number.Butthislctteth  not,  but  th'ata  number  may  be  euenly  euen 
although  it-  be  not  doubled  from  two  vpwafd  &  alfo  that  a  number  may  be  euely'  odde 
although  it  baue  not-to  Ids  halfe  an  odde  number.  As  in  this  3  4\pfopofitio  Euchde 'hath 
plainly  proued.  Which  thing  could  by  nomeanes  be  true,ifthe  forefayd  3  2.&  3  3 .  pro- 
pofitons  of  this  booke  Ihould  haue  that  fence  and  meaning  wherein  they  .take  it. 


fl  The  3$.  Theorems.  The  3  f.  Tropoftion. 

If  there  he  numbers  in  continual! _ proportion  how  manj foeuer  3  and  if  from 
the  fecond  and  loft  be  taken  away  numbers  squall  Imto  the firjl  3  as  the  ex* 
eejfe  of the fecond  is  to  the firftj'o  is  the  excejfe  of the  loft  to  all  the  nuber s 
going  before  the  lajl. 


t  _  „  A,B C,D, and  E  F,  be  in  continuall  proportion  be- 

■  '  \gtnmng  at  A  the  leaf .  And  from  B  C which  is  the  fecond,  take  away  C  G  e quail 

t^}e frfl,uamfy,  to  A,  and  likewife  from  E  F  the  laf  take  away  E  H  e- 
quail  alf 1  unto  the firfl, namely,  to^A.T  hen  I fay,  that  as  the  excefe  BG  is  to 
A  Ueffifo  iS  Fj  E.  the  excefe,  to  allthe  numbers T) ,  B  C,and  mW,  which  go  before  the  laf 
number,  namely,  E-F  .-FerafmuchasE  F  is  the  greater  ( for  the  fecond  is  fuppofed  greater 
tpert  the  frf)put-the  number  F  L  equallto  the  number  D,  and  likewife  the  number  F  K 
equall  to  the  number  B  C .  And forafmnch  as  F  K  is  e  quail  unto  C  B,  of  which  F  His  equall 
unto  G  C ,  therefore  the  ref  due  H  K  is  equall  unto  the  ref  due  GB  .  And  for  that  as  the 
whole  F  E, isto the  whole  E  L,  feisihbpart  taken  dway  E  L,  to  the  part  taken  away  F  K, 
therefrethelrflidueL  Eds  to-' 

ihe:refdueHEL\.  as  the  .Whole  A  ...*  . 

EE  is  ia the  whole  F E ( by  B  ....  G  ....  C  •'  • 
the  it.  of  the  feuenth  )  .  So  D  ........ . . . .  V . . .  • 


likewife  l for.  that  F'L  is  to  E 
EEC,. as.  E  Kris.  to.  F  Fi,  K L 


H 


fall  be  to  HK,  as  the  whole  FEistothe  whole  F  FF-  (■  bythefameFhfofltion  )  .  But  as  F£ 
is  to  r  Ei,  tindas  F  L  is  to  F  Krahd  F  K  to  F  FF ,fo  were  FE  to  D'fdhd  HtoB  C,andBC 
t/FA  .  Wkerefoteias  L  E  is  to  K  Lr  and  as  Xt 

Wely  fy  ihe 13.  ofthefeuemhh  4?  EE  is  to  D  ffo  is  EL Fo\ be  B  G,  and  as  H  L  isib  B  CT 
fo  ts-h.  &  .to  A  i  k  ferejore  ahv  aso^e  Oj  the  antecFd'eidtesiHo  oneof  ihe  cbnfequentesffo  arc 
'cc,  .  CC.i,  allthe 


Vemmttra* 

tm* 


mon 


effete 


This  propor¬ 
tion  teachtlh 
how  to  finde 
cut  a  per fe  ft 
number. 


Censlruftion, 


Dmonttra- 

Stan. 


The  ninth  Boo{e 

all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  confequentes .  Wherefore  as' K  H  is  to  A,  fo  are  H  K,K  L, 
and  L  E,  to  D,  S  C,  and  A  (by  the  12.  of  the  feuenth  )  .  But  it  is  proued,  that  K  H  is  e- 
quall  vnto  B  G .  Wherefore  as  B  G, which  is  the  excejfe  ofthefecond,  is  to  A}fo  is  E  H  the 
excefe  of  the  lali  vnto  the  numbers  going  before  D,  B  C,  and  A.  Wherefore  as  the  excefe 
of  the fecond  is  vnto  the firsffo  is  the  excefe  of  the  la  ft  to  all  the  numbers  going  before  the 
laf  :■  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

f  The  3  6.  T heoreme .  T he  3  6.  (propojition . 

If  from  Tonitie  be  taken  numbers  how  many  foeuer  in  double  proportion 
continually,  Tontill  the  ivbole  added  together  be  a  prime  number,  and  if  the 
whole  multiplying  the  laf  produce  any  number,  that  ix/hich  is  produced  is 
a  perfeCIe  number. 

Vppofe  that from  vnitie  be  taken  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,D,  in  double  proportion 
continually,  fo  that  all  thofe  numbers  A,B,  C,D,&  vnitie  added  together, make 
a  prime  number  •  and  let  E  be  the  number  compofed  of  all  thofe  numbers  A,B , 
C,D,dr  vnitie  added  together :  and  let  E  multiplying  I), which  is  the  last  num¬ 
ber, produce  the  number  F  G  .T hen  /  fay,  that  F  G  is  a  per  fell  number. 


Vnitie  . 
A  .. 

B  .... 
C  ...t 
Z>  ... . 


o 

F 


E 

H 

L 

M 

F 


St 


3 1 


3* 


K 


6m 


12+ 


s+t 


31 


465 


How  many  in  multitude  A,B,C,D,are,fo  many  in  continuall double  proportion  take  be¬ 
ginning  at  E ,  which  let  be  the  numbers  E,  H  K,  L,  andM .  Wherefore  of  equalitie  (  by 
the  13.  of  the feuenth  )  as  A  is  to  D,  fo  is  E  to  M ,  Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  ofE 
into  D,  is  e  quail  to  that  which  is  produced  of  A  into  M .  But  that  which  is  produced  of E  in* 
to  D,is  the  number  F  G.W herefore  that  which  is  produced  of A  into  M,is  equallvnto  F  G. 
Wherefore  A  multiplying  Mproduceth  F  G.  Wherefore  M  meafureth  F  G  by  thofe  vnities 
which  are  in  A .  But  A  is  the  number  two .  Wherefore  FG  is  double  to  M .  And  the  num¬ 
bers  M,  L,  H  K,  and  E,  are  alfo  in  continuall  double  proportion .  Wherefore  all  the  num¬ 
bers  E,H  K,L,M, and  F  G,  are  continually  proportionall  in  double  proportion.  Take  from 
the  fecond  number  K  H,and from  the  laf  FGa  number  equall  vnto  thefrf,namely,toE: 
and  let  thofe  numbers  taken  be  H  N,&  F  X .  Wherefore  (  by  the  Fropofition  going  before) 
as  the  excejfe  of the  fecond  number  is  to  the firfi  number,  fo  is  the  excejfe  of  the  Iasi  to  all  the 
a  /  .  numbers 


ofSuclides  Elementes,  Fohnj « 

numbers  going  before  it .  Wherefore  as  TbJC  is  to  E,  fits  X  G  to  thefe  numbers  M,  L, 

K  H,and  E .  But  T(K  is  e quail  vntoE  ( for  it  is  the  halfe  of  H  K,  which  is  fuppofed  to  be 

double  toE)  .  FFhenfore  X  G  is  e  quail  vnto  thefe  numbers  M,L,H  K ,  and  E.  But  XF  is 

equal l  vnto  E,  and  E  is  equaUvnto  thefe  numbers  ^M,B,C,D,  and  vnto  vnitie.  Wherfore 

the  whole  number  F  G  is  equall 'unto  thefe  numbers  E,rl  KyL,M,and alfo  'unto  thefe  mm -  Vmonflra- 

bers  A,B,CyD,  and  unto  vnitie.  (JMoreouer  I fay , that  vnitie  and  allthe  numbers  A,  BfB,  tion  leading  to 

D,E,h!  K,L,and  My  do  meafure  the  number  F  G.  That  vnitie  meafureth  it, it  needeth  no  an  abfurditie • 

fro  ufe .  Andforafmuch  as  F  G  is  produced  ofD  into  E,  therefore  D  and  E  do  meafure  it. 

And  forafmuch  as  the  double from  vnitie , namely, the  nuhers  A,  B,  C,  do  meafure  the  num¬ 
ber  D  (by  the  /  3  .of this  booke  )  therefore  they  [ball  alfo  meafure  the  number  F  G  ( ivhomD 
meafureth )  by  they. common fentence .  By  the fame  reafon forafmuch  as  the  mbers  E,  H  K> 

Fnitie 

A  .. 

B  .... 

C  . 

x>  . . . 

o  - — - — 

p - - 


E 

H 


jjjsr. - 

M  - 

F  - - - 

3  1 


X 

/ 


- S24 

- - 24$ 

— 


L, and  M,are  vnto  F  Gp  as  vnitie  and  the  numbers  ByC,are  vnto  D  (namely, in  fwbduk 
pie  proportion)  and  vnitie  and  the  numbers  AyByCydo  meafure  D ,  therefore  alfo  the  num¬ 
bers  Eyll  K, L, and  My  jhallmiafure  the  number  F  G .  T(owT fay  alfo,  that  no  other  num¬ 
ber  meafureth  F  G  befdes  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,1>,E,H  K,L,M,and  vnitie .  For  if  it  be 
p  of  idle y  let  O  meafure  F  G.  And  let  O  not  be  any  of  thefe  numbers  A,B,C,T>,E,U  KyL,and 

M .  And  how  o  ften  O  meafureth  F  G,fo  many  vnities  let  there  be  in  P  .  Wherefore  O  mul¬ 

tiplying  P  produceth  F  G  .But  E  alfo  multiplying  D  produced  F  G .  Wherefore  (by  the  ip. 
of  the feuenth )  as  E  is  to  O ,  fo  is  P  to  D  .  Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  9.  of the feuenth )  as 
Eis  to  Py  fois  0  to  D  .  And forafmuch  as  from  vnitie  are  thefe  numbers  in  continuall pro¬ 
portion  AyByCy  D  y  and  the  numbef  A  which  is  next  after  vnitie  is  a  prime  number  ytherf ore 
( by  the  13 .  of  the  ninth)  no  other  number  meafureth  D  befdes  the  numbers  A,B,C .  And  it 
is fuppofed  that  O  is  not  one  and  the fame  with  any  of  thefe  nubers  AyByC. Wherefore  0  mea- 
fureth  not.D  .  But  as  O  is  to  7)  ,fo  is  Eto  P  .  Wherefore  neither  doth  E  meafure  P  .And  E 
is  a  prime  number  ■  But  (by  the  31. of  the  feuenth)  euery  prime  number ,  is  to  euery  number 
that  it  meafureth  not, a  prime  number .  Wherefore  E  and  P  are  prime  the  one  to  the  other : 
yea  they  are  prime  and  the  least. But  ( by  the  ii. of  the feuenth )  the  leaf  meafure  the  numbers 
that  haue  one  and  the fame  proportion  with  them  equally ,  the  antecedent  the  antecedent, and 
th  e  confequent  the  confequent .  And  as  E  is  to  P,fois  O  to  D  .  Wherefore  how  many  times 
E  meafureth  0, fo  many  times  P  meafureth  D  .But  no  other  number  meafureth  D  befdes 
the  numbers  A,B,C  (by  the  13.  of this  booke).  Wherefore  P  is  one  and  the fame  with  one  of 
thefe  numbers  A,B,C .  Suppofe  that  P  be  one  and  the  fame  with  how  many  B,C,V,are 

*  CCf.  in 


/ 


r\gx/: 

«'->5U<Vi 


The  ninth  cBooke 

inmudutudefo  tnanyfdkefrom  E  vpward,mmelj,  E,H  K,and  L.  But  E,U  K,  and  L,ar& 
ih  the  fame proportion  that  B,C,D  ,are .  Wherefore  of  equalitie,  as  Bisto  D,fois  E  to  L. 
Wherefore  that  which  isf reduced  ofB  into  L,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of D  into 
E  .  But  that  which  is  produced  of I)  into  E,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  P  into  O . 
Wherefore  that  which  is  produced  of P  into  O,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  ofB  into 
L .  Wherefore  as  P  is  to  B,fo  is  L  too  :  and  P  is  one  &  the fame  with  B :  wherefore 
L  alfo  is  one  and  the  fame  with  O  •:  which  is  imp  oft  hie .  For  O  is fuppofed  not  to 
he  one  and  the fame  with  any  of  the  numbers  geuen .  Wherefore  no  num¬ 
ber  meafureth  F  G  hefdesthefe  numbers  A,B,C,D,E}H 
and  vnitie.  And  it  is  proved, that  F  G  is  equall  vnto  thefe  num¬ 
bers  Ay B,C}D,E,IJ  K,L,M,  and vnitie, which  are  the 
partes  t her  of  {by  the  3  9  .of the feuenth )  .But  a  perfect 
nuber  {by  the  definition )  is  that  which  is  equall 
vnto  all  his  partes .  Wh  erf  ore  FG  is  a 
perfect  number  •  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  proued. 

The  end  of  the  ninth  booke 

ofEuclides  Elementes. 


FoLn2. 


Mt  h  t  is  t  t  nth1  Booic.fi  doth  Euclide  entreat 
ofliries  and  other  magnitudes  rational!  Sc  irrationall, 
but  chiefly  of  irrationall  magnitudes ,  commenfura- 
ble  and  incommenfurable:  of  which  hitherto, in  al  his 
former  p.  bokes  he  hath  made  no  mention  at  all.  And 
herein  differeth  number  from  magnitude,  or  Arith- 
metikefrom  Gebmetiy:  for  that  although  in  Arirh- 
metike, certayne  numbers  be  called  prime  numbers  in 
confideration  ofthemleiues,  orinrefpe&ofati  other, 
and  fo  are  called  incommenfurable,  for  that  no  one 
number  meafureth  them,but  onely  vnitie.Yetin  dede 
andtofpeakeabfolutelyandtruely,  there  are  no  two 
numbers  incommenfurable,but  haue  one  common  meafure  which  meafureth  the 
both, if  none  other, yet  haue  they  vnitie,  which  is  a  common  part  and  meafure  to 
all  numbers, and  all  numbers  are  made  of  vnities,as  of  their  partes.  As  hath  before 
bene  fliewed  in  the  declaration  of  the  definitios  of  the  feueiith  booke.But  in  mag- 
nitude  it  is  farrc  otherwife,for  although  many  lines,plaine  figures, and  bodies, are 
commenfurable,and  may  haue  one  meafure  to  meafure  them,  yet  all  haue  not  fo, 
nor  can  haue.  For  that  a  line  is  not  made  ofpointes,  as  number  is  made  of vnities, 
and  therfore  cannot  a  point  be  a  common  part  of  all  lines, and  meafure  them, as  v- 
nitie  is  a  common  part  of  all  numbers  and  meafureth  them. Vnitie  taken  certayne 
tymes  maketh  any  number.For  there  are  not  in  any  number  infinite  vnities :  but. a 
point  taken  certayne  tymes,yea  as  often  as  ye, lift,  neuer  maketh  any  line,  for  that 
in  euery  line  there  are  infinite  pointes.Wherfore  lines,  figures,and  bodies  in  Geo¬ 
metry, are  oftentymes  incommenfurable  and  irrationall.Now  which  are  rationall, 
and  which  irrationall, which  commenfurable.and  which  incommenfurable,  how 
many  and  how  fundry  fortes  and  kindes  there  are  of  them,what  are  their  natures, 
paffions,and  properties, doth  Euclide  moft  manifeftly  fhew  in  this  booke,  and  de- 
monftrate  them  moft  exactly.  ' 

'  This  tenth  booke  hath  euer  hitherto  of all  men,  and  is  yet  thought  Sc  accomp- 
ted,to  be  the  hardeft  booke  to  vnderftand  of  all  the  bookes  of  Euclide.  Which  co- 
mon  rccciucd  opinion,hath  caufed  many  to  £hrinke,and  hath  (as  it  were)deterred 
them  from  the  handeling  and  treatie  thereof.  There  haue  bene  in  deede  in  times 
paft,and  are  prefently  in  thefe  our  day es,  many  which  haue  delt,  and  haue  taken 
greatand  good  diligence  in  commenting,amending,and  reftoryng  of  the  fixe  firft 
bookes  ofEuclide,and  there  haue  ftayedthemfelues  and  gone  no  farther,  beyn<^ 
deterredandmade  afrayde  (as  itfeemeth,  by  the  opinion  of  the  hardnes  of  this 
booke)  to  pafle  forth  to  the  bookes  following.Truth  it  is  that  this  booke  hath  in  it 
fomewhat  an  other  &ftraugermaner  of  matter  entreated  of,  the  the  other  bokes 
before  had,and  thedemonftrations  alio  thereof^  Sc  the  order  feemelikewile  at  the 
firft  fomewhat  ftraunge  and  vnaccuftomcd, which  thinges  may  feeme  alfo  to  caufe 
■the  obfcuritie  therof,and  to  feare  away  many  from  the  reading  and  diligent  ftudy 
of the  fame,fo  much  that  many  of  the  well  learned  haue  much  complayned  of  the 
darkenes  and  difficulty  thereof, and  haue  thoughtit  a  very  hard  thing'  and  in  ma* 
,  CG.iij.  net 


The  Ar gurnet 
of  the  tenth 
bosket, 

Difference 
betwene  num 
b^r  and  mag~ 
nitude* 


A  line  Is  mt  . 
made  of  points 
as  number  is 
made  of  y  ns - 
ties. 


This  booke  the 

bar  deft  toyrs- 
derfland  of  all 
the  bookes  of 

Euclide* 


In  this  booke 
is  entreated  of 
aftramger 
tnaner  of mat¬ 
ter  then  in  the 
former \ 


Many  men  of 
the  Tee!}  lear¬ 
ned  banc 
thought  that 
this  book?  can 
not  tveli  be 
ynderfianded 
without  Al¬ 
gebra. 

The  nine  for¬ 
mer  bookes  & 
the  principles 
of  this  book? 
well  ynder- 
ftoode,this 
book?  Tvill  not 
be  hard  to 
yndetftand. 


The  fir (l 
definition. 


ner  impoffible  to  attayne  to  the  jaghunJ  full  vnderftanding  of this  booke,  with¬ 
out  the  aydcand  helpe  of  fome  otnt  r  knowledge  and  leamy  ng,  and  chiefly  with¬ 
out  the  knowledge  of  that  morefccret  and  fubtiil  part  of  Arithmetike,commonly 
called  Algebra, which  vndoubtedly  firft  well  hadandknowne,  would  geue  great 
light  therunto  :yet  certainly  may  this  booke  very  well  be  entred  into, and  fully  vn- 
derftand  without  any  ftraunge. helpe  or  fuccour,  onely  by  diligent  obferuation  pf 
the  order,and  courfe  of  Euclides  writinges.So  that  he  which  diligently  hath  peru- 
fed  and  fully  vnderftandeth  the  p  .bookes  goy  ng  before,  and  marketh  alfo  earneft- 
ly  the  principles  and  definitions  of  this  tenth  bookc,he  flial  well  perceiue  that  Eh- 
elide  is  ofhimfelfe  a  fufficient  teacher  and  inftru<fter,and  needeth  not  the  helpe  of 
any  other,  and.foalkfoone  fee  that  this  tenth  booke  is  not  of  fitch  hardnes  and  ob- 
icuricie,as  it  hath  bene  hetherto  thought.  Yea, I  doubt  not,  but  that  by  the  trauell 
and  induftry  taken  inthis.  translation,  and  by  addidonsand  emendations  gotten 
ofothers,therefiiallappeareinitnoha4rdnes  atall,butfliallbeas  eafieas  the  reft  of 
his  bookes  are. 

^definitions. 

i  Magnitudes  commenfurable  are  fuch^hich  one  and  the  felfe  fame  mea& 

fare  doth  meafure. 

Firft  he  fhewetb  what  magnitudes  are  commenfurable  one  to  an  other.To  the  better 
and  more  cleare  vnderftanding  of  this  definition,  note  that  that  meafure  whereby  any 
nlagm  tude  fsmeafured,  is  lefle  then  the  magnitude  which  it  meafureth.  oratleai'he^ 
cjnali  vnto  it. For  the  greater  can  by  no  meanes  meafure  the  lefle.  Farther  it  behoueth, 
that  that  meafure  if  it  be  equall  to  that  which  is  meafured,  taken  once  make  the  mag¬ 
nitude  which  is.  meafured.-if  it  beleffe,then  oftentimes  taken  andrepeted,  it  muft  pre- 
eifely  render  and  make  the  magnitude  which  it  meafureth  .Which  thing  in  numbers  is 
eafeiyfene, for  that  (as  was  before  faid)  all  numbers  are  commenfurable  one  to  an  o- 
ther.And  although  Euclide  in  this  definition  comprehendeth  purpofedly,  onely  mag¬ 
nitudes  which  are  con tinuall  quantities.as  arelinesJfuperficieces,and  bodies,  yet  vn¬ 
doubtedly  the  explication  of  this  and  fuch  like  places,is  aptly  to  be  fought  of  numbers 
as  well  rationall  as  irrationall.  For  that  all  quantities  commenfurable  hauc  that  pro¬ 
portion  the  one  to  the  other,which  number  hath  to  numbers.  In  numbers  therfore,p> 
and  1 2  are  commenfurable,  becaufe  there  is  one  common  meafure  which  meafureth 
them  both,namely, the  number  3.  Firft  it  meafureth  12, for  it  is  lefle  then  la.and  be- 
ingtakencertaine  dmeSjnamely^timesjitmakethexaAlyti  2:  3  times  41s  12,  it  alfo 
meafureth  p,forit  is  lefle  then  p.  and  alfo  taken  certaine times, namely,  3  times,  it  ma- 
keth  precifcly  <5:3  times  3  is  p.Likewifeis  itin  magnitudes,  if one  magnitude  meafure 
two  other  magnitudes,thofe  two  magnitudes  fo  meafured,are  faid  to  becommenfuta- 
ble.Asforexample,ifthelineCbeingdou- 

biedjdo  make  the  line  B,  and  the  fame  lyne  -d  * - * - - + - * 

C  tripledjdo  make  the  line  A,  then  are  the 

two  lines  A  and  B,lines  or  magnitudes  com  3  •- — - * - — - ► 

menfurable.For  that  one  meafure,  namely, 

the  line  Cmeafuretfytheboth.Firft,  the  line  C  ♦ — - » 

G  is  lefle  the  the  line  A,  and  alfolefle  the  the 

line  B,alfo  the  line  C  taken  or  repeted  certaine  times, namely,  3  times, maketh  pr ecifely 
the  line  A,and  the  fame  line  C  taken  alfo  Certain  times,namely,two  times,maketh  pre- 
cifely  the  line  B.So  that  the  line  C  is  a  common  meafure  to  them  both,  and  doth  mea¬ 
fure  them  both  .And  therfore  are  the  two  lines  A  and  B  lines  commenfurable.  And  fo  i- 
magine  yc  of  magnitudes  of  other  kyndes,as  of  fuperficiall  figures,  and  alfo  of  bodies. 

Incoma 


Fol.np . 

• 

*  tnMmnfiirable  md^MesAnfutl'^hkh'  M  onemnmon  meafure  Tbefemi 
doth  meafure.  definition « 


This  diffinition  neadeth  ho  explanation  at  all* 
it  is  eafely  vnderftanded  by  the  diffinition  going 
before  of  lines  commenfurabie  .  For  contraries  are  .  j 
made  manifefl  by  comparing  of  the  one  to  theo* 
theriasif  the  line  C,  or  any  other  line  oftentimes  # 
iterated, doo  not  render  precifely  theline  Aynor  the 
line£,  the  are  the  lines  A  and  B  incommenfufable: 
Alfo  if  the  line C ,  or  any  otherlffie  certayne  times  ^ 
repeted,  doo  exaftly  render  the  line  A,  and  doo  not  g 
meafure  the  line  B  ••  or  if  it  meafure  the  line  B, 
and  meafureth  notalfothe  line  A,  the  lines  Aand  C 
B,are  yet  lines  incomenfurablet  &  fo  of  other  mag- 
nitudes^s  of  fuperficieces,and  bodyes. 


| - - 

-4 - 

""  '* 

-4 

Uii 

♦ - - 

- ( - — 

- -» 

Cotitraryet 
made  mamfefi 
by  t  be  compa¬ 
ring  of  the  one 
to  the  other* 


rt  1 


3  cfljgbt lines  commenfur able  in  po’frer are  fuch }  Tehofe [quarts  one  and 
ihejetfe fame  fuperficies fixea^or  plat  doth  meafure. 


iO“. 


The  thirds 
definition* 


To  the  declaration  of  this  diffinition  we  muft  firft  call  to  minde  what  is  vnder- 
{landed  &  ment  by  the  power  of  a  line  :  whichas  we  haue  before  in  the  former  bookes 
noted  is  nothing  ells  but  the  fquare  thereof ,  or  any  other  plaine  figure  equall  to  the 
1  qua  re  thereof.  And  fo  great  power  &  habilitie  is  a  line  faid  to  haue,as  is  the  quantitie  of 
the  fq  uare, which  it  is  able  to  defcribe,or  a  figure  fuperficial  equal  to  the  fquare  therof.  Wfat-tht 
This  is  alfo  to  be  noted  that  of  lines ,  feme  are  commenfurabie  in  length,  the  one  power  of 4 
to  the  other, and  fomc  ate  commenfurabie  the  one  to  the  other  in  power.Of  lines  com  Iweit* 
menfufablein  iength  the  one  to  theother,was  geuen  an  example  in  the  declaration  of 
the  firft diffiilitio, namely , -the  lin’es  A  and  B,  which  were  commenfurabie  in  length,one 
and  the  felfemeafuremaniely,  the  line  C  meafured  the  length  of  either  of  them.  Of  the 
other  kinde  is  geuen  this  diffinition  here  fct.-for  the  opening  of  which  take  this  exam¬ 
ple.  Tet-therebeacertainelinemamely,  the 
lineB  C ,  and  let  the  fquare  of  thatline  be 
the  fquare B  CS>£.  Suppofe alfo  an  other 
line,  namely,  the  line  F  H,&  letithe  fquare 
thereof  be  the  fquare  F  H I K ,  and  let  a 

certayne  fuperficies ,  namely ,  the  fuperfi-  - — -j  , 

cies  A, meafure  the  fquare  BCDE,  taken 
1 6.  times:  which  is  the  number  of  the  litle 
areasjfquaresjplatsjor  fuperficieces  cotai- 
ned  and  deferibed  within  the  fayd  fquares 
ech  of  which  is  equall  to  the  fuperficie: 

A.  Agayne  let  the  fame  fuperficies  A  mea- 


K 


H 


t> 

& 

« 

s 

B 


M 


fure  the  fquare  F  H  I  K  9.  times  taken,  ac-  F~ 
cording  to  the  number  of  the  fieldes  or  fu¬ 
perficieces  contayned  and  deferibed  in  the  fame.  Ye  fee  the  that  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
fuperijcies,namely,the  fuperficies  A ,  is  a  common  meafure  to  both  thefe  fquares,  and 
by  certayne  repetitions  thereof,  meafureth  them  both  ♦  Wherefore  the  two  lines  B  C 
and  F  H,which  are  the  fidcs  or  lines  producing  thefe  fquares ,  and  whofe  powers  thefe 
fquares  are,arc  by  this  diffinition  lines  commenfurabie  in  power. 

4  bines  incommen fur  able  are fuch  3  lohofe fquares  no  one  plat  or fuperfi*  Tie  fourth 
cies  doth  meafure.  definition* 


CCiiii. 


This 


/ 


u< 


This  definition  is  ca/y  to  be  vnderftanded  by  that  which  was  iaydin  the  diffim- 
kioivlaft  fet  before  this,  and  headeth  ho  Farther  declaration ,  And  thereof  take  this  ex¬ 
ample  .  If  neither  the  fuperficies  A,  ' 

noranyother  fuperficics  doo  mea-  ■  ^  ^  _ p 

fure  the  two  fquares  BCDE  ,  and 
F  H I K  :  or  if  it  meafure  the  one; 
namely  BCDE,  and  not  the  other 
I  ' 

F  H I  K,and  not  the  fq 
the  two  lines  B  C  and  F  H  ,  are  in 
power  incommenfurable,  and  ther--. 
fore' alfo  incommefurable  in  length. 

For  whatfoeuer  lines  are  incpinme- 
fu ruble  in  power  ,  the  fame  are  alfo 
incommenfurable  in  length  as  (hall 


****«,.  A-r  j  Aii VA  WiiV  UU1V.4 

F  H I K,  dr  if  it  meafure  the  fquare 
FBI  K,and  not  the  fquare  BCDE: 


3 


c 


:OU  . 


afterward  in  the  <?.  propofition  of 
this  booke  be  proued.  And  therfore 
fuch  lines  are  here  defined  to  be  abfolutely  incommenfurable  .  Thefc  thinges  thus 
ftandingit  may  eafelyappeare,thatifalirte  beaffignedandlayd  before  vs,  there  may 
beinnumtrabie  other  lines  commenfurable  vnto  it ,  and  otherincommenfurable  vnto 
tt:of  commenfitVaofe  lines  fome  are  commenfurable  in  length  and  power, and  fomeia 
power  ondy. 


The  fifth 
definition* 

V  >  U  yM 

The  pritMplel 
■of  this  booke 
might  ivsii  to 
be  peifed ,  for 
that  they  are 
wore  firaunge 
then  the  pmi 
ciplesoftbe 
fanner  bakes. 


„  r  ►  ’  -*  '  ,  ,  .  .  .  • 

And  that  right  line  fo fet  forth  is  called  a  ratmall  line. 


t 

Thefe  principles , definitions  and  groundes  of  this  tenth  booke  ought  well  to  be 
pay  fed, -they  are  fomewhat  moreftrangeand  more  hard,  then  are  the  dimnitions  and 
principles  of  the  other  bookes  of  Euchde  going  before  ,  and  therefore  at  the  firft  fight 
or  reading  are  not  ftraight  way  conceiued,but  ought  often  to  be  repeted,  and  by  vfe  to 
be:  con  fir  rhed  .For  the  propositions  following.briug  vntothem  much  light,  aha  facili- 
tie  of  vnder  ftanding.Firft  there  is  a  line  fuppofed,and  layd  before  vs,  which  may  be  a- 
nv  line  whatfoeuer,  of  what  length, or  (hortnes  ye  will :  this  line  thus  firft  fuppofed  is 
imagined:  to  ha ue fuch  diuifions  and  fo  many  partes  as  ye  lift  to  conceiue  in  minde,  as 
3 .4. 5  .and  fo  forth,which  may  be  applied  to  any  kinde  ofmeafure,  as  it  (hall  happen,as 
to  inches,feete,pafes,and  fuch  other, Vnto  this  line  faith  Euclide  may  be  copared  innu¬ 
merable  lines,  of  which  fame  (halbecommenfurablciand  other  fome  incommenfura¬ 
ble  :of  commenfurable  lines ,  fome  are  commenfurable  both  in  length  and  in  power, 
other  fome  are  comenfurable  inpow 


er  cmeifiAs  if  any  part  of  the  line  pro 
pofed  which  let  be  the  line  A  B  ,  <100 
mefure  alfo  the  line  EF  and  againe 
ifanyone  fuperficies  do  meafure  the 
fqnare  of  the  line  A  B,which  let  be  the 
fquare  A  B  C  D  :and  alfo  doo  meafure 
the  fquare  of  die  line  EF, which  let  be 
rhe  fquare  EF  G  H:  the  is  the  line  EF 
to  the  fujppofed  line  &  firft  fet ,  name 
ly,to  the  line  A  B,a  line  commenfnra- 
ble  bothin  lengthand  power,  as  ye 
may  feein  the  firft  example  here  fet. 

Andifitfo  be  that  one  &the  felfe 
fame  fuperficics  do  meafure  both  the 
fquares  of  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and 
E  F,  namely  the  fquares  A  B  C  D  and 
E  F  G  B:  and  no  one  line  do  meafure 
the  lines  A  B  and  E  F :  then  is  the  line 


3 


M 


3> 


EF 


Fol.i]  o. 


ofSuclides  Elementes 

ET  (  compared  to  the  fuppofed  and 

fifftline  AB)corinmenfurableinpow-  ^  B  F  S 

eronely-.As  in  this  example  ye  may  ” 

eafely  perceiue .  For  the  triangle  or 
fuper'ficies  ACD,  twife  taken,  mea- 
fureth the  fquare  ABCD,  namely, 
the  fquare  of  the  line  AB  :  and  the 
felfe  fame  triangle  ACD  taken  foure 
times  meafureth  the  other  fquare,  a 
namely,  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F. 

Butnlbonemeafure  orlinecan  beaf- 
figned  tomeafure  both  the  lines  AB 
and  E  F ,  becaufe  the  fides  of  a  fquare 
and  the  diameter  are  incommenfura- 
bleialength  the  one  to  the  other,  as 
afterward  (halbe  fhewed .  Wherefore 
they  are  in  length  incommenfurable,  &  commenfurable  in  power  onely,that  is  by  rea 
foil  of  their  fquares,which  are  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other, 

Agayne  ifitfo  be  that  no  one  line  may 
Be  found  to  be  a  comon  meafure,to  meafure 
both  the  firft  line, namely, A  B  ,  andalfo  the 
JineEF;  noryet  any  onefuperficies  tomea¬ 
fure  the  fquare  or  powers  of  thefe  two  lines, 
then  is  the  line  E  F ,  to  the  firft  line  fet  and 
fuppofed ,  incommenfurable  both  in  length 
and  in  power .  As  is  fuppofed  to  be  in  this 
example. 

Thus  may  ye  fee,  howto  the  fuppofed 
line  firft  fet  may  be  compared  infinite  lines, 
feme  commenfurable  both  in  length  &  pow¬ 
ered  fome.commenfurableinpower onely,  E - — : — * F 

and  incommenfurable  in  length,  and  fome 

incommenfurable  both  in  power  &  in  length  .And  this  firft  line  fo  iet,whcreunto,  and 
tp  whofe.  fquares  the  other  lines  and  their  fquares  are  compared,  is  called  a  rationail 
line, commonly  of  the  moftpartof  writers. But  fome  there  are ,  which  miflike  that  it 
fiiotftd  be  called  a  rationalIline,&  that  not  without  iuft  caufe  .  In  the  Greeke  copy  it  is 
called  ^)jT>]}rete,w hich  fignifieth  a  thingthat  may  be  fpoke,&  exprefled  by  word, a  thing 
certayneygraunted  and  appoynted  .  Wherefore  Flu  fetes ,  a  man  which  bellowed  great 
traueil  and  diligence  in  reftoring  of  thefe  elementes  of  jE«£7W,Ieauing  this  word  ratio- 
nall,calleth  this  line  fuppofed  and  firft  fet,a  line  certaine,becaufethepartes  thereof  in¬ 
to  which  it  is  deuided  are  certaine,and  known,and  may  be  exprelfedby  voyce,and  alfo 
be  co ump ted  by  number:otherlines,beingto  this  line  incommenfurable,whofeparts 
are  nqt  diftindly  known, bu  t  are  vneertayne,  nor  can  be  exprefled  by  name  nor  affignd 
by  number ,  which  are  of  other  men  called  irrationall ,  he  calleth  vneertaine  and  furd 
lmes.IV//v/j  Montaureus  although  he  doth  not  very  wel  like  of  the  name, yet  he  altereth 
it  not^but  vfeth  it  in  al  his  booke.Likewife  wil  we  doo  here, for  that  the  word  hath  bene 
and  is  fo  vniuerfally  receiued. And  therefore  will  we  vfe  the  fame  name ,  and  call  it  a  ra¬ 
tional!  line. For  itis  not  fo  great  a  matter  what  names  wegeue  tothinges,  fo  that  we 
fully  ynd’erftahd  the  thinges  which  the  names  fignifie, 

.  Jhfs  rational!  line  thus  here  defined,is  the  ground  and  foundation  of  all  the  propo¬ 
rtions  af.moft  of  this  whole  tenth  booke.  And  chiefly  from  the  tenth  propofition  for- 
wardes.So  that  vnlefle  ye  firft  place  this  rational!  Iihe,andhauc  a  fpecialland  continu-' 
all  regard  vnto  it  before  ye'begin  any  demonfttation,  ye  {hall  noteafely  vnderftand  it. 
For  it  is  as  it  were  thetouch  and  criall  ofall  other  lines,  by  which  it  is  known  whether 
any  of  them  be  rational!  or  pot.  And  this  may  be  called  the  firft  rationall  line,  the  line 
ratio  nail  orpurpole  or  a  rationall  line  fet  in  the  firft  place,  and  fa  made  diftimft  and  fe- 
uer^rom  other  rational!  lines, of  which  ihall  be  fpoken  afterwarde.And  this  nyuft  ye  ' 
well  commit  to  memory. 


ID 


,3 


Ph  to  the  Jup¬ 
pe  fed  iinefirjl 
Jet  may  be 
comp  and  infi¬ 
nite  Hues* 

Why  fame 
miflike  that 
the  line  fell 
fet  fhouid  be 
called  a  ratio¬ 
nal  tine. 

Flu  fetes  c ab¬ 
le  th  this  line, a 
line  certains* 


This  rational 


in  a  maner  of 
all  the  propor¬ 
tions  in  this 
tenth  books* 
Note . 

The  line  Rati¬ 
on  all  of  pur- 
pojs. 


6  Lmes 


"fhefitcib 

definition* 


: 


DhetentbBookg' 


€  "Lines  "tobich  are  commenfurable  to  this  line  whether  in  length  and power ^ 
or  in  power  onely }are  aljo  called  ration  all. 


This  definition  needeth  no  declaration  at  all,  but  is  eafily  perceiued,if  the  firft  de¬ 
finition  be  remembred,which  fheweth  what  magnitudes  are  commenfurable,  and  the 
third,  which  iheweth  what  lines  are  commenfurable  in  power.  Here  note,how  aptly  & 
naturally, Euclick  in  this  place  vfeth  thefe  wordes  commenfurable  either  in  length  and 
power,orin  power  onely.  Becaufe  that  all  lines  which  are  commenfurable  in  length, 
are  aifo  co  mmenfurable  in  power:  when  he  fpeaketh  oflines  commenfurable  in  legth, 
he  euer  addeth  and  in  power,but  when  he  fpeaketh  of  lines  commenfurable  in  power, 
he  addeth  this  worde  Onely,and  addeth  not  this  worde  in  length,  as  he  in  the  other 
added  this  worde  in  power.  For  not  all  lines  which  are  commenfurable  in  power,  are 
flraight  way  commenfurable  alfo  in  length.  Ofthis  definition,  take  this  example.  Let 
the  firft  line  rationall  of  purpofe, 

£  F  A  B 


which  is  fuppofed  and  laide  forth, 
whole  partes  are  certaine  &  known, 
and  may  be  exprelfed,  named,  and 
nubred  be  A  TS,  the  quadrate  wher- 
ofletbe^SCD:  then  fuppofe  a- 
gaine  an  other  lyne,namely,the  line 
££,  which  let  be  commenfurable 
both'in  length  and  in  power  to  the 
firft  rationall  line, that  is,(  as  before 
was  taught)ief  one  line  meafure  the 
length  of  echeline,  and  alfo  let  one 
fuperficies  meafure  the  two  fquares 
of  the  faid  two  lines,  as  here  in  the 
example  is  fuppofed  and  alfo  ap- 


G 


H 


_ ^ 

F  -4 


B 


peareth  to  the  eie.then  is  the  line  EF  alfo  a  rationall  line, 

Morcouer  if  the  lyne£  F  be  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  rationall  line  A  S 
firft  fet  and  fuppofed,fo  that  no  one  line  do  meafure  the  two  lines  A  H  and  E  F :  As  in 
example  ye  fee  to  be  (for  that  the  line  E  £,is  made  equal!  to  the  line  A  D,  which  is  the 
diameter  of  the  fquare^  B  C"Z>,of 


which  fquare  the  line  AB  is  a  fide, 
it  is  certayne  that  the  fide  of  a 
fquare  is  incomefurablc  in  legth  to 
the  diameter  of  the  fame  fquare: 
if  there  be  yet  founde  any  one  fu- 
perficieSjWhich  meafureth  the  two 
fquares  Ia  Tl  C  Z),and  £  F  G  Af  (as 
here  doth  the  triangle  zAB  £>,  or 
the  triangle  zA CD  noted  in  the 
fquare  ABCDi  or  any  of  the  foure 
triangles  noted  in  the  fquare  EF 
G  H,  as  appeareth  fomwhat  more  -A. 
manifeftlyin  thefecond  example. 


in  the  declaration  of  the  laft  definition  going  before)  the  line  £  £  is  alfo  a  rational  line. 
Note  that  thefe  lines  which  here  are  called  rationall  lines, are  not  rational  lines  ofpur- 


Campmns 
hath  catifei 
much  oo  fc  un¬ 
tie  in  this 
tenth  boohs* 


pofejOr  by  fuppofition,as  was  the  firft  rationall  line, but  are  rationall  onely  by  reafon  of 
relation  and  comparifon  which  they  haue  vnto  it,becaufc  they  are  commenfurable  vn- 
to  it  either  in  length  and  power,or  in  power  onely.  Farther  here  is  to  be  noted,  that 
thefe  wordes  length ,  and  power,and  power  onely,are  ioyned  onely  with  thefe  wordes 
commenfurable  or  incommenfurable,and  are  neuer  ioyned  with  thefe  woordes^ratio- 
nall  or  irrationall.So  that  no  lines  can  be  called  rational  in  length, or  in  power, nor  like 
wife  can  they  be  called  irrationall  in  length,or  in  power.Wherin  vndoubteefiy  Campa- 
nus  was  deceiued,who  vfing  thofe  wordes  &  fpeaches  indifferently  ,caufeH  &  brought 
an  great  obfeuritie  to  thepropofitions  and  demonftratioos  ofthis  boke,which  he  (half 

eafily 


Fohyi. 

eafily.fee  which  marketh  with  diligence  the  demoiiftrations ofVampanusia  this  bboke. 

7  Lines  aphid  are  incommenfurahle  to  the  rationall  line  ,  are  called  ir * 
rational l. 

By  lines  incommenfurahle  to  the  rationall  line  fuppofed  in  this  place ,  he  Vnder- 
flandeth  fuch  as  be  incommenfurahle  vnto  it  both  in  length  and  in  power .  For  there 
are  no  lines  incommenfurahle  in  power  onely :  for  it  cannot  be  that  any  lines  Ihould  fo 
be  incommensurable  in  power  onely,that  they  be  not  alfo  incommenfurable  in  length. 
What  foeuer  lines  be  incommenfurahle  in  power,  the  fame  be  alfo  incommenfurahle 
in  lengtn  .  Neither  can  Euclide  here  in  this  place  meane  lines  incommenfurahle  in 
length  oncly,forin  the  difhnition  before  ,  hecalled  them  rationall  lines,  neither  may 
they  be  placed  amongltirrationalllines.-Wherforeitremayneth  that  in  this  diffintioii 
he  fpeaketh  onely  of  thofe  lines  which  arc  incommenfurable  to  the  rationall  linefirft 
geuen  and  luppofed,both  in  length, and  in  power.  Which  by  all  meanes  are  incommen, 
iurable  to  the  rationall  line,&  therfore  molt  aptly  are  they  called  irrationall  lines.  This 
diffinition  is  eafy  to  be  vnderftandcd  by  that  which  hath  bene  fayd  before .  Yet  for  the 
more  plaitienes  fee  this  example .  Let  the  ftrft  rationall  line  fuppofed,  be  the  line  AB, 
whofe  fquarcor  quadrate,Iet  be  ABCD.  And 
let  there  be  geuen  an  other  line  EF  which  let 
be  to  the  rationall  line  incommenfurable  in 
length  and  power, fo  that  let  no  one  line  mea- 
fure  the  length  of  the  two  lines ,  A  B  and  E  F: 
and  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  be  E  F  G  H. 

Now  if  alfo  there  be  no  one  fuperficies  which 
meafureth  the  two  fquares  A  BCD,  and  E  F 
G  H,as  is  fuppofed  to  beinthis  example,  the 
is  the  line  E  F  an  irrationall  line,  which  word 
irrat  ional  (  As  before  did  this  word  rational) 
hiifliketh  many  learned  in  this  knowledge  of  4  .  .  y 

Geometry, Fhifiat.es ,  as  he  left  the  word  ratio¬ 
nall  ,and  in  lleade thereof yfed  this  word cer-  if - - iF 

taine,fo  here  he  leaueth  the  wordrrrationall, 

and vfeth  in  place  thereof  this  word  vneertaine,  and  euer  nameth  thefe  lines  vneertaine 
lmes&etria  Monunreus  alfo  mifliking  the  word  irrationall,  would  rather  haue  them  to 
be  called  furd  lines  ,  yet  becaufe  this  word  irrationall  hath  euer  by  cuftome  and  long 
vfe,fo  generally  benereceiued ,  he  vfeth  continually  the  fame.  InGreeke  fuch  lines  are 
called  &’KoyciMogoiiw\\ich  fignifieth  nameles,  vnfpeakeable}vncertaync, indeterminate, 
and  with  out  proportion  :  not  that  thefe  irrationall  lines  haue  no  proportion  at  all,  eP 
ther  to  the  fim  rationall  line ,  Orbetwene  them  deities :  but  are  fo  named ,  for  that  theyr 
proportions  to  the  rationall  line  cannot  be  exprelfed  in  number .  Thatis  vtidoubtedly 
very  vntrae, which  many  write,  that  their  proportions  ate  vn known e  both  to  vs  and  to 
nature.Is  it  not  thinkeyou  a  thing  very  ab  furd  to  fay  that  there  is  anything  in  nature, 
and  produced  by  nature^o  be  hidde  from  nature, and  not  to  be  know  ne of  nature  ?it 
can  not  be  fayd  that  their  proportions  are  vttfrly  hidde  andvnknowne  to  vs  (much 
leffe  vnto  nature  )  although  we  cannot  geue  them  their  names  ,  and  diftin&ly  exprefle 
them  by  numbers :  otherwife  thoul  &  Euclide  haue  taken  all  this  trauell  and  wonderful! 
diligence  bellowed  in  this  bookedn  vaine  and  to  no  vfet  in  which  he  doth  nothing  ells 
but  teach  the  proprieties  and  paflions  of  thefe  irrationall  lines ,  and  Iheweth  the  pro¬ 
portions  which  they  haue  the  one  to  the  other.  r 

Here  is  alfo  to  be  noted ,  which  thing  alfo  T artalea  hath  before  diiigentlv  notedf 
that  Campanus  andmany  dther  writers  of  Geometry .  ouer  rhucH  erred  and  weredereG 
that  they  wrote  and  taught,  that  all  thefe  lines  whole  iquareTwere  not  fighiHed 
ancTmou^itbe  exprelfed  by  a  fquare  number  (  althoughthcy  might  by  any  other 
n u mber:  as  by  1 1.  12. 14. and  fuch  others  notfquare  numbers )  arc  irrationall  lines. 
Which  is  manifeltly  repugnant  to  the  grourides  and  principles  op«c&fc,who  wil,that 
ail  lines  which  are  commenfurable  to  the  rationall  line,  whether  it  be  in  length  and 
-  power 


Jhftumb 

definition* 


flu  [sates  in 
ft  cede  of  this 
Tvord  irratio - 
nail  y/eth  this 
Toordvncer* 
tayne. 

Wly  they  are 
called  irratio* 
nail  lines. 


Thecaufeof 
the  obf canty 
and  confufed- 
ti&in'Wn 

AMIP 

The  eighth 
■definition* 


'The  ninth 
definition* 


Kt  *v  b 

yr-  *«' 
'-OWWtt  V.  -iJif 


power  aor  in  power-onely,{hould  be  rational!'.  Vndqnbfcedly this  hath  bene  one  of  the 
chiefeft  and  greateft  eaufes  of  the  wonderfull  confufion  and  darkenes  of  this  booke, 
which, fo  hath  tolled, and  tormoyled  the  wittes  of  all  both. writers  andr.eaders,mafters 
and  fchofefs,  and  fo  bnerwhelmed  them,th'at  they  could  not  without  infinite  trauell 
and  fweate,attayne  to  the  truth  and  perfect  vnderftanding  thereof.  ■ 

8  F  he  fquare  ~ftbicb  is  defqihed  of  the  rationall  right  line  fuppofed }  is 
rational l. 

tu  XL"'  f;  ■■■"'  t  -  i.v.-.r'fi.-.tiroi  u  -  -W-  .  ■ 

Vntili  this  diffinition  hath  .Emhde  &&  forth  the  nature  and  proprietie  of  the  find 
iun'de  ofrnagnicudt‘,namcly ,  oflines:howtfoey  are  rationalfor irrational! now  he  be¬ 
ginner  ir  ro  {.hew  how  the  fecond  kinde  of  magnitudes  jiameiy  fuperficies  are  one  to  the 
other  rationall  or  irrationaU.This  diffinition  is  very  playne. 

Suppofe  the  line  A  B',to  be  the  rational!  line, hailing  his  parts 
and  diuifions  certaynely  Jaiowne  .•  the  fquare  of  which  fine  a 
let-bct-he fquare  A  B  G  D.Now  becaufe  iris  the  fquareef the 
rationall  line  A  B,,.  it' is  alfo  called  rationall  .-  and  as  the  line. 

A  B,is  the  firfi:  rationall  line,  vnro  which  other  lines  com’pa- 
jcediare  coumpted  rationall:,  or  irrational l,fo  is  the  quadrat 
or  fquare  thereof,  the  firft  rationall  fuperficies  vnto  which 
all  other  fquares  or  figures  compared,arecoumptedand  na- 
medrationalfprirrationail.  ^  x. ,  .■■■•  .  . 

P  Such'fyhkb  are  commerjmA able  Tmto  it }are  rationall 

jn  this  diffinitipn, where  it  is  fayd,fuch  as  are  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the 
rationaU.iine,are  nob  vnderftand  o nelly  other  fquares  or  quadrates,bu,t  all  other  kindes 
of  reMline  figures  playne  plats  Sc  fuperficiefes.  What  fo  euer  fo  that  if  any  fuch  figure 
becomenfurable  vnto  .  .  f  ~,n\'  r.-. 


A 

3 


that  ration  all  rquare^it 
is  alfo  rationall.  As  fup 
pofe  that  the  fquare 
of  the  rationall  line, 
which  is  alfo  rationall, 


K  -  (JL, 

r-r 

1 

v.  L, 

,  ^  .. 

t  *  •* 

F  A 


3 


H 


--  .  M 

V>  jVlfe'i 

.mtWhvt 


The  tenth 
definition. 


«vr{  ht) 

rltion 


fo  jfonie  other  fquare  m  kj 

;u.tkfquareEbCH,_.  .  ■  , 

fq.be-cpinmenfur^le;  ...  r-. 

to  .the  fame:  theisthe  ...  . 

jqnareEEGHalfora- .  /  . 

-tip  nai  So.  alfo  if  the  rediiline  figure  K;L  M.N,  which  is  afigureon  the  one  fide  Ionger,b$ 
eoininenfurable  vn  to  the  fayd  fquare  as  is  fuppofedin  this  example, it  is  alfo  a  rational 
fuperficies  and  fo  of  all  other  fuperficiefes. 

I  ■■  '  bin  t  i  - ; 

2 1  m  n  Such  tfohkb  dnincorntnenforab  leTnto  it 3are  irrationally 

.....  jj  id  -  ■■■■'•  - 

:  .W'het'eitisfayd  in  this  dilfini 
tionfuch  which  areincommenfu- 
rable,  it  is  generally  to  be  taken: 
as  was  this  word  com  en  fur  able  id 
the  difnnitio  before.  For  al  fuper- 


•  On 


fU 


linedfignre  fo  euer  it  be,if they  be 
ineonUnenfurable  vnto  the  ratio- 
nail  fquare  fuppofed ,  the  arethey  >  9 

*  _ .  i. ...  ^  v  .  trt a*.  k  . 

,  .  'iS'WQn 


1  ai3ri3 

A 

-iWn 

' ,  X  t. 

s 

3  Si 

;X.  cl 

• 

■ 

rm 

a-..,  ; .  i 

V-! 

t.  J: 

:: 

0(12: 


Knr 


0. 


Fol.ip, 

irrationall,  As  ietthe  fquareA  B-C  D  be  the  fquare  ofthe  fnppofed  rationall  line  which 
fquare  therefore  is  alfo  rational!:  fuppofe  aifo  alfo  an  other  fquare  ,  namely  the  fquare 
E,fuppoferalfo  any  other  figure,  as  for  example  fake  a  figure  of  one  fide  longer,  which 
Iht  be  A.Noaf  if  the  fquare  E  and  the  figure  F/be  both  inconimenfurable  to  the  ratio- 
nall  fquare  AB  C  D.clien  is  ech  of  .thefe  figures  E  &  F  irrationall.  And  fo  of  other, 

11  jind  thefe  lines  ieboje ppfveres  they  are,  are  irrationall.  If  they  he 
f pares,  then  are  their  jides  irrationall.  If  they  he  notfquares,  hutfome 
other  reef  line  figures  phen Jhall  the  lines  gtihofe jquares  are  equal l  to  thefe 
reef  line  figures,  he  irrationall. 


a 


N 


L 

K 


B 


T~ 

w 

Suppoiethat  the  rationall 

fquare  be  ABCD.  Suppoie  _ „ _ _  F 

alfo  an  other  fquare,name 
ly  the  iquare  E ,  which  let 
be  incomefurable  to  the  ra 
tionall  fquare,  &  therefore 
is  it  irrationall:  and  let  the 
fide  or  line  which  produ¬ 
ced!  this  fquare  be  the  line  p 

F  C:  then  lhall  the  line  FG  1— -  - - '  C  j> 

by  this  definition  be  an  ir- 
rationall  line ;  becaufe  it  is 

the  fide  of  an  irrationall  fquare .  Let  alfo  the  figure  H  being  a  figure  on  the  one  fide 
longer  ( which  may  be  any  other  redtiline  figure  re&angled  or  not  redtangled,  triangle* 
pentagone,trapezite,or  what  fo  euer  ells)  be  inconimenfurable  to  the  rationall  fquare 
ABC  D,then  becaufe  the  figure  H  is  not  afquarefit  hath  no  fide  or  roote  to  produce  it 
yet  may  there  be  a  fquare  made  equall  vnto  it :  for.  that  all  fuch  figures  may  be  reduced 
into  triangles, and  fo  into  fquares,by  the  x  4,  of  the  fccond ,  Suppofe  that  the  fquare 
be  equall  to  the  irrationall  figure  H.The  fide  of  which  figure  QJet  be  the  line  KL:  then 
lhall  the  lipe  K  L  be  alfo  an  irrational  Iine,becanfe  the  power  or  fquare  thereoffis  equal 
to  the  irrationall  figure  H;and  thus  conceiueof  others  the  like. 

Thefe  irrationall  lines  and  figures  are  the  chiefelf  matter  and  fubiedC  which  is  en¬ 
treated  ofin  all  this  tenth bookei  theknowledge>ofwhichis  deepe , and fecret ,  and 
pertaineth  to  the higheft and  moft  worthy  part  of  Geometric,  wherein  ftandeth  the 
pith  and  mary  ofthe  hole  fcience:  the  knowlede  hereof  bringeth  light  to  all  the  bookes 
following, with  out  which  they  are  hard  and  cannot  be  at  all  vnderftoode .  And  for  the 
more  plainenes,ye  (hall  note, that  of  irrationall  lines  there  be  diners  fortes  and  kindes. 
But  they,  whofe  names  are  fet  in  a  table  here  following ,  and  are  in  number  1  j .  are  the 
chiefe,andin  this  teth  boke  fufficiently  for  Euclidesprincipallpurpofe,difcourfed  on. 
'  A  mediall  line, 

Abinomiallline. 

Afirftbimediallline  „ 

A  fecondbimediall  line,  •  -  ’ 

.  A  greater  line.  ■  > 

A  line  containing  in  power  a  rationall  fuperficies  and  a  mediall  fuperficies. 

A  line  containing  in  power  two  mediall  fuperfieieces. 

*  A  refiduall  line. 

A  firft  mediall  refiduall  line, 

A  fecond  mediall  refiduall  line. 

AlefTeline.  'V  ’ ' 

A  line  making  with  a  rationall  fuperficies  the  whole  fuperficies  medial!. 

A  line  making  with  a  mediall  fuperficies  the  whole  fuperficies  mediall. 

-  Of  all  which  kindes  the  definitions  together  with  there  declarations  fhalbc  fet  here 
after  in.  their  due  places. 

>  "  . . “  . ‘  *’  &i)f  '  -  '  -The- 


Conflruttm . 


VemonHra- 
if  on. 


4  Corollary* 


D 


F 


H 


ff  'The  i.l  beoreme.  The  i.  Trojojitwn. 

1  wo  Unequal!  magnitudes  being geuen ,  if  from  the  greater  be  taken  away 
more  then  the  halfe,  and  from  the  refidue  be  againe  taken  away  more  then 
the  halfe ,  and fo  be  done fill  continually  yhere Jhall  at  length  be  left  a  cer* 
taine  magnitude  leffer  then  the  lejfe  of  the  magnitudes firfigeuen. 

Fppofe  that  there  be  two  awe  quail  magnitudes  A  B,  and  C,ef 
which  let  A  B  be  the  greater .  Then  I fay,  that  tffrom  A  B,  be 
taken  away  more  then  the  halfe,  and  from  the  refidue  be  taken  a - 
|  gaine  more  then  the  halfe,  and fo  fill  continually,  there Jhall  at 
the  length  be  left  a  certaine  magnitude,  leffer  then  the  left  mag¬ 
nitude  geue, namely, then  C.  For forafmuch  as  C  is  the  lefe  mag¬ 
nitude, therefore  C  may  be  fo  multiply ed, that  at  the  length  it  will 
be  greater  then  the  magnitude  AB  (by  the  $  .definition  of  the f ft 
" 1  booke)  .  Let  it  be  fo  multiply  ed,  and  let  the  multiplex  of  C  grea¬ 
ter  then  B,be  D  E.  And deuide  D  E  into  the  partes  e quail 
vnto  G,  which  let  he  D  F,F  C,  and  G  E .  And  from  the  mag¬ 
nitudes  A  3  take  away  more  then  the  halfe ,  which  let  beBB: 
and  againe  from  kA  H,  takeaway  more  then  the  halfe,  which 
let  be  ILK- And  fo  do  continually  amt  ill  the  diuifons  which  are 
in  the  magnitude  <^AB,  be  e  quail  in  multitude  vnto  the  diui - 
fions  which  are  in  the  magnitude  D  E  .So  that  let  the  diuifons 
A K,  KB,  and  H  B,  be  equallin  multitude  vnto  the  diuifons 
V  F,F  G,  and  G  E.  And  forafmuch  as  the  magnitude  IDE  is 
greater  then  the  magnitude  A  B,  and  from  D  E  is  taken  away 
lejfe  then  the  halfe,  that  is,  EG  ( which  detraction  or  taking  a- 
way  is  vnderjland  to  be  done  by  the  former  diuifon  of  the  mag¬ 
nitude  D  E  into  the  partes  equall  vnto  C :  for  as  a  magnitude 
is  by  multiplication  increajed ,  fo  is  it  by  diuif  on  diminijhed) 
and  from  A  B  is  taken  away  more  then  the  halfe,  that  is,  B  Be 
therefore  the  refidue  G  D  is  greater  then  the  refidue  H  A( which 
thing  is  most  true  and  moft  eafie  to  conceaue,  if  we  remeber  this  &  c  E 

principle >  that  the  refidue  of  a  greater  magnitude ,  after  theJa- 

kingMvay  ofthhalfc  or  lejfe  then  the  halfe ,  is  euer  greater  then  the  refidue  of  a  lefie  magni¬ 
tude,  after  the  taking  away  of  more  then  the  halfikX „  And  forafmuch  as  the  magnitude  G  D 
is  greater  then  the  magnitude  H  A,  and  from  G  D  is  taken  away  the  halfe,  that  is,G  F: 
and  from  A  B  is  taken  away  more  then  the  halfe,  that  is,  H  K :  therefore  the  refidue  D  F  is 
greater  then  the  refidue  A  K  (by  the forefay  d  principle)  .But  the  magnitude  D  F  is  equall 
vnto  the  magnitude  C  (by  fuppofitton )  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  magnitude  C  is  greater  then  the 
magnitude  A  K ,  Wherefore  the  magnitude  A  K  is  lejfe  then  the  magnitude  C .  Wherefore 
of  the  magnitude  A  B  is  left  a  magnitude  A  K  left  then  the  lefe  magnitude  geuen,  namely » 
then  C  ■  which  was  required  to  beproued .  In  like  J'ort  alfo  may  it  be proued  if  the  halfes  be 
taken  away. 

#  A  Corollary. 

•\r . 

Of  this  Proportion  it  followethjthat  any  magnitude  being  geuen  how  litle  foeuer  it 

be,  there  may  be  geuen  a  magnitude  lefle  then  it :  fo  that  it  is  impolfible  that  any  mag- 
v  tutudc 


!<*■ 


rF 


c/Buclules  Elementes.  ft/*  233, 

citude  fhould  be  geuen.  then  which  can  be  geuen  nolefTe, 

f  -'t\s  vaa  'rvnsi  3  . v.’  ,  ly-W**-  >  -  vJ.  C"  C  •>  g  _  f 

An  ocher  dcmonfcration  of  the  fame, 

yfi-  ■  iWam1;  w ■>. •  ■,  ;  :V\ '■■■■  -  v  ■ 

S. uppofe  that  the  two  vne quail  'magnitudes getien  be  A  B  and  C .  And  let  C  he  the  lejfe. 

And forafmucb  as  C  is  the  lefegherefore  C  mayfd  be  multiplyed,  that  it  pall  at  the  length 
be  greater  then  A  B .  Let  it  be fb  multiplyed,  and  let  the  multiplex  of  C  encoding  A  B  be  the  e  Hj 
magnitude  F  M  :  Anddeuide  F  M  into  his  partes  equall  vnto  C ,  that  is,  into  the  magni¬ 
tudes  M  H,  H  Gy  and-G  F .  And  from  cA  B  take  away  more  then  the  halfe,  which  let  be 
the  magnitude  B  E  •  and  Ukewififrom  E  A  take  away  againe  more  then  the  halfe,  name* 
lj,  the  magnitude  E  D  .  And  -thus  do  continually  vntill  the  diuifions  which  are  in  the 
magnitude  FM ,  be  equall  in  multitude  to  the  diuifions  which  are  in  the  magnitude '  A 
B-  and  let  thofie  diuifions  be  the  magnitudes  B  E,E  D  ,  and  D  A .  ^And  hop?  multiplex 
the  magnitude  F  M.  is  to  the  magnitude  C,  fio  multiplex  let  the  magnitude  K  X  he 
to  the  magnitude  D  A .  Arid  deuide  the  magnitude  K  X  into  the  magnitudes  equall  td  lOemnUra- 
the  magnitude  DA:  which  let  be  K  L,  L  N,  and  N  X .  Now  then  the  diuifions  which'  tW}U 
are  in  the  magnitude  K  X,  are  e quail  vnto  the  diuifi¬ 
ons  which  arein  themagmiudeM  F .  And forafimuch 
as  B  E  is  greater  then  the  halfe  of  A  B,  therefore  B  E 
is greater  then  the  r eft  due  E  A. Wherefore  B  E  is  much 
more  greater  then  D  A .  But  DA  is  equal!  vnto  X  N. 

Wherefore  B  E  is  greater  then  X'N.  Againe  for afmuch 
as  D  E  is  greater  then  the  halfe  of  E  A ,  therefore 
D  E  is  greater  then  the  refidue  D  A:  but  D  A  is  e  quail 
vnto  L  N :  wherefore  D  E  is  greater  then  L  N.  Wher- 
fore  the  whole  magnitude  DB  is  greater  the  the  whole 
magnitude  X  L.  But  D  A  is  equall  vnto  L  K .  Where¬ 
fore  the  whole  magnitude  CAB  is  greater  then  the 
whole  magnitude  KX .  <^Andihe  magnitude  M  F  is 
greater  then  the  magnitude  B  A  :  wherefore  M  F  is 
rnuch  greater  the  K  X .  And  for  afmuch  as  thofe  mag¬ 
nitudes  X  N,  N  L,dr  L  K ,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther.fr  likewife  thefe  magnitudes  M  Fiji  G,andG  F, 
are  equal  the  one  to  the  other, &  the  multitude  of  thofe 

magnitudes  which  are  in  M  F,  is  equall  to  the  multi-  B  c  M  x 
tude  of  thofe  magnitudes  which  are  in  K  XAherfore  as 

K  Listo  F  G,fois  LN  to  G II, and  NX  to  H  M ,  Wherefore  (by  the  1 2. of  the  f ft)  as  one 
tof ’ ihe  antecedentes ,, namely,  K  L,is  to  one  of  the  confequentes ,  namely ,  to  F  G,foare  all  the 
antecedentes, namely  ,the  whole  I(  X  to  allthe  confequentes, namely ,  to  the  whole  F  M .  But 
F  Mis  greater  then  K  X.  Wherefore  F  G  is  greater  then  L  K.  But  F  G  is  equall  vnto  C:  and 

K  LvntoD A  (by fuppofition)  .Wherefore  the  magnitude  C  is  greater  then  the  magnitude 
A  D  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

ff  1  2- Theorem?,  The  2.  frofiojition. 

Two  Unequal!  magnitudes  being  geuen }  if  the  lejfe  be  continually  taken 
from  the  greater  y  &  t  hat  Xohich  remayneth  meafureth  at  no  time  the  mag* 
nnude going  before :  then  are  the  magnitudes  geuen  incommenfurabie. 


D 


E 


H 


K 


L 


K 


This  propoft 
um  teaebetb 
that  incantt- 
nuc&U  quanti¬ 
ty  which  the 
fir  ft  of  the  fs- 
mnth  taught 
tn  dif cme 
quantity. 
Lonfituthon. 


Vppofe  that  there  he  two  vne  quail  magnitudes^!  B,and 
C  D, and  let  A  B  be  the  left :  and  taking  away  continu¬ 
ally  by  a  certaine  alternate  detraction  the  lefie  from  the 
greater,  let  not  the  residue  meafure  the  magnitude  going 


bin 


"M 


lit 


F 


4 


E 


DemonBra- 
tints  leading  to 
an  ab fur  ink. 


before  .Then  I  fay,  thatihofeUvo  magnitudes  A  B  and  C  D,  arein- 
commen fir  able .  For  if  they  be  commenfurable,  then  (by  the  firfl  de¬ 
finition  of  the  tenth)  feme  one  magnitude  [hall  meafure  them  both  •  ; 

Let  there  be  fueh  a  magnitude,  if  it  befofiible,  and  let  the  fame  be  E. 

\_And  let  A  B  mea faring  D  F,  leaue  a  life  then  it felfe, namely,  CF 
(that  is, from  the  greater  magnitude  C  D,  takeaway  a  certayne  part  as  D  F, 
which  let  be  equal!  to  A  B ,  or  if  it  be  not  equail  vnto  it,  yet  let  it  be  fuch,that 
that  leffe  magnitudeA  B  being  more  then  once'  repeated  may  make  the  mag¬ 
nitude  D  F  t  For  this  is  the  meaning  of  this  hi  A  B  meiftMng  D  F.  Qfc.  And 
this  detraction  made,o£the  leife  1  fay  out  of  the  greaterjtet  there  he  left  of  the 
greater  a  certaine  portion  C  F,  leffe  then  the  magnitude  A  f  <  And  this  is  the 
meaning  of  that  which  in  the  Theoreme  was  th$t  which  rem#tntth  me* 

fureth  *t  no  time  the  Magnitude  going  SefVrfifil'  '%Wejpijf%FCT(  msafur-Wg 

B  G  leaue  a  left  then  it  felfe, namely,  A  G  f  hiiddotlm  continually  as 
often  as  neederequireth,  vntillthere  he  found fuch  arnagnitkde'that  '  l 
is  lefie  then  E  :  which  muB  needes  at  the  length  happen  (by  the  Proposition  going  before) ' . 
La  there  be  found fitch  a  magnitude  leffe  then  E,  which  let  be  A  G .  And  forafmuch  as  the 
magnitude  E  mea  fureth  the  magnitude  A  B,  but  A  B  me$ fureth D  F :  therefore  E  meafi¬ 
reth  the  magnitude  D  F  (by  this  common  fentencc ,  !f*  mugnhuie  meafure  an  other  magnitude  it 
fbatl  ttlfo  meafure  entry  magnitude  whom  it  mea  fureth  )  .  And  it  meafireth  alfo  the  whole  C  D  (fir 
it  is  (kppofedto  be  a  common  meafure' to  the  magnitudes  A  B  and  CD).  Wherefore  alfo  it 
meafireth the refidue  CF  (by  this cdmmonfentence,  If*,*>*2uit>tii*  wbole  *nd 

tai»en  away,  it  fall  alfo  meafure  the  ref d»e  ) .  find forafmuch  as  E  meafireth  C  F,  hut  C  F  mea¬ 
fireth  B  (7,  therefore  E  alfo  meafireth  B  G  (by  the fir  FI forefaid  common fentence)  ■:  and  it 
meafireth  the  whole  A  B .  Wherefore  it jh  a  l l  alfo  mea  fire  the  refidue  A  G  (by  the  other fore- 
fay  d.  common' fen  fence)  namely,  the  greater  magnitude fhatl  meafure  the  left :  which  is  im- 
pofiible .  Wherefore  no  magnitude  meafireth  thefe  magnitudes  B  and  CD.  Wherefore 
the  magnitudes  A.  B  and  C  D  are  incommensurable .  If  therefore  two  vnequall magnitudes 
being  geuen,  the  leffe  be  continually  taken from  the  greater, and  that  which  remay  net  If  mea- 
fureth  at  no  time  the  magnitude  going  before,  then  are  the  magnitudes  geuen  incommenfifi 
rable :  which  was  required  to  be  dem  on f rated. 


jf  yi Corollary  added  by  Mont  aureus. 


By  this  proportion  it  is  manifefijthatifthe  two  vnequall  magnitudes  geuen  benoe 
incommenfurable,but  commenfurable, then  the  leffe  being  continually  fubtrahedont 
of  the  greatcr^the  refidue  (hall  ofnecefiiitie  meafure  that  which  went  before. 


f  T be  i.  Trobleme. 


The  3.  Tropofition. 


Two  cafes  in 
i tbit  propoft  to. 
Tbejirf  cafe . 


Two  magnitudes  commenfurable  heinggeuen?  to  finds  out  their  great ffl 
common  meafure. 

Fppofi  that  the  two  commenfurable  magnitudes  geuen  be  A  B  fiC  D, of  which 
let  A  B  be  the  lejfe.lt  is  required  to fnde  out  the  great efl  common  meafire  of  the 
magnitudes  A  B  and  C  D  .Now  A  B  either  meafireth  C  D, or  not.  If  it  meafure 
it, and feingit  alfo  meafireth  it felfe,  wherfire  A  Bis  a  common  meafure  vnto 

the 


7  C 


A 


T 


his  propoft- 
tknteacbetb , 
that  in  catti- 
nttal  quanti¬ 
ty, which  the 
2.  of  the  fe  tilth 
taught  in 
tn,mbtn. 

7 he  fecund 
cafe. 


oFEudides  Elemented *  FoL  224. 

magnitudes  A  S  and  C,  D .  And  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  the  gren- 
fef  common  meafure  to  them. T or  no  magnitude  greater  then  A  B 
can  me  a  fare  A  B.  Butnorvfuppofe  that  AB  do  not  meafure  CD * 

And  taking  continually  the  lepefrom  the  greater  that  which  rentai- 
neth  fall  at  length  meafure  that  which  goeth  before  ( by  the  cor  dia¬ 
ry  before  added ),for  that  A  B  and  C  D  are  corner fur able. Now  then 
let  A  B  me af tiring  E  D  which  is  a  part  of  the  magnitude  C  D,  leans  p 

a  magnitude  iefe  then  itfdfe, namely, E  C.i_And let  E  C  measuring 
the  magnitude  F  B,  which  is  a  part  of the  magnitude  B,  leaue  a 

kffe  the  it  fdfe, namely, F  A, and  let  F  A  pr  safely  meafure  the  mag¬ 
nitude  C  E  (And  this  is  the  meaning  of  this.  That  which  remayneth  jhall  at 
the  length  meafure  that  which  goeth  before  gx  hen  there  is  nothing  left  after  the 

mcafuring  made)  forafmiich  as  A  F  meafureth  the  magnitude 
C  E,b  til  C  E  meafureth  F  B  :  wherfore  A  F  a/fo  meafureth  F  B,& 
it  meafureth  itfdfe  :  wherfore  A  F  meafureth  alfo  the  whole  A  B. 

But  A  B  meafureth  D  E, wherfore  A  F  alfo  meafureth  D  E.And  A 
F  alfo  meafureth  C  E,  wherfore  it  meafureth  the  whole  magnitude 
C  D  .Wherfore  the  magnitude  A  F  meafureth  both  the  magnitudes 
A  B  and  C  D  Wherfore  A  E  is  a  common  meafure  vnto  A  B  and  C 
D .  I  fay  alfo  that  it  is  thegreatefi  comon  meafure  vnto  them .F or  if  & 
not, then  is  there feme  magnitude  greater  the  the  magnitude  A  F  which  meafureth  both  the 
magnitudes  A  B  and  CD. Let  there  be ftich  a  one  if  it  be  poffible,and  let  the  fame  be  the  mag 
nitude  G.  And f or afrnuch  as  G  meafureth  A  B, and  A  B  meafureth  ED  :  therefore  G  alfo 
meafureth  E  D,  and  by  fuppofition, it  meafureth  the  whole  C  D,  wherfore  G  meafureth  alfo 
the  ref  due  C  E.  But  C  E  meafureth  F  B, wherfore  G  alfo  meafureth  F  B.And  by  fuppofition 
it  meafureth  the  whole  A  B  Wherfore  it  meafureth  the  ref  due  A  F, namely,  the  greater  mag 
nitude  the  kffe, which  is  impoffible.  V/heref ore  no  magnitude  greater  then  A  F,  meafureth 
thefe  magnitudes  A  B  and  C  D .  Wherefore  A  F  is  the  greatef  common  meafure  vnto  the 
magnitudes  A  B  and  C  D  .Wherfore  vnto  two  commenfur able  magnitudes geuen,  namely , 

A  B  and  C  D  is found  out  their  greatef  common  meafure ,  namely,  the  magnitude  F  ; 

which  was  required  to  be  done. 

f  Corollary . 

Hereby  it  is  manifejl  that  if  a  magnitude  meafure  two  magnitudes ,  it  Jhall  CmUaty. 

alfo  meafure  their  greatef  common  meafure .  For  ific  meafure  the  wholes  and  the  partes 

taken  away, it  fhal  alfo  meafure  the  refidues, of  which  one  is  the  greatell  common  meafure,as  we  may 
fee  by  the  latter  ende  of  the  former  demonftration. 


T> 


Bemcnftrc  ~ 
tion  leadmg  to 
an  abjuidnie. 


tAtont  aureus  reduceth  this  Probleme  into  a  Theoreme  after  this  marien. 

T vso  'vncqiii'.tl  and  commcnfurable  magnitudes  being  geuen,  if  the  le/fe  da  meafure  the  greater,  then  is  it  the 
greatef?  common  meafure  to  them  both.  But  tj  not, then  the  tejfe  being  continually  bj  a  mutual?  detraction  (at 
before  hath  bene  taught)taken  out  of  the  greater, whenfeeuer  the  reftdue  trees fely  meafureth  that  which  went 
before, leaning  nothing, the fasd  refidue  Jhall  be  the  great eft  common  meafure  to  both  the  magnitudes  geuen . 


f  The  2.  Troblcme. 


The  4.  (Pr  of  of tion. 


Three  magnitudes  commenfur  able  beynggeuen  fo  finde  out  their  greatef 
common  meafure , 

DD  .if  Suppofe 


This  Pro¬ 
bleme  reduced 
to  a  Theo¬ 
rem, 


A 


B 


V 


Vppofe  that  the  three  commenfur able  magnitudes geuen  be  A,B,C.  It  is  required 
ofthefe  three  magnitudes  to  jinde  out  the  greatejl  common  measure.  T ake  ( by  the . 
3former tr °f  ofition)  the greatef  common  meafure  of  the, two  magnitudes  A,B  and 
let  the  fame  be  D  .Now  then  this  magnitude  D  either  meafureth  the  third  magnitude >  which 
is  C,or  not. Fir (l  let  it  meafure  C.  Andforafmuch  as 


Yhh  propofi* 

U'.n  teachetb, 
that  in  conti- 
nual  quanti¬ 
ty  yivhich  the 

Z.eftbefctmd  :D  meafureth  C,  and  it  meafureth  alfo  the  rnagni- 
>,anght  in  tudes  ALB  *  therfore  D  mea  fureth  the  three  mami- 

USY £  J  i  J  o 

tudes  J yByC.Wher fore  D  is  a  common  meafure  vn- 
n  to  the  magnitudes  A  >B, C.  And  it  is  manifeftytbat  it  } 

■'  'UiSn  is  the greatef  common  meajure.  For  no  magnitude  j 

greater  then  V  can  meafure  the  magnitudes  A,B,C . 

Two  cafes  in  p  or  jfjt  je y^ihle  let  the  magnitude  E  being  grea- 
f'"s  l  ropo/t-  ier  gy  f7,dnriir}!gc  jy  mieafure  the  magnitude 

tUCU.  .  „  ^  t  r  S  r  i  A  J  r  i  r  ^ 

Tbefirfl  cafe.  A,B  ,C.AndjoraJmuch  as  E  meajureth  the  magni¬ 
tudes  A,ByCyit  meafurehh  the  two  frfl  magnitudes 
jyefran  §fra_  A  B.  Wherfore  it fall  alfo  ( by  the  Corollary  of  the 
tlon  leading  to  former  prcpofition)  men fare  the  greatejl  comon  mea- 
an  abfmime.  fun  of  the  magnitudes  A>B  which  is  1),  namely,  the  greater fall  meafure  the  leffe,  which 
is  impofibte. 

The  fecund  But  now  let  D  not  meafure  the  magnitude  C.  rh-p  rfy  that  the  m«tAt«derC.p,  are  commerfu- 
eafe .  r-ahle.  p  or  for  a fm  u  ch  as  the  magnitudes  A,B,  C  are  ''commen fur  able,  fome  magnitude  J ball 

meafure  them, which  fall  alfo  meafure  the  magnitudes  A  B  taken  apart .  Wherfore  it  fall 
alfo  (by  the  corollary  going  before)  meafure  the  greatejl  common  meafure  cf A, B, that  is,D: 
unify fuppofdion  )it  meafureth  the  magnitude 
fmted  'Afore  c .Wherfore  that faid magnitude fall  meafure 
the  magnitudes  C  and  D .  Wherfore  the  magni¬ 
tudes  C,D  are  comme fur  able. T  ake  by  the  third 
of this  tenth, their  greatef  common  meafure, & 
let  the  fame  be  the  magnitude  E.  And  firaf- 
■much  as  E  meafureth  D,  but  D  meafureth  the 
magnitudes  A,  B.  Wherfore  E  alfo  meafureth 
the  magnitudes  A,  B,  and  it  alfo  meafureth  the 
magnitude  C.  Wherfore  E  is  a  common  meafure 
to  the  three magnitud.es  AyB,C.lfay  alfo  that  it  ^ 

is  the  greatef  commit  meaj  ure.  For  if  it  bepofi- 
ble ,  let  there  be  a  magnitude ,  namely,  F,  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  magnitude  E.And let  F  meafure  the  three  magnitudes  A,B,C .  And  forafmuch 
as  F  meafureth  the  magnitudes  A,B,Cjtalfo  meafureth  the  two frfl  magnitudes  A,B.Wher 
fin  (by  the  corollary  going  before )  it  (hall  alfo  meafure  the  greatef  common  meafure  of  the 
magnitudes  Ay'B. But  the  greatejl  common  meafure  of the  magnitudes  A  }B}is  D.  Wherfore 
E- meafureth  D , and  it  alfo  rneafureth  C.  Wherfore  F  meafureth  the  magnitudes  CD.Wher- 
fin  F  jhdl.al fo  meafure  the  greatef  common  meafure  of  the  magnitudes  C,  D  .But  thegrea - 
tell  common  meafure  of  the  magnitudes  C,D,  is  E.  Wherfore  F  meafureth  E,  namely,  the 
•greater  f he  leffe  ,which  is  impoffible. Wherfore  no  magnitude  greater  then  E  meafureth  the 
magnitudes  A,B,C  Wherfore  E  is  the  greatest  common  meafun  of  the  magnitudes  ABC. 
Iff)  do  not  meafure  the  magnitude  C.But  ifDdo  meafure  C,then  is  D  thegreatef  comma 
meafure. Wherfore  three  magnitudes  commenfurable  being geuen, there  is found  their  greet- 
test  common  meafure g  which  was  required  to  be  done . 

**  ,  ,  **  1  ...  -  v.  ••  '  '  ..  '  •  •  '•  *  ’•  ‘  k 

Corollary: 


a? 

A  'Lcwma 
tiece/fary  to  be 

.  '  Jh 

-befall  is  the 
dstoZflratioii* 
t  attjhuIhoKt 


3 


C 


v> 


I 

& 


& 


S' 


of Suclides  Elementef*  FoL  %Xf* 

f  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeUjthat  if a  magnitude  me  afire  three  magnitudes ft jhall 
alfo  me  afar  e  their  greatef  common  me  afire.  In  like fort  alfo  in  magnitudes 
commie  fur  able  ho~\V  many foeuer  beinggeuf  may  be  found  out  their  greatef 
common  meafure  /aid  the  corollary  loill  euer  be  true . 


This  Probleme  alfo  Mont  aureus  reduceth  into  a  The  or  erne  after  this  maner.- 

Three  magnitude1  being  commenfiixable  the  greatest  comit-itm  metifure  to  free  eft  hem  .do  meafure  the  third 
it  Jhall  be  t  he  greatefl  common  me  afire  to  all  the  three  magnitudes  gcuen.But  if  it  do  not  meaftre  it,the  greatef 
common  meafure  of  the  third  and  of  t  he  greatest  common  meaftre  of  the  two jirJt,  is  the  greatef  common  mea- 
fure  of  all  the  three  magnitudes. 


tfThe 3.Theoreme .  T he  s.  ddropofition. 

Magnitudes  commen  fur able  fauefuch proportion  the  one  to  the  other }  as 
number  hath  to  number. 

t^at  ^  anc^  ^  magnitudes  co  wen  fur  able.  T hen  I fay  that  A  hath  vnto  B 
I gfffffjuch  proportion  as  nuber  hath  to  number. For  for  afnuch  as  A  and  B  are  comenfu - 
ruble  f her  fore fome  magnitude  meafureth  them, let  there  be  a  magnitude  that  mea 
J ureth  them, and  let  the  fame  be  C.And  how  often  C  meafureth  A,  fo  many  vnities  let  there 
be  in  the  number  D  .And how  often  C  meafureth  B,fo  many  -vnities  let  there  be  in  the  num* 
her  E,and  let  F  be  vnitie. cAnd for  afnuch  as  the  magnitude  C  meafureth  the  magnitude 
A  by  thofe  -unities  which  are  in  the  number  D,  and 
vnitie  F  mea  fureth  the  number  D  by  thofe  -unities 
which  are  in  the  number  D  :  therefore  how  many 
times  -vnitie  meafureth  the  number  D  fo  many  times 
doth  the  magnitude  C  meafure  the  magnitude  A  • 
wh  erf  ore  as  the  magnitude  C  is  to  the  magnitude  A, 
fo  is  -vnitie  F  to  the  number  D .  Wherefore  contrary 
wife  (by  the  corollary  of  the fourth  propoftionofthe 
fft  booke  fas  the  magnitude  A  is  to  the  magnitude  C, 
fo  is  the  number  D  to  -vnitie  F.  Againe  for afmuch  . 

•as  the  magnitude  C  meafureth  the  magnitude  B  by 
thofe  -unities  which  are  in  the  number  E,  and  vnitie 
E  meafureth  the  number  E  by  thofe  vnities  which 

are  in  the  number  E :  therf ore  how  many  times  vni-  A  3  C  x>  E  F 

tie  F  meafureth  the  number  E,  fo  many  tymes  doth 

the  magnitude  C  meafure  the  magnitude  B .  Wherforeasthe  magnitude  C  is  to  the  maqni* 
tude  B,fo  is  vnitie  F  to  the  number  E,  and  it  is  pr oiled  that  as  the  magnitude  A  is  to  the 
magnitude  Cfois  the  number  D  to  vnitie  F  .Wher fore  of equalitie  (by  the  22.  of thefftey 
■as  the  magnitude  A  is  to  the  magnitude  B,fo  is  the  number  D  to  the  number  E.  Wheref  ore 
the  cmwenfurable  magnitudes  A  and  B  hone  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  the 


c 


■  re  quin 


DO. W], 


Mag- 


%/L  €orcllarya 


This  Fro-* 

Hems  reduced 
to  a  lino- 
reme* 


^  vwVJt 

Conflruftiots* 

Demanflm* 
tm t 


magni¬ 
tudes  arejayd 
to  be  in  pro¬ 
portion  the 
an ? to  the o- 
ther,as  num¬ 
ber  is  to  mm- 
ben 


This  propor¬ 
tion  is  the 
eonuerje  of 
former, 

Con&ruttion, 

Demnftra- 


The  tentJfEookc 

Magnitudes  are  fayd  to  haue  fuch  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  n uber  hath 
to  number,  when  as  what  foeuer  proportion  is  betwene  thofe  magnitudes,  the  fame  is 
found  betwene  fome  certaine  numbers :  as  if  a  magnitude  be  vnto  a  magnitude  either 
equally  the  number  2.  is  to  thenumber  2, or  double, as  the  number  4.  to  the  number 
2,  or  triple,  as  6.  to  2,  or  in  any  other  multiplex  proportion  .And  foalfo  touchingthe 
other  kindes  ofproportion, either  fuperpar'ticular,orfuperpartient. 

f  The  4.  T heoreme.  T he  6 .  Tropofition. 

If  two  magnitudes  haue  fuch  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  number 
hath  to  number:  thofe  magnitudes  are  commenfurable. 


I  Vppofe  that  thefe  two  magnitudes  A  and  B  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the 
other,  that  the  number  D  hath  to  the  number  E  .  T hen  J  fay,  that  the  magni¬ 
tudes  A,  B,  are  commenfurable .  How  many  ’unities  there  are  in  the  number  D, 
yfe  into  fornany  c  quail  partes  deuidc  the  magnitude  A  {by  the  9  .of the fixt )  and 
let  the  magnitude  C  be  equall  to  one  of  the  partes  ther  of .  An  dhow  many  unities  there  are 


in  the  number  E,  offo  many  magnitudes. equal!  vnto  the  magnitude  C  let  the  magnitude  F 
be  copofed.And  let  G  be  fynztie.  Tfow forafmuch  as  how  many  vnities  there  are  in  the  nuber 
T>,fo  zn any  magnitudes  alfo  are  there  in  the 
magnitude  A  equal!  vnto  the  magnitude  C : 
t  her  fore  what  part  vniii  G  is  of  the  nuber  D, 
the  fame  part  is  the  "magnitude  C  of  the  mag¬ 
nitude  A.  Wherefore  as  the  magnitude  C  is  to 
the  magnitude  A,fois  vnitieG  to  the  num¬ 
ber  D .  But  vnitie  G  meafureth  the  number 
D  .  Wherefore  the  magnitude  C  alfo  meafu- 


1 


F 


D 


reih  the  magnitude  A .  And  for  that  as  the 
magnitude  C  is  to  the  magnitude  A,  fo  is  v- 
nitie  G  to  the  mmber  D  :  therefore  contrary- 
ivifeiby  the  Corollary  of the  fourth  ofthefift ) 
as  the  magnitude  A  is  to  the  magnitude  C,  ■  • 

fo  is  the  number  D  to  vnitie  G.Againe  foraf-  | 

much  as  how  many  vnities  there  are  in  the  a  3  q 
number  Efo  many  magnitudes  alfo  are  there 
in  the  magnitude  F  equall  vnto  the  magni¬ 
tude  C :  therefore  as  the  magnitude  C  is  to  the  magnitude  F.,fo  is  vnitie  G  to  thenumber  E. 
And  it  is  proued  that  as  the  ?mgnitude  A  is  to  the  magnitude  C,  fo  is  the  number  D  to  vni¬ 
tie  G .  Wherefore  of equalitie  {by  the  22.  of  the f ft)  as  the  magnitude  A  is  to  the  magnitude 
F  ,fo  is  the  number  D  to  the  number  E  But  as  thenumber  D  is  to  the  number  E,  fo  is  the 
magnitude  A  to  the ; magnitude  B  .  Wherefore  (by  then,  of  the fift)  as  the  magnitude  A  is 
to  the  magnitude  B,fo  is  the  fame  magnitude  A  to  the  magnitude  F:  wherefore' A  hath  vn¬ 
to  either  of  thefe  magnitudes  B  and  F  one  and  the  fame  proportion .  Wherefore  ( by  the  9  .of 
the  fft )  the  magnitude  B  is  equall  vnto  the  magnitude  F  .But  the  magnitude  C  meafureth 
the  magnitude  F :  wherefore  it  alfo  meafureth  the  magnitude  B  and  it  likewife  meafureth 
the  magnitude  A .  Wherefore  the  magnitude  C  meafureth  the  magnitudes  ^yiand B.Wher - 
fore  the  magnitudes  A  &B  are  commenfurable .  If  therefore  two  magnitudes  haue fuch  pro¬ 
portion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  number  hath  to  number,  thofe  magnitudes  are  comenfurable : 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


j£  Corollary. 


ofSuclicles  Ekmchtes. 

#  Corollary. 

.  ..  plerebyit  betpao  nubers,as  D  and 

E ,  and  a  right  line ,  as 'Ca  .  itfp.ofihk  to  gem  another  lim, 
rvnto  which  the  line  A  pi  all  haue  the  fame  proportion,  that  the 
number  I)  hath  lo  the  number  E .  For  demdc  the  line  A  into 
fo  many  e  quail partes  as  there  are  'unities  in  the  number  D  ( by 
the-9  .of  tkeJiM^  .  And  take  another  line,  as F,  which  let  be 
%'mpofiddffi  many  partes  e quail  to  the  partes  of  the  line  A, as 
there  be  i unities  in  the  number  E .  Wherefore  the  line  A  fall 
be  to  thefne  F,  as  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  E  .  And  by 
’-this  meanes'you  may  vnto  any  line  gene  gene  an  other  line  com- 
men)  arable  in  length .  For  if  two  lines  be  in  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other, as  number  is  to  number,  they  fhallalfo  be  commen - 
fur  able  in  length,  by  this  6  IF  hear  erne. 


FoLz^6. 


..  ,  v. x 


<f[  An  AlTumpt. 

\T wo  numbers  being  geuen )  and  aljo  a  right  line as  the  one  number  is  to 
the  other  Jo  to  make  the Jcjuare  of]/  line  geuen  to  he  to  the fquare  of an  other  line. 


Suppofe  that  the  number s geuen  be  D  and  E :  and  let  the  right  line  geuen  be  odf .  It  is 
required,  as  the  number  T>  is  to  the  number  E,fo  to  make  the  fquare  of  the  lim  A  to  be  to 
thej  quart  of  an  other  line .  As  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  E,fo  let  the  line  A  be  to  the 
Une  F  (bythe former  Corollary) .  And  take  ' 
betwene  thofe  two  lines  A  and  F  the  mean e 
proportional l  (  by  the  13.  of  the  fixt )  which 
let  be  the  line  B .  Now  for  that  as  the  number 
-F>  is  to  the  number  E,fo  is  the  line  A.  to  the 
line  F :  and  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  F,fo 
is  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  to  the fquare  of  the 
line  B  (  by  the  fecond  Corollary  of  the  20. of 

thefxt )  .  Wherefore  as  the  number  D  is  to  D  .... .  E  ... 

the  number E,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  to 
the  fquare  of the  line  1 3 :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

U  An  other  demonflration  of  the  6.  Proportion. 


Suppofe  that,  thefe  two  magnitudes  geuen  AandB, 

[haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  the  num- 
for  C bat v  to  the nuber  D.Fhe I fay,  that  thofe  magni¬ 
tudes  are  comme fur  able.  Now  many  •unities  there  are  in 
the  number  C,  mtgfomany  equall partes  let  the  magni¬ 
tude  A  be  deuidedffx  let  the  magnitude  E  be  equaltvn- 
to  one  of  thofe  partes .  Wherefore  as  vnitie  is  to  the  num 
her  C,fo  is  the  magnitude  E  to  the  magnitude  A .  And 
its  the  number  C  is  to  the  number  Ft  fo  is  the  magnitude 
A  to  We  magnitude  B.  Wherefore  of  equahtie(by  the  22.  " 
of  the f ft)  as  vnitie  is  to  the  number  D,f0  is  the  magni¬ 
tude E  to  the  magnitude  B .  But  vnitie  meafuretJj  the 

number  1  *  P 

A  a  r. 


>A  Corcl!d>y< 


Con]  ruction* 


Demnflra* 

uan« 


Conftmtm* 


Vmonilr*- 

thn. 


number  D  .  Wherefore  the  magnitude  E  mcaj’urcth  the  magnitude  B  .  '^And  it  alfo  mecfu- 
nth  the  magnitude  A  (for  that  'unitie  meafureth  the  number  C  ).  Wherefore  the  magnitude 
£  meafureth  either  of  theft  magnitudes  A  and  B  .Wherefore  the  magnitudes  A  and  £  are 
commenfurable ,  and  the  magnitude  E  is  their  common  meafure. 

f  T he  s.  T heoreme.  The  ydPropofition. 


Vemovftra- 
tion  leading  to 
m  ab fur  ditie. 


Magnitudes  incommen  fur able ,  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  o* 
therfhat number  hath  to  number. 

V  ‘  *”  i  A-'fV*  '  f  V  ■  TV.-Ti 

1  Fj Ppofe  that  the  magnitudes  A  and  B  he  incommen  fur  able .  T hen  1 fay,  that  A 
hath  not  to  B,  that  proportion  that  number  hath  to  number.  For  if A  haue  n. in¬ 
to  B  that  proportion  that  number  hath  to  number,  then  is  A  comenfurable  *vn- 
vto  B  (by  the  6. of  this  tenth )  .  But  ( by  fuppoftion)  it  is  not.  Wherefore  A  hath 
net  vnto  h  that  proportion  that  number  hath  to  ^ 

number .  tJMagttitudes  incommenfurable  therfore  '  '  "  ~  "* 

haue  not  that proportionthe  one  to  the  other  that  3  _ _ - 

number  hath  to  number  ••  which  was  required  to 
he  demonjlraied. 


W 


V 


ff  The  6.  T heoreme. 


A 


The  8.  Tropofition. 


Tbss  ts  the 
tanner  fs  o*  the 
former, and  tt 
proued  by  an 
indirect  de- 
monfiration. 


iftivo  magnitudes  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  num* 
her  hath  to  number,  thoje  magnitudes  are  incommen  fur  able. 

V ppofe  that  thefe  two  magnitudes  A  and  B,  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to 
the  other  that  number  hath  tonumber.7  hen  I  fay,  that  A  and  B  are  magni¬ 
tudes  incommenfurable .  For  if  A  and  B  be  commenfurable,  then  jhall  A  haue 
•vntoB , that  proportion  that  number  hath  to  number  (  by  the  $.  of  this  tenth). 
But  (by  fuppoftion  )it  hath  not  that  proportion  that 

number  hath  to  number .  Wherefore  A  and  B  are  A  - - - • 

incommenfurable  magnitudes. If  ther fore  two  mag¬ 
nitudes  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther  that  number  hath  to  nuber,  thoje  magnitudes 
are  incommenfurable :  which  was  required  to  be proued. 


3 


ft  The  7.  T heoreme. 


The  9.  Tropofition. 


A  \  ' 


Squares  defer ibed  of  right  lines  commenfurable  in  length ,  haue  that  pro* 
portion  the  one  to  the  other, that  a Jquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number, 
jindfepuares  "Which  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a fquare 
number  hath  to  a  fquare  nuber  fh  all  alfo  haue  their  fides  comenfurable  in 
length  .But fquare  s  deferibed  of  right  lines  incommenfurable  in  length, 
haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  a jquare  number  hath  to 
a  fquare  number .  yfnd  fquares  "Which  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to 
the  other  that  a  fquare  nuber,  hath  to  a Jquare  number  fane  not  their fides 
commenfurable  in  length . 

Suppofi 


oj-Suclicies  Elementes. 


Fohyj, 


A 


C . D 


B 


r  Fppofe  that  A  and  B  be  lines 
comenfurable  in  length .T hen 
faj  that  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  hath  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line 
B,  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber  hath  to  a  fquare  number. For foraf 
much  as  the  lines  A  and  B  are  common 
fur  able  in  length :  therefore  the  line  A 
hath  vnto  the  line  B  that  proportion 
that  number  hath  to  number  (bp  the  y. 
of  this  tenth). Let  the  line  A  haue  vnto 
the  line  B  that  proportion  ,  that  the 
number  C  hath  to  the  number  D,Now 
for  that  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  B,fo 
is  the  number  C  fo  the  number  T> :  but  ..... 

the  fquare  of the  line  csl  is  vnto  the  ..... 

fquare  of  the  line  B  in  double  pro portio  .....  ... 

of  that  which  the  line  A  is  vnto  the  line  B  ( for  like  rectiline fgures  ( by  the frlf  corollary  of 
the  2  o .  oft  he  fxt )  are  in  double  proportion  of  that  which  the fides  of  like  proportion  are ) 
and  likewife  the  fquare  number  produced  of  Cist  0  the  fquare  number  produced  ofD ,  in 
double  proportion  of  that  which  the  number  C  is  to  the  number  D  (for  by  the  il.ofthe  eight 
betwene  two  fquare  numbers  there  is  one  meane  proportionall  number  dr  a fquare  number  is 
to  a  fquare  number  in  double  proportion  of  that  which fide  is  vnto  fide )  .  Wherefore  as  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B,fo  is  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the 
number  C,to  the fquare  number  produced  of  the  number  D . 

■  't 

An  other  demonftration  to  proue  the  fame. 

Forafmuch  as  the  lines  A  and  B  are  commen fur  able, therefore  (by  the  5  of  this  tenth )  A 
hath  vnto  B  the fame  proportion  that  number  hath  to  number. Let  them  haue  that proportio 
that  the  number  C  hath  to  the  number  D .  And  let  the  number  C  multiplying  himfelfe pro¬ 
duce  the  number  E,and  multiplying  the  number  D  ,let  it  produce  the  number  F:  and  let  the 
number  D  multiplying  himfelfe  produce  the  number  G .  And  forafmuch  as  the  number  C 
multiplying  himfelfe  produced  the  number  E ,  and  multiplying  the  number  D  it  produced 
the  number  F :  therefore  (by  the  17. of  the feuenth  )as  the  number  C  is  to  the  number  D,  that 
is ,  the  line  A  to  the 
line  B  fo  is  the  num¬ 
ber  E  to  the  niiber  F. 

But  as  the  line  A  is 
to  the  line  B,fo  is  the  ^ 
fquare  of  the  line  A 
to  the  parallelograme 
contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  and  B  (by  the 
firf  of  the  fxt  )Wher 
fore  as  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A  is  to  that 
which  is  contayned 
vnder .  the  lines  A 


A 


A 


B 


5 


£ 


V ... 


G 


... ...... 


and 


The  fir  ft  p&rt 
dmwftratfdo 


An  ether  £& 

monftration 
of  the  fi rib 
part. 


‘Tbetentb^Bool \e 


An  other  Ae- 
monfl  ration 
■ of  the  fame 
-fir Jl  part  after 
MonuurehS. 


.  *  % 

»V>  Vi  ". 


.llV\ 


TtmottUra- 
tion  nf  the  fie* 
conde  part 
Tvbicb  is  the 
comer fe  of 
the  former. 


e  f 

and  3  ,fo  is  the  number  E  to  the  number  F .  t^Agayne for  as  muche  as  the  number  C  multi* 
flying  the  number  D  produced  the  number  F  ,fir  the  number  D  multiplying  him f elf e  pro¬ 
duced  the  number  G:  therefore  (  by  the  xy.of the feuenth)  as  the  number  C  is  to  the  mm - 
her  'D,  thud  is,  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  B ,  fo  is  the  number  F  to  the  number  G .  But 
as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  B^fo  is  par allellograme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  and  B  to 
t hefquar  e  of the  fine  B  (by  the frit  of the  fixt ) .  Wherefore  as  that  which  is  contained  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  A  and  B  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  lineB ,  fo  is  the  number  F  to  the  number 
G,  But  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  that  which  is  contayncd  vnder  the  lines  A  and  B, 
fo  is  the  number  E  to  the  number  F .  Wherefore  of  equalitie (by  the  22.  of  thefifte  )  as  the  ’ 
fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B ,  fo  is  the  number  E  to  the  number  G .  But 
either  of  thefc  numbers  E  and  G~ is  a fquare  number .Bor  E  is  produced  of  the  number  C, 
multiply  ed  into  him felfe ,  and  G  is  produced  of  the  number  D  multiplyed  into  him  felfe. 
Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  hath  vnto  the fquare  of  the  line  B  that  proportion  that  a 
fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number:  which  was  required  to  he  demonjlrated. 

An  ofher  demonflration  of  the  fame  firft  part  after  Mont  aureus. 

Suppofe  chat  there  be  two  lines  commensurable  in  length  A  and  B  .  Then  I  fay  that  the  Squares 
deferibed  of  thafe  lines  ihalbe  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as  a  fquare  number  is  to  afquare  nu~ 
ber.Fbrforafmuch  as  the  lines  A  and  B  arecommefurable  in  length,  they  ihalbe  in  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other  as  number  is  tonumber(by  the  y. of  this  booke).Let  Abe  to  £  in  duple  proportion,which 
is  in  Such  proportion  as  number  is  to  n  u  m  b  er ,  n  a  m  ely,a  s  4. 1  s  to  2, and  5.  to  3, and  So  of  many  other.  And 
(by'  the  Second  of  the  eighty  take  the  three  kail  numbers  in  continual!  proportion,and  in  duple  propor 
rion,  &r‘iet  thefame  be  the  numbers  4.2.1 :  wherfore  by 
the  corrollary  of  the  Second  of  the  eight ,  the  numbers 

4. andj.. ihalbe  fquare  numbers.  (  For  as  4.  is  a  fquare  A  ' — - — ■* — — - — — . 

number  produced  of  a.multiplied  into  him  felfe,fo  is  1. 

dKb  a  fquare  number,for  itis  produced  of  vni tie  multi-  2)  t —  _ _ 

plied  into  him  felfe. )  I  fay  moreouer.  that  thofe  are.the 
fquare  numbers  j  whofe  proportion  the  Squares  of  the 

lines  A  and  B  haue  the^one  to  the  other.  For  as  the  number  4.is  to  the  number  a.  fo  is  the  line  A  to  the 
line  B  (  For  either  proportion  is  double  by  fnppolition  )  :  butasthelineA  is  to  the  line  B,foisthe 
fquare  of  the  line  A  to  the  parallelogram  e  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  and  B  (  by  the  foil  of  the  fixt). 
^yheEefore-a'5  the  number  4.  isto  the  number  a  :  fofhallthc  fquare  of  the  line  A  be  to  the  parallelo- 
gratne  contained  vnder  the  linps  A  and  B  .  Likewife  as  the  number  2.  is  to  the  number  1.  fo  is  the  line 
A  to  the  line-  B-  ( For  either  proportion  is  duple  by  fuppofition )  :  but  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  B ,  fo  is 
the ;  parallelogram  e  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  and  B  to'  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  (  by  the  felfe  fame  firft 
pfthefrxt.)  .  Whepeforeasthe  number  2.  ts  to  r.fors  the  parallelograme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A 
andR  to  the  fquare  of  the  lineB  :  wherefore  of  equaUitie  f.by  the  22  .of the  fifth  -)~as  the  fquare  of  tile 
Hne  A  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B,fo  is  the  number  4.  to  1  .which  are  proued  to  be  fquare  numbers. 


*  But  now  fuppofe  that  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A,  be  vnto  the  fquare  of  the 
line  B,  as  the  fquare  nuber  produced  of 
the  number  C  is  to  the  fquare  number 
produced  of the  number  D.  Then  I  fay 
that  the  lines  A  fir  B  are  c  omen  fur  able 
in  length.  For  for  that  as  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A  is  to  the  fquare  oft  he  lineB , 
fo  is  the fquare  number  produced  of  the 
number  C  to  the  fquare  number  pro* 
duced  of  the  number  Debut  the  propor 
tion  of the fquare  of  the  line  A,  is  vnto 
the  fquare  of  the  tine  B  double  to  that 
proportion  which  the  line  A  hath  vnto 
the  line  B(by  the  cmllary  of  the  20 ,  of 


. 

1  _ 

L  _ 

- 

c ... 

A 

,  D  . . . 

B 


-4 


.*?;***  *•> 


•K.'Vtb 


the 


cfSuclides  Element es . 


Fol.zzS* 


the fixt )  .^And  the  proportion  of  the fquare  number  which  is  produced  of  the  number  C  to 
the fquare  number  produced  of  the  number  D  is  (  by  then. of  the  eight )  double  to  that  pro* 
portion  which  the  number  C  hath  vnto  the  number  D : Wherefore  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line 
Bfo  is  the  number  C  to  the  number  D.  Wherefore  the  line  A  hath  vnto  the  line  B  the  fame 
proportion  that  the  number  C  hath  to  the  number  D  .'Wherefore  (by  the  6. of  this  books \)the 
lines  A  add  B  are  comtnenfufdblein  length :  which  was  required  t  o  be  proued . 


An  oth'ef  defrionftrafion  to  prouethe  fame* 


■  - 


Vppofe  againc  that  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  ham  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B,  the  ctfjcr  fa 

fame  proportion^  that  the  fquare  number  E  hath  to  the  fquare  number  G .  Then  l  mcnfiration  of 
fay  that  the  lints  A  and  B  are  commenfurablein  length.  For fmpofs  that  the  fide  of  the fee  cud 


Ax 


the  fquare  number  E  ;  v  ;  Part* 

be  the  nuher  C,  &  let 
the  fide  of  the  fquare 
number  G  be  thenu- 
ber  D  :  and  let  the 
number  C  multiply¬ 
ing  the  number  D 
produce  the  number 
F  .  Wherefore  thefs 
numbers  F,F,  G,  are 
in  continuall  propor¬ 
tioned  in  the  fame  C  . ...  i  2?  .  .* 

proportion  that  the 

numhr  C  is  It  the  . . . .  F  .... . .  <7  . . .  Hit  Jflumpt 

number  D  (by  the  V]  .andiS  .of the  fiueuth )  .-and  forafmuch  as  theme'ime  proven  ioa, ill  betwent  the  followstkas  a, 

fqtictres  of  the  lines  X  and  £  is  that  which  is  contained 'onder  the  lines  A  and  B .  ( Which  though  it  might  CoTollaiy  of 

bnefely  be  proued :yet  we  take  it  as  now)  .^And  likewife  the  means froportimall  betmnethe  the'  zq;lut(  [h 
numbers  E  and  G  is  the  numberFfby  the  20  .of the feuenth)  :  therefore  as  the  fquare  of  the  as  f  might  ala 
line  A  is  to  that  which  is  contained  -vnder  the  lines  A  and  B,  fo  is  the  number  E  to  the  mm-  tn 

her  F, and  as  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  and  Bis  to  the fquare  of the line  B,  ced)*'tb% 
fo  is  the  number  F  to  the  number  G .  But  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  that  which  is  con -  finieiuhet  ' 
tained  vnder  the  lines  A  and  Bfo  is  the  line  A  to  the  line  B(by  thefirfi  of the  fixt) .  Where -  the  *3,  of  this 
fore  the  lines  A  and  B  are  in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  number  E  is  to  the  number  F,  bcokgabfo- 
that  is  .that  the  number  C  is  to  the  number  D  .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  andB  are  cwmenfu-  demon-  . 

fable  in  length  (by  the  6. of  this  tenth which  was  required  to  be  proued.  ^J4te  ‘!:for 

uethto  the  qq* 
2,  hit  demon  first- 

—  - * — - -*■  non. 


A, 

3 


,rJ  % 


But  now  fuppofe  that  the  lines  A  and  B  be  incam- 
men fur  able  in  length.  Then  I  fay  that  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A  hath  not  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  that 
proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  mi- 
her.  For  if  the  fquare  of  the  line.  A  haue  vnto  the 
fquare  of the  line  B,the fame  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number, the 
Jhallthe  lines  A  and  B  be  comen  fur  able  in  kngth(by  the fecond  part  of this proportion)  .But 
byfuppofiitonihey  are  not. Wherefore' the  fquare  of  the  line  A,  hath  not  vnto  the  fquare  if 
the  lyne  B  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number  .which  was  rtmi* 
Yedto  be  proued.  . 

Againe fuppofe  that  the  fquare  of the  line  A  haue  not  vnto  the fquare  of the  line  B ,  the 

EE  a.  fame 


Demo (l ratio  of 
the  third  party, 


Des?Aflrattd  of 
the fourth  part 
which  is  the  co - 
tterfeoftkcp 


Conctufion  of 
the  Tvboteprc- 
pofimn. 


vi  CoroHa>y* 


Prof'e  of  the 
firtt  part  of 
the  Corollary* 

Profe  of the 
fecondpart • 


Pnfecfthe 

tbitipart* 


Trofe  of  the 
fourth  part* 


fame  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  [quart 
number .  T hen  1 fay  that  the  lines  A  and  B  are  income  ^ 

menfurable  in  length .  For  if  the  lines  A  and  B  be  com -  A  — — - - — - ■ - - 

men  fur  able  in  length  ,then  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  Jhould 

hauevnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B,  the  fame  proportion^  * — - — — 1 

that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number, by  the frfl  part  of  this  propoftion ,  but  by 
fuppofition  it  hath  not , wherf  ore  the  lines  A  and  B  are  not  commenfurable  in  length .  Wher- 
fore  they  are  nicomenf arable  in  length  .Wherf ore fquares  made  of  right  lines  commenfura- 
in  length, haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 
number.  And fquares  which  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, that  a  fquare  number 
hath  to  a  fquare  number, (hall  alfo  hade  the  fides  commenfurable  in  length .  But fquares  de¬ 
ferred  of  right  lines  incommenfurable  inlength, haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  afquare  number.  And fquares  which  haue  not.  that  pro¬ 
portion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  afquare  number ,  haue  not  alfo 
their  fides  commenfurable  in  length :  which  was  all  that  was  required  to  be proued. 

{  i  j  !  |  j  ~  V_v  r-’  \  , 

ypCorrollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeji  ,that  right  lines  comenjurable  in  lengthy  are  alfo  euer 
commenfurable  in  power. 'But  right  lines  commenfurable  in  power,  are  not 
alwayes  commenfurable  in  length,  yfnd  right  lines  incomenjurable  in  legth 
are  not  alwayes  incommenfur able  in  power.  But  right  lines  incommenfur  a* 
ble  in  poiteryare  euer  alfo  incommenfur  able  in  length. 

For  forafmucb  as  fquares  made  of  right  lines  commenfurable  in  length,  haue  that  pro¬ 
portion  the  one  to  the  other  jhat  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number  (by  the frfi  part 
of  this  propoftion)  :  but  magnitudes  which  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that 
number fmpl'j  hath  to  number, are  (by  the fixt  of  the  tenth)commenfur able. Wherf  ore  right 
lines  commenfurable  in  length, are  commenfurable  not  onely  in  length,  but  alfo  in  power. 

Againeforafmuch  as  there  are  cerfaine  fquares  which  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,  but  yet  haue  that  proportion  the 
one  to  the  other  which  number fmpl'j  hath  to  number :  their fides  in  dede  are  in  power  corn- 
men  fur  a  ble,  for  that. they  deferibe fquares  which  haue  that  proportion  which  number  fim- 
ply  hath  to  number,  which  fquares  are  therf ore  commenfurable  (by  the  6.  of  this  booke)  : 
but  the  faid fides  are  incommenfiurable  in  length  by  the  latter  part  of this  propoftion  Wher 
efore  it  is  true  that  lines  commenfurable  in  power,  arenotfraightway  commenfurable  in 
length  alfo.  -  -  > 

x^And  by  the felfe fame  reafon  is  proued  alfo  that  third part  of  the  corollary,  that  lines 
incommenfurable  in  length ,  are  not  alwayes  incommenfur able  in  power.  For  they  may  be  in v 
commenfurable  in  length, but  yet  commenfurable  in  power.  As  in  thofe  fquares  which  are  in 
proportion  the  one  to  the  other ,  as  number  is  to  number ,  but  not  as  afquare  number  is  too. 
fquare  number. 

But  right  lints  incommenfurable  in  power, are  alwayes  alfo  incommenfurable  in  length. 
For  if  they  be  commenfurablein  length, they  fial  alfo  be  commenfurable  in  power  by  thefirfi 
part  of  this  Corollary  .But  they  are ftippofed  to  be  incommenfur  able  in  length,  which  is  ab' 
furde  Wherf  ore  right  lines  incommenfurable  in  power, are  euer  incommenfur  able  in  length. 

Pop 


of8u$lideiMkt^te&  Pol.  ity. 

For  the  better  vnderftanding  of  this  propofition  and  the  other  fQHo'\Vingy  I  haae 
here  added  certayne  annotacions  taken  out  of  a^Mpmaureus.  And  firft  as  touching  the 
fignification  of  horde's  and  termes  herein  v  fed,  which  are  fuch,  that,  vide  fie  they  be  well 
marked  and  pey fed, the  matter  will  be  obfcure  and  hard,and  m  a  maner  inexplicable. 

Firfhthis  ye  tuuft  note,that  lines  to  be  cotnmettfurable  in  length,  and  lines  to  b£  in 
proportion  the  one  to  the  other, as  number  is  to  number  is  all  one. So  that  whatfoeuer 
lines  are  cormnenfiu-able  in  length, are  alfo  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,as  num¬ 
ber  is  to  number. And  conuerfedly  what  fo  euer  lyn.es  are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the 
other,as  number  is  to  number,  are  alfo  commefurable  in  length, as  ills  manifdl  by  the 
5  and  6  pfthis  booke.Likewife lines  ro  be  incommenfurablein  length, and  hot  to  be  in 
proportion  the  one  to  the  other,as  number  is  to  number  is  all  one,  as  it  is  manifeft  by 
the  7. and  8  .of  this  booke.Wherfore  that  which  is  fayd  in  this Theoretne,  ought  to  be 
vnderdandoflines  eommeiifurable  in  length  ,and  incommenfurablein  length. 

This  moreouer  is  to  benoted,thatitisnotal!  one,numbers  to  be  fquare  numbers, 
and  to  be  in  proportio  the  one  to  the  other,  as  a  fquare  number  is  to  afquare  number  * 
For  although  fquare  numbers  be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber  is  to  a  fquare  number,  yet, are  not  all  thofe  numbers  which  are  in  proportion  the 
one  to  the  other,as  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number,  fquare  numbers.  For  they 
may  be  like  fuperficiall  numbers, and  yet  not  fquare  numbers, which  yetarein  propor¬ 
tio  the  one  to  the  otheipas  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number.Although  all  fquare 
numbers  are  like  fuperficiall  numbers. For  betwene  two  fquare  numbers  there  falleth 
one  meane  proportionall  number  f  by  theT  1.  ofthe  eight).  But  if  betwene  two  num- 
bcrs, there  fall  one  meane  proportionall  number,thofe  two  numbers  are  like  fuperfici¬ 
all  numbers(by  the  20. of  the  eight).  So  alfo  if  two  numbers  be  in  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other,as  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number,  they  (hall  belike  fuperficiall  tin¬ 
kers  by  the  firft  corollary  added  after  the  laft  propofition  of  the  eight  booke. 

And  now  to  know  whether  two  fuperficiall  numbers  geuen,be  like  fuperficiall  num¬ 
bers  or  no, it  is  thus  found  out, Firftif  betwene  the  tw'O  numbers  geuen,  there  fail  no 
meane  proportionall, then  are  notthefe  two  numbers  like  fuperficiall  numbers(by  the 
1 8. of  the  eight. But  if  there  do  fall  betwene  them  a  meane  proportionall, then  are  they 
like  fuperficiall  nil  mbers  (by  the  20. of  the  eight)  Moreouer  two  like  fuperficiall  num¬ 
bers  multiplied  the  one  into  the  pther,do  produce  a  fquare  number  (by  the  firftof  the 
ninth) .  Wherfore  if  they  do  not  produce  a  fquare  uum  ber,then  are  they  not  like  fuper¬ 
ficiall  numbers.  And  if  the  one  being  multiplied  into  the  other,  they produce  a  fquare 
number,then  are  they  like  fuperficiall(by  the  2  .of  the  ninth)  .Moreouer  if  the  faid  two 
fuperficialnumbers  be  in  fuperperticuIar,or  fuperbipartientproportion,then  are  they 
not  like'fuperficiallnumbers.Forif  they  ftiould  be  like,  then  fliould  there  be  a  meane 
proportionall  betwene  them  (by  the  20  .of  the  eight )  .  But  that  is  contrary  to  the  Co¬ 
rollary  of  the  20,  of  the  eight. 

.  And  the  eafilier  to  conceiue  the  demonfirations  following/  take  this  example  of 
that  which  we  haue  fayd. 


Suppofe  that  there  be  aline,  namely ,C>  which  imagine  to  be  foure  fote  long:  and  let  there  be  an 
Other  line  D,  which  let  be  three  foote  long.  And.  (by  the  13.  of  the  fixt)itake  the  meane  propor¬ 
tion  all  betwene  the  lines  A,  D,  which  let  be  the  line  B  .  Wherefore  the  lquare  of  the  line  B  ihall 
be  equall  to  the  reftangle  parallelogram  me  contained.  vnder  the  IineC  andD  (by  the  17.  of  the 
iixt)  .  Which  fquare fhall  contayne  12.  foote,  &fp  much  alfo  ihall  the  .parallelogram  me  deferibed 
of  the  lines  C  &  D  containe.  Take  alfo  two  other  lines  E  and  F,  of  which  let  E  be  5  .foote  long, and  let 
The  a  foote  long.  And  let  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the  lines  EandF,  be  the  line  A.  Now 
then  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  fhall  containe  3.  foote,  as  alfo  doth  the  parallelograme  deferibed  ofthe 
lines  E,F.  The  I  fay,  that  the  fquare  of  the  line  B,  which  cotaineth  12,  foote,  is  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line 
A,  which  contayneth  3.  foote,in  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number  .  For  as 

the  number  12.  is  to  the  number  3,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  B,  which  contained)  12.  foote,  to 
the  fquare  ofthe  line  A,  which  contayneth  3  foote  .  But  the  numbers  12  .and  3 .  are  like  fuperficiall 
numbers  ,ror  the  fides  of  12.  which  are  2.  and  <5,are  proportional!  with  the  fides  of  3 . which are; 
a  .and  3 .  Wherefore  the  fquare  ofthe  line  B,  which  contayneth  12. foote,  fhall  be  ynto  thefquare  ofthe 
line  A.which  contayneth  3  .foote, in  that  proportion  that  ,a  like  fuperficiall  number  is  to  a  like  fuperfici- 
number.  But  Like  fup-erficiali  numbers  are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  as.a  fquare  number  is 
pp  1  ‘  EE.ij.  to  a 


Certayne  an* 
notations  out 
of  Mor,  Wi¬ 
nns. 


Rules  to  fyiow 
whether  two 
fuperficiall 
numbers  he 
Hkgorno. 


Tbetentb'Boofy 


B 


V.  i 

*  »»g...r.ga 


m  a  fqtsare  n  fiber, 
which  fquare  num¬ 
bers  are  4.  and  1. 

(  by  the  16.  of  the 
eight)  .  Wherefore 
the  fquare  of  the 
line  B,  which  con- 
tayneth  n.foote,  is 
to  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A,which  cotai- 
nethj.footejtn  that 
proportion  that  a 
fquare  number  is  to 
'a  fquare  number, 
namely  ,  that  the 
number  4.  is  to  the 
number  1  :  which 
proportion  is  qua¬ 
druple  .  For  the 
greater  fquare  whi- 
che  is  xz,  contay- 
ueth  theleffe  fquare 
which  is  3,  foure 
times  .  Wherefore 
the  fide  of  the 
fquare  iz,  which  is 
the  line  B, is  double 
to  the  fide  of  the 
fquare  3,  which  is 
the  line  A  .  Wher- 
fore  the  line  B  is  to 
the  line  A  ,  in  that 
proportion  that 
number  is  to  num¬ 
ber  .  Wherfore  (by 

the  jr.of.this  booke)  the  lines  B  &r  A  are  commenfurable  in  length  .Which  is  a  fuppofition  neceflary 
to  conclude  the  firft  part  of  this  Theoreme,  namely,  that  the  fquares  of  fuch  lines  are  in  proportion 
the  one  to  the  other,  that  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number. 

So  a'fo  the  nuber  which  denominateth  the  greater  terme  of  the  proportion  ofthe  line  B  to  the  line 
A,which  is  a, if  it  be  multiplyed  into  it  felfc,  it  maketh  a  fquare  number, namely,  4.  Likewife  the  num¬ 
ber  which  denominateth  theleffe  terme,namely,r.  if  it  be  multiplyed  into  itfelfe,it  maketh  no  more 
but  1 .  Which  vnitieisalfoin  power  a  Iquare  nuber.  Wherfore  the  fquare  ofthe  line  B,is  to  the  fquare 
©f  the  line  A,  in  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number,namely,  that4-is  to  r.  By 
this  you  fee  (which  thing  was  before  noted)  that  it  is  not  all  one,numbers  to  be  fquare  numbers,  and 
to  be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number .  For  it  is  manifeft, 
that  the  numbers  iz.and  3.  are  not  fquare  numbers,  when  yet  the  fquares  expreffed  by  thofe  num¬ 
bers  are  in  that  proportion.  Rut  the  fide  of  the  fquare  iz  .although  it  can  not  ofit  felfe  be  expreffed  by 
number  diftindHy,  to  fay  that  the  fide  thereof  is  fo  many  foote  long, which  feete  fquare  taken ,makc 
the  whole  fquare  iz  :  yet  being  referred  or  compared  to  an  other  thyng,  namely,  to  the  fide  ofthe 
fquare  3,  which  fide  alfo  ofit  felfe  can  not  be  expreffed  by  number,  it  is  vntothe  fayde  fide  of 
thefquare3,  in  double  proportion .  For  the  one  fquare  being  quadruple  to  the  other  fquare  (as  is 
the  fquare  of  the  line  B,  which  contayneth  xz.  foote,  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A,  which  contay- 
neth  3.  foote  )  hath  his  fide  double  to  the  fide  of  the  other  fquare,  by  this  generall  Corollary 
of  thezo.  of  the  fixe,  like  reclihnejigures  are  ia  double  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  their  Jides  of  like 
proportion  are .  Now  if  a  man  will  fay,  that  the  fide  of  the  fquare  iz.'may  be  meafured,for  that  hys 
proportion  which  it  hath  to  the  fide  of  the  fquare  3  ,is  meafurea  by  z  (forafmuch  as  it  is  dupla  propor¬ 
tion:  this  is  to  be  confiaered,tharin  fo  faying,  you  fay  not,that  that  magnitude  can  ofit  felfe  be  meafu- 
red,but  the  proportion  therof.  For,that  magnitude,namely,the  fide  of  the  fquare  iz,fhouId  by  it  felfe 
be  meafured,when  without  any  refped  of  the  proportion  of  it  to  an  other  thing,  we  may  fay  that  the 
fide  of  the  lquare,which  contayneth  iz.foote,is  fo  many  foote  Iong,the  number  of which  foote  multi¬ 
plyed  into  it  felfe  fhould  make  that  number  iz.  But  this  is  notpoffible,for  that  tz.is  not  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber  .  Wherefore  thus  you  may  fay  :  In  afmuch  as  that  fquare  rz.  is  confidered  by  it felf, without  hauing 
any  refped  ofthe  proportion  efitto  any  other  thing, but  onely  as  it  is  xz.foote,ithath  no  fide  which  of 
it  felfe  can  be  expreffed  by  number  .But  if  it  be  compared  to  any  other  thing,  namely,  to  the  fquare  of 
3'.foote,then  may  you  fay  that  the  fide  of  the  fquare  iz. is  z,  and  the  fide  of  the  fquare  3.1s  x.  Butthysis 
the  denomination  of  that  proportion  which  is  called  duple,which  proportion  can  not  be  or  confidered 


mentes. 


FoLi^o. 


in  fewer  termes  then  .two,  when  as  it  is  a  relation  ofone  thing  to  an  other  thing  :  wherefore  2.  is  not 
the  number  of  fuchfeete,of  which  there  are'n.in  the  fquare .  Agayne,if  the  number  a.  fhoulde  be  the 
fide  of  the  fquare  ia,  fo  that  that  fide  fhould  be  2,  then  of  the  multiplication  of  2, into  it  felfe,  fhoulde 
not  be  made  that  fquare  12, but  an  other  fquare  which  fhouid  be4.foote  :  as  of  the  number  2. multiply- 
ed  into  him  felfe  is  produced  the  fquare  number  4 .  Neither  alfoifany  other  number,  meafure  the  _lia@ 
of  the  fquare  i2,and  the  iayd  number  be  multiplyed'ihto  him  felfefhall  it  euer  make  the  number  ia. 
When  yet  all  numbers  denominating,  the  fide  ofany  fquare  number,  if  they  be  multiplyed  into  them 
felues, they  make  the  number  which  denominateth~the  fquare,  whofe  fid  es  they  denominate.  As  2. 
multiplyed  into  him  felfe  maketh  4  :  3.  maketh  q  :  4.maketh  16  :  and  fo  likewife  of  all  others.  Where¬ 
fore  it  is  notallone,magnitudes  to  be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,as  number  is  to  number,  and 
eueryoneofthem  to  be  meafured  b  him  felfe  without  any  reiped  had  of  the  proportion  .As  here  the 
fide  of  the  fquare  iz.canofit  felfe  by  no  meanes  be  meafured,but  being  compared  to  any  other  magni- 
tude,nameIy,to  the  fide  of  the  fquare  3  ,the  proportion  thereofis  exprelfed  by  number.  So  alfo  the  fide 
of  the  fquare  3  ,and  of  all  other  fquare  figures, whofe  areas  yet  can  not  be  exprelfed  by  fquare  numbers. 
And  thatwhich  wehcrefay, ismanjfeft  euen  by  the  wordesof  Eucltde'mthe  y.6.7.and8.  Theoremes 
of  this  booke .  Where  he  fayth  not,  that  magnitudes  commenfurable  and  incommenfurable  are  of  the 
felues  or  of  their  owne  nature  exprelfed  by  numbers,but  that  either  they  haue  or  haue  not  that  propor¬ 
tion  which  number  hath  to  number  .Which  thing  not  being  well  confidered,it  fiiouldfeme  hathcau- 
fed  many  to  erre-as  hereafter  fhall  be  made  manifeft.  And  in  deede  they  which  haue  detnonftrated  this 
Theoreme,  may  feme  to  feme  rather  to  haue  demoftrated  it  particularly  &tJotvniuer(ally.Anddoubt- 
les  I  iudge  there  are  fome  which  vnderftand  their  fayinges  otherwife  then  they  ment:  when  as  they 
thinke,that  they  fuppofe  certayne  lines  not  onely  commenfurable  in  length, as  they  are  fuppofed  to  be 
in  the  Propofitiojbut  alfo  fuch,  that  ech  of 
them  apart  may  be  exprelfed  by  fome  cer¬ 
tayne  number.  Wherfore  for  want  of  right 
vnderftading,  this  mought  they  fay  of  their 
demonftrationstthatwheras  they  thought 
that  they  had  concluded  that  generally, 
which  is  in  this  theoreme  oiEucltde  Squares 
defer  shed  of  lines  comenfurable  in  length ,are  in 
proportio  the  one  to  the  other  that  a  fquare  nil • 
her  is  to  a  fquare  number:  they  conclude  par¬ 
ticularly,  fhys  onely  :  Squares  deferibed  of 
lenes  which  may  by  them  felues  be  exprefed  by 
fome  certame  number ,  are  in  proportion,  ffc. 

which  yet  is  otherwife,and  their  demoftra- 
tions  are  right  &  agreable  with  the  Theoreme.Onely  the  pidure  of  the  figures  which  the  Greeke  boke 
hath,  may  feeme  to  bring  fome  doubt.  For  the  fquares  are  lb.delcribed  with  certayn  litle  areas, that  the 
number  of  them  may  be  denominated  by  a  fquare  number  :  whereby  it  mought  {eeme  that  the  lines 
A  &  B  which  deferibe  the  fquaresjought  to 
be  fuch  that  they  may  be  exprelfed  by  fome 
certairie  nuber.As  the  line  A  to  be  y  .foote, 
and  the  line  B  3  .  foote.  As  the  two  former  fi 
gures  herefetdeclare.Which  thyngyet  £«-  “ 
elide  fuppofeth  not,  but  only  requireth  that 
they  be  commenfurable.in  length,  as  in  the 
former  example  of  the  two  fquares,  the 
whole  area  of  one  of  which  is  12,  and  the 
whole  area.of  the  other  is  3.  For  although 
their  fides  ca  not  by  them  felues  be  expref- 
fed  bv  fome  certayne  number ,  yet  are  they 
commenfurable  in  length  .  Moreouer  thys 
deferibing  of  the  Iquarcs  of  the  lines  A  and  B,deuided  by  certaine  litle  areas,  may  caule  this  error,  that 
a  man  fhould  thinke  that  ids  all  one  two  numbers  to  be  fquare  numbers ,  and  to  be  in  proportion  the 
.one  to  the  other  as  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  fquare  number.For  the  number  of  the  areas  in  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A  is  a  fquare  number ,  namely,  23.  produced  of  the  roote  y,  which  is  the  length  of  theline  A. 
Xikewife  the  number  ofthe  areas  ofthe  fquare  ofthe  lineB,isafquare  nuber,  namely,?,  which  is  pro¬ 
duced  of  the  roote  3,  which  is  the  length  of  the  line  B.  But  we  haue  before  declared  that  it  is  notall 

one,numbers  to  be  called  fquare  numbers, and  to  be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,as  a  fquare  nu- 
ber  is  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  as  touching  thofe  areas  contayned  in  the  greater  fquare,  which 
is  o.  the  line  A,  and  which  are  in  number  2y, they  do  exprelfe  that  fquare  number  2y, which  is  produced 
■orthenumber y. multiplyed  into  him  felfe,  which  number,  y,is  the  greater  extreme  ofthe  proportion) 
betwene  y.  and  3 ,  which  is  the  proportion  ofthe  lines  A  and  B  .  And  this  proportionmamely,  ofy.to- 
3  .caufeth ;  that .the  lines  A  and  B  are  commenfurable  in  length  (by  the  rf. of  this  booke)  .  The  fame  may 
ue  uyd  alio  ofthe  areas  ofthe  leife  fquare .  Neither  is  it  of  neceflitie  that  you  vnderftand  thofe  areas  to 
be  iquares,as  eithe*  feete  fquare  or  pafes  fquare  which  make  the  whole  fquare,  although  in  deede  they 

EE.iij.  ai  ay 


A 


B 


Note, 


This  affumpt 
■ts  the  amuer fn 
oftbei6*of 
the  eight « 


Demtrflratio 
of  the  fir  ft 

pAtU 


Demnfira- 
rnn  of  the 
JeemdpArt * 


e 

may  be  fuch,fo  that  the  fides  of  thofe  fquares  be  fo  many  foote  long,  as  y.  foote  or  3  .foote .  Howbeit 
thys  is  ofneceifttie  that  the  numbers  which  expreffe  the  number  or the  feete  fquare  or  pafes  fquare,co~ 
tayned  in  the  fquares, be  either  both  of  the 
fquare  numbers,  as  in  thefe  fquarc  figures 
ofthelines  A,B,  or  that  both  of  them  be 
like  fuperficiall  numbers,  as  in  the  former 
Iquares  which  were  n  .and  3  vof  which  nu- 
bers  it  is  manifeft  by  that  which  hath  be¬ 
fore  bene  faid,that  they  are  like  fuperficiall 
numbers,  and  therefore  haue  that  propor¬ 
tion  the  one  to  the  other ,  that  a  fquare  nu- 
ber  hath  to  a  fquare  number.  And  therfore 
you  may  deforibe  the  fquares  of  the  lines 
A,  B,  without  any  diilin&ion  of  fuchlitle 
areas, fo  that  the  fquares  may  be  voydeand 
emptie,and  contay  ned  onely  of  foure  right  lines,as  in  the  figure  here  put. 

«fl"AnAfIumpt. 

Forafmuch  as  in  the  eight  booh  in  the  26.  frofofition  itwasproued,  that  like  play ne 
numbers  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  a, fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 
number:  and  Ukewife  in  the  24.  of  the fame  booke  it  was  proued,  that  if  two  numbers  haue 
that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other ,  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number,  thofe 
numbers  are  like  plaint  numbers. Hereby  it  is  manifeft,that  vnlike  f  lame  numbers,  that  is, 
rvhofc  fides  are  not  proportionally  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  a  fquare 
number  hath  to  a  fquare  number.  For  if they  haue,  then  jhould  they  be  like  plain  e  numbers , 
which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofitionWherfore  vnlike  plaint  numbers  haue  not  that  propor¬ 
tion  the  one  to  the  other, that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  nub  er.  And  therfore  fquares 
which  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, that  vnlike  plaine  numbers  haue, fall  haue 
their  fides  incommenfurable  in  length  ( by  the  laf  part  of  the  former  propofiiion)  for  that 
thofe  fquares  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  4 
fquare  number . 

yf  T he  8.  Tbeoreme.  The  10.  Tropofition. 

If  foure  magnitudes  be  proportionally  and  if  the  firft  he  commenfurable 
Jmto  the fecondythe  third  alfo fhalbe  commenfurable  Tonto  the fourth.  And 
if  the  firft  be  incommenfurable  'Vnto  the  fecondy  the  third  fhall  alfo  be  in * 
commenfurable  Tonto  the fourth. 

f  Fppofe  that  thefe  foure  magnitudes  A, B,C,D, be  proportional/.  LAsA/stoS, 

1 fo  let  C  be  to  D, and  let  A  be  commenfurable  vntoB.  Thenlfay  that  C  is  alfo 
commenfurable  •unto  D .  For  forafmuch  as  is  commenfurable  vnto  B,  it 

hath(Jby  the f ft  of the  tenth)th at  proportion  that  number  hath  to  number  Jlut 
as  A  is  to  B,fo  ts  C  to  I>  Wherfore  C  alfo  hath  vnto  D  that  pro 
portion  that  number  hath  to  number.  Wherfore  C  is  commen¬ 
furable  vnto  D  (by  the  6. of  the  tenth ) .  But  now  fuppofi  that 
the  magnitude  lA  be  incommenfurable  vnto  the  magnitude 
S.  Then  /  fay  that  the  magnitude  C  alfo  is  incommenfurable 
vnto  the  magnitude  D  .For  forafmuch  as  A  is  incommenfura¬ 
ble  vnto  B,  therfore  ( by  the  7.  of  this  booke )  A  hath  not  vnto 
B  fuch proportion  as  number  hath  to  number. But  as  A  is  to  B , 
fo  is  C  to  D.  Wherefore  C  hath  not  vnto  D  fuch  proportion  as 
number  hath  to  number.  Wherfore  (by  the  8. of  the  tenth )  Cis 
incommenfurable  vnto  D.  if  therefore  there  be foure  magni-  A  ® 

tudesproportionall,and  if  the firjl  be  commenfurable  vnto  the 

fecond. 


ofSuclides  Element es. 


Fol.  24.1. 


fecond,  the  third  alfo Jhall  be  commenfurable  vnto  the  fourth.  And  if  the firjl  be  incommen- 
far  able  vnto  the fecond,  the  third jhall  alfo  be  incommenfurable  vnto  the  fourth :  which 
■was  required  to  be  proued. 

A  Corollary  added  by  Montaureus. 

If  there  he  foure  lines  proportion  all, and  if  the  tVt>o  fir  A, or  the  ttyo  last  be  commenfurable  in  poWer 
onely, the  other  two  alfo jhall  be  commenfurable  tn  power  onely.  This  is  proued  by  the  22.  of  the 
fixt,and  by  this  tenth  propofition. And  this  Corollary  Euclide  vfethin  the  27.  and  28. 
propofitions  of  this  bookstand  in  other  proportions  alfo. 


f/  'The  3-  T rob  feme. 


The  11.  Tropoftion , 


V nto  a  right  line  firjl  fet  and geuen  ( which  is  called  a  rationall  line)  to 
finde  out  two  right  lines  in  com  m  enfura  b  fefithe  one  in  length  onely x  and  the 
other  in  length  and  alfo  in  power. 

Tppofe  that  the  right  line  fir (l  fet  and  geuen, which  is  called  &  rationall  line  of 
purpofe  be  A  .It  is  required  vnto  the  J’aid line  A,tofnde  out  two  right  lines  in - 
1  c ommen fur able ,the  one  in  length  onely ,  the  other  both  in  length  and  in  power . 
_ Take  ( by  that  which  was  added  after  the p  .propofition  of  this  booke )  two  num¬ 
bers  B  and  C,not  hauingtbat proportion  the  one  to  the  other, that  a fquare  number  hath  to 
a  fquare  number ,that  is, let  them  not  be  like plaine  numbers  (for  like plaine  numbers  by  the 
2  6.  of  the  eight  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a 
fquare  number)  .And  as  the  number  B  is  to  the  number  C,fo  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  be 
vnto  the  fquare  of an  other  line, namely  ,of D  (bow  to  do  this  was  taught  in  the  afumptput 
beforethe  6.  propofition  of  this  booke.)  Wherforethe fquare  of the  line.  A, is  vnto the fquare 
of  the  line  D  commenfurable  (by  the  fixt  of  the:  tenth.) 

Andforafmuch  as  the  number  B  hath  not  vnto  the  num 
berC,  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  & 
fquare  nuber,  therfore  the  fquare  of the  line  A  hath  not 
' vnto  the  fquare  of j/  line  D,  that proportio that  a fquare 
number  hath  to  a  nuber. Wherf  ore  by  the  9 .of  the  tenth, 
the  line  A  is  vnto  the  line  D  incommenfurable  in  length 
onely.  And fo  is found  out  thefrf  line, namely, T>  incom- 
menfurable  in  length  onely  to  the  line  geuen.  A  .  Agayne 
take  (by  the  13.  of  the fixt )  the  meant  proportional!  be- 
tw.ene  the,  lines  A  and  D,and  let  the fame  be  E. Wherf  ore 
as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  D,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  A 
to  the fquare  of the  line  E  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  20.  of 
the  fixt) .  But  the  line  is  vnto  the  line  D  incommen¬ 
furable  in  length.  Wherf  ore  alfo  the  fquare  of the  line  A 
is  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  incommenfurable  by  the 

fecond  part  of the former  propofition.'Kowforafmuch  as  the fquare  of the  line  A  is  income 
furable  to  the  fquare  ofthelineE,it follow eth  (by  the  definition  of  incommenfurable  lynes 
that  the  line  iff  is  incommenfurable  in  power  to  the  line E  .Wherf ore  vnto  the  right  line  ge 
uen,andfirfi fet,A,which  is  a  rationall  line, and  which  is fuppofed  to  haue fuch  diuifions  ant 
fo  many  partes  as  ye  lift  to  conceyue  in  minde,as  in  this  example  u  ,whereunto ,  as  was  de 
clared  in  the  $ . definition  of  this  booke, may  be  compared  infinite  other  lines,  cither  commen 

ME.iiij.  furabi 


£ 

& 

ft 


v; 


A  E 


B 


A  Corollary, 


To  fin  de  m 
the  fir  ft  line 
incommenfu¬ 
rable  in  length 
onely  to  the 
line  geuen. 


To  finde  out 
the  fecond  line 
imommenfu - 
table 'oth  in 
length  and  in 
power  to  the 
line  geuen. 


. }.» 


fur  able  or  inComtntftfurbblt, is found  out  the  line  D  incommenfura  bk  in  length  onelj.Wher 
fore  the  line  E>  is  rationall  ( by  the fixt  definitio  of  this  booh )  for  that  it  is  incommenfura - 
hie  in  length  onely  to  the  line  A,  which  is  thefrjl  line  fet,and  is  by  fuppofitio  rational. There 
is  alfo found  out  the  line  E, which  is  vnto  the fame  line  incommen fur  able,  not  onely  in 
length  but  alfo  in  powerj which  line  E  compared  to  the  rationall  line\A,  is  by  the  defnition 
irrationally  or  Euclide  alwayes  calleth  thofe  lines  irrationally  which  are  incommen fur able 
both  in  length  and  in  power  to  the  Unefrjl fet,and  by fuppofition  rationall. 


Conflruftion. 


DemonUra- 

wm. 


-  -  • 

Thit  is  with 
Zambeft  an 
uifiumpt,  but 
Sjtterlj  tmpro  - 
perlys  Fluff  ate i 
maketh  it  aCt- 
rotlarjybut  the 
Greece  and 
Mont  aureus 
make  it  a  fro-' 
ftfitiw.bute*" 
uerj  n>aj  an 
infallible  tmtk 
it  is. 


f  The  p.  Theoreme.  The  12.  Tropoftion. 

Magnitudes  commenfurable  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  magnitude :  are  alfo 
commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other.  /  * 

,  Fppofe  thaLeither  ofthefe  magnitudes  A  and  B,be  commenfurable  vnto  the  mag¬ 
nitude  C.T hen  I  fay  that  the  magnitude  A  is  commenfurable  vnto  the  magnitude 
£  B  .For forafrnuch  as  the  magnitude  A  is  commenfurable  vnto  the  magnitude  C, 
therefor e{by  the  5.  of  the  tenth)  A  hath  vnto  C  fuch 
proportion  as  number  hath  to  number.  Let  A  haue 
vnto  C  that  proportion  that  the  number  D  hath  to 
the  number  E.iAgaine forafrnuch  as  B  is  commen 
fur  able  vnto  C, therefore  ( by  the felfe  fame )  C  hath 
vnto  B  'that proportion  that  number  bath  to  num¬ 
ber  .  Let  C  haue  vnto  B  that  proportion  that  the 
number  F  hath  vnto  the  number  G.Now  then  take 
the  leaf  numbers  in  continuall  proportion  and  in 
thefe proportions geuen ,  namely that  the  number 
D  hath  to  the  number  E ,  and  that  the  number  F  A  C  B 

hath  to  the  number  G{by  the  /y.ofthe  eight) :  which 

let  be  the  numbers  //,  K,  L.  So  that  as  the  number  X) .  F  .... 

D  is  to  the  number  E,fo  let  the  number  H  be  to  the  E  ....  G  ........ 

number  If,  and  as  the  nuber  F  is  to  the  nuber  G,fo  H  ... 

let  the  nuber  K  be  to  the  nuber  L .  Now  for  that  as  K  . . 

A  is  to  C,fo  is  D  toE,  but  as  D  is  to  E  fois  H  to  K,  L  .... 

therfore  as  A  is  to  C  fo  is  H  to  K,  \Againe for  that 

asCistoB  ,fois  F  to  G ,  but  as  F  is  to  G  fois  K  to  L;  therefore  as  C  is  to  B ,  fois  K  ioL. 
But  it  is  now  proued  that  as  A  is  to  Cfo  isHtoK .  Wherefore  ofequalitie  ( by  the  n.of  the 
fft'jas  A  is  to  Bfo  is  the  number  H  to  the  number  L  Wherefore  A  hath  vnto  B  fuch  propor¬ 
tion  as  number  hath  to  number. Wherefore  (by  the fixt  of  the  tenth)the  magnitude  A  is  com 
menfurable  vnto  the  magnitude  B .  ^Magnitudes  therefore  commenfurable  to  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  magnitude ,are  alfo  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other :  which  was  required  to 
beproued.  -  '  * 

AnAfTumpt. 

If  there  he  ttyo  magnitudes  compared  to  one  and  the felfe fame  magnitude , 
and  if  the  one  of them  he  commenfurable  Jmto  it, and  the  other  incommen • 
furabk'.thofe  magnitudes  are  incommen  fur  able  the  one  to  the  other. 


ole 


ofSudides  Elementeh 


Foiz^i. 


,  Vppofe  that  then  he  two  magnitudes,  namely,  A  andB  and let  C  he  a  certaym  other  °Dtmtmflra~ 

„  ?  f magnitude .  And  let  A  he  commensurable  tion  leading  to 

vnto  C,and  let  B  he  comme fur  able  vnto  the  ^  — 1 — . an  abjuttitie* 

felfe  fame  C  .  Then  1  fay  that  the  magnitude  A  is  in-  q  _ _ _ 

common  fur  able  vnto  B  .  For  if  A  be  common  fur  able 

vntoB ,  for af much  as  A  is  alfo  commefurahle  vnto  C  ®  *“ — ~i--"  ••  •-"« - - 

therefore  {by  the  1 2 .  of the  tenth  )B  is  alfo  commefura¬ 
hle  vnto  C  .-which  is  contrary  to  the fuppoftion . 


f  The  10.  T  heoreme.  T he  13  fPfopofition . 

If  there  he  two  magnitudes  commenfurahle  ,  and  if  the  one  of  them  he  in* 
commenfurahle  to  any  other  magnitude: the  other  alfo  Jhallbe  incommen* 
fur  able  lento  the fame . 


A 

C 

3 


t  Vppofe  that  thefe  two  magnitudes  A,B  be  commonfurable  the  one  to  the  other ,  and 
let  the  one  of  them ,  namely  A,  be  incommenfurable  vnto  another  magnitude,  Ttemon^rc- 

_ namely, vnto  C.  T  hen  1 fay  that  the  other  magnitude  alfo, namely  B ,  is  incommen -  tun  m 

fur  able  vnto  C.  For  if B  be  commenfurahle  vnto  C,  afi  4K/ftrdtiie. 

then  forafmuch  as  A  is  commenfurahle  vnto  B, 
therefore  (  by  the  12.0ft he  tenth  )  the  magnitude  A 
alfo  is  commenfurahle  vnto  the  magnitude  C.  But  it 
is  fippo  fed  to  be  incommenfurable  vnto  it ,  which  is 
impofible .  Wherefore  the  magnitudes  B  and  C  are 
not  commenfurahle .  Wherefore  they  are  incommenfurable.  if  therefore  there  be  two  magni¬ 
tudes  commenfurahle ,  and  if  the  one  of  them  be  incommenfurableto  any  other  magnitude, 
the  other  alfo jhalbe  incommenfurable  vnto  the  fame  .-which  was  required  to  beproued. 

y  J  Corollary  added  by  Mont  aureus. 

Magnitudes  commenfurahle  to  magnitudes  incommefurable,are  alfo  incommen-  .  *  „ 

durable  the  one  to  the  other.  •A,€or§Hatya 


Suppofe  that  the  magnitudes  A  and  B  be  incommenfurable  the  one  to  the other,and  let  the  mag- 
nitude  C  be  comenfurable  to  A ,  and  let  the  magnitude  D  be  co- 
tnenfurable  vnto  B  .  Then  I  fay  that  the  magnitudes  C  and  D  are 

incommenfurable  the  one  to  the  other  .For  A  and  C  are  commen-  A  - - — (  (  ,  ,  ,  , 

furable ,  of  which  the  magnitude  A  is  incommenfurable  vntoB, 

wherefore  by  this  13. propofition  the  magnitudes  C  and  Bare  alfo  ®  — « 

incommenfurable: but  the  magnitudes  B  and  D  are  comenfurable 

wherefore  by  the  famejor  by  the  former  aflumpt  ,  the  magnitudes  G  * - ♦ - * — —> —  * 

C  and  D  are  incommenfurable  the  one  to  the  other.This  corolla-  ^ 

ry.  Them  vfeth  often  times  as  in  the  zi  itf.  and  36  proportions  of  ** — * — ■*—** - * 

dii*  bookstand  in  other propofitions  alfo. 


^  An  AlTumpt. 

•’  _  ,  •  ‘  '  f'.K 

Two  lone quail  right  lines  beinggeuenfo finde  out  how  much  the  greater  if 
m  power  more  then  the  lejfe. 

Suppofe  that  the  twovnequall  right  lines geutnM  A  B  and  C,  ofwhkhks  cAB  be  the 

greater* 


€onUrtmion. 


Demnfira- 

tim* 


*d  Corollary . 


greater.lt  is  required  to fade  out  how  much  more  in  power  the  line  A  B  is  then  the  line  C. 
Deferibe  vpon  the  line  ABa femicircle  AD  B.  And  vnto  it from  the  point  A  apply  (by  the 
firfi  of  the fourth )  a  right  line  A  D ,  equal!  vnto  the  line 
C,and  draw  a  right  line  from  D  to  B.  “Igow  it  is  mani¬ 
fest  that  the  angle  AD  Bis  a  right  angle  (by  the  31.  of 
the  third)  :  an  dt hat  the  line  AB  is  in  power  more  then 
the  line  A  D  jhat  is }then  the  line  C,by  the  line  D  B,  by 
the  47 .  of  the fir  ft. 

And  like  in  forte ,  two  right  lines  Icing  gcuen  ,  by  this 
me.mes  n:aj  be  found e  tat  a  right  Ijne  which  contayneth  them  A. 

both  m  power .  Suppofe  that  the  two  right  lines  geuen 
be  AD  and  D  B.  It  is  required  to fade  out  aright  lyne 
4hat  contayneth  them  both  in  power. Let  the  lines  A  3  and  D  B  be  fo  put,  that  they  compre¬ 
hend  a  right  angle  A  D  B,and draw  a  right  line  from  A  to  B.Now  agayne  it  is  manifcf(by 
the  47.  of  the  firfi)  that  the  line  A  B  contayneth  in  power  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B. 


Dauonflra- 

Men.' 


f  The  n.Tbeoreme.  The  14.TropoJ1.tion. 

If  there  he foster  right  lines  proportionally  andifthefirjl  be  in  power  more 
then  the  fecond  by  the fquare  of a  right  line  commenfurable  in  length  lento 
the  firjlythe  third  alfo  Jbalbe  in  po^er  more  then  the  fourth }  by  the  fquare 
of  a  right  line  commenfurable  Ion  to  the  third.  Andif  the  firft  be  in  po* 
~Wer  more  then  the  fecond  by  the  fquare  of  a  right  line  incommenfu * 
rable.  in  length  lento  the  fir flgthe  third  alfo  Jhall  be  in  poioer  more  then 
the  fourth  by  the fquare  of  a  right  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to 
the  third. 


'  /  J  J  1  J 

#  ware  of  the dine  B,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  C  to  the 
fuare  of  the  line  D  (by  the  2  2. of  the fixt ) .  But  by  fuppo - 


C  '  /  ~  ftii  ,  J  ^  )  fy  .  I  t  J 

yFppofe  ihatthefefoure  right  lines  Aj>>C>D  fie  proportional!. As  A  is  to  Bfo  let 
C  be  to  D.^yfndlet  A  be  in  power  more  then  B,by  the fquare  of the  line  E. And 
likewife  let  C  be  in  power  more  then  D,by  the  fquare  of  the  line  F.  Then  1  fay 
that  if  Ape.  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  E>C  alfo  Jhall  be  common- 
' fir dile  in  length  vntdlhe  tine  F.  And  if  A  be  incommen¬ 
furable  in  length  to  the  line  E,  C  alfo  fall  be  incommen¬ 
surable  in  lengthfa  the  BneJ? .For for  that  as  A  is  to  Bfo 
is  C  to  D,  therefore  as  the fquare  of  the  line  is  to  the 
[yuan 
fquare 

fitio'n  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  areequall  thefqmres 
ofthe  lines  E  and  B, and  vnto  the  fquare  of  'the  line  C  are 
e  nail  the  fquare s  of  the  of  the  lines  D  and  E :  Where¬ 
fore  as  the  fqnareYof  the  lines  E  and  B  (which  are  e quail 
to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  A )  are  to  the fquare  ofthe  line  B, 
fo  are  thefquares  of  the  lines  D  and  F( which  are  equall  to 
the fquare  ofthe  line  C)  to  the fquare  ofthe  line  D(by  the 

. the 


}%4 


mi 


•n 
bur 


A  .3 


S 


fquare  of the  line  F  to  the fquare  ofthe  line  D .  Wherfore  alfo  as  the  line  E  is  to  the  line  2?* 
fo  is  the  line  F  to  the  line  D  (by  the fecond  parte  ofthe  22.  ofthe fixt)  wherefore  contrari - 
wife  ( by  the  Corollary  oft  he  fourth  ofthefft)  as  Bis  t&  Efo  is  D  to  F.But(by  fuppoftion} 


as 


cfEuclides  Element es^  FoLiqz* 

&s  A  is  to  B,fo  is  C  to  D,W her  fore  of equallitie  (by  then,  of the  fift)  as  A  is  to  E,fo  is  C  to 
F.  If  therfore  A  be  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  E,C  alfo  Jhall be  commenfurable  in  legth 
vnto  F :  and  fit  ba  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  E,C  alfo  Jhalbe  incommenfurablel  in 
length  vnto  F,  by  the  10.  of  this  booke.  if  therfore  there  be foure  right  times  proportionally 
and  if the frjl  be  in  power  more  then  the fecondby  the fqnare  of  a  right  line  commenfurable 
in  length  vnto  the  frjl ,  the  third  alfo  (hall  be  in  power  more  then  the fourth  ,by  the  fquare 
of  a  right  line  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  third-  and  if  the  frjl  be  in  power  more  the 
the  fecond ,  by  the fquare  of  a  right  line  incomerfurable  in  length  vnto  the  frjl ,  the  third , 
alfo  fall  be  in  power  mere  the  the  fourthly  the  fquare  of  a  right  line  incommenfurable  in. 
length  to  the  third :  which  was  required  to  be proued. 

Note  that  the  line  A  may  be  proued  to  be  in  proportion  to  the  line  E,as  the  line  C  is  to  the  line  F,by 
sn  other  way,  namely,  by  tonuerfiori  of  proportion  (of  fome  as  we  haue  before  noted,  called  inuerfe 
proportion)  by  the  19. of  the  fift .  For,forafmuch  as  the  foure  lines  A,B,C,D,are  proportionalltther- 
fore(by  the  n.of  the fixt)  their  fquares  alfo  are  proportionall.  And  forafmuch  as  the  antecedent,name- 
!y,the  fquare  of  the  line  A  excedeth  the  confequent, namely ,  the  fquare  of  the  line  B,  by  the  fquare  of 
the  line  E  :  and  the  other  antecedeot,namely, the  fquare  ofthe  line  C, excedeth  the  other  confequent, 
namely, the  fquare  of  the  line  D,by  the  fquare  of  the  line  F,  therefore  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to 
thecxCeffo, namely, to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E,fo  is  the  fquare  of  thelinc  C  to  the  exceffe,  namely,  to  the 
iquare  of  the  line  F.  Wherefore  (by  the  fecond  part  of  the  zi  .of  the  fixt)  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  E, 
fo,is  the  line  C  to  the  line  F . 

f  T he  12.  Theoreme.  The  is.Tropofition. 

If  two  magnitudes  commenjurahle  be  compofed f  he  ~^>hole  magnitude  com » 
pojid  alfo Jhall  be  commenjurahle  to  either  of  the  two  partes.  .And  if  the 
t>hole  magnitude  compofed  be  commenfurable  to  any  one  of  the  two  partes 3 
thofe  two  partes  Jhall  aljo  be  commenjurable. 

Et  thefe  two  commenfurable  magnitudes  A  B  and B  C,be  compofed or  added  toge¬ 
ther.  Then  I (ay, that  the  whole  magnitude  A  C  is  comenfurable  to  either  of  thefe 
partes  A  B  and  B  C .  Forforafmuch  as  A  B  andB  C  are  commenfurable, therfore 
{by  the  frf  definition  ofthe  tenth)  fome  one  magnitude  meafureth  them  both. 
Let  there  be  a  magnitude  that  meafureth  them, and 

let  the  fame  be  D  .  N \ow forafmuch  as  D  meafureth  ^4  3  C 

A  B  and  B  C,  it  fall  alfo  meafure  the  whole  magni -  * - » — — *  d  1  —*  ~+‘ 

tude  compofed  AC,  by  this  common  fentence,  what  “P _ _ 

foeuer  magnitude  meafureth  two  other  magnitudes , 

Jhall  alfo  meafure  the  magnitude  compofed  of  them,  tut  the fame  E>  meafureth  A  B  and  B  C 
(by  fuppofition )  .  Wherefore  D  meafureth  A  B,B  C,and  A  C.  Wherefore  C is  commenfu¬ 
rable  to  either  of  thefe  magnitudes  B  and  BC. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  whole  compofed  magnitude  AC  be  commenfurable  to  any  one  of 
thefe  two  magnitudes  A  B  or  BC,  let  it  be  commenfurable  I fay  vnto  AB.  T  hen  1 fay,  that 
the  two  magnitudes  A  B  and  B  C  are  commenfurable  .  For  forafmuch  as  A  B  and  A  C  are 
commenfurable, fome  one  magnitude  meafureth  them  (  by  the fir  A  definition  ofthe  tenth). 
Let  fome  magnitude  meafure  them, and  let  the  fame  be  D  .  Now  forafmuch  as  1)  meafureth 
A  B  and  A  C,  it  alfo  meafureth  the  ref  due  B  C,  by  this  common  fentence,  what  foeuer  mea-- 
fiireth  the  whole  and  the  part  taken  away,  jhall  alfo  meafure  the  ref  due. But  the fame  D  mea* 
fureth  the  magnitude  A  B  (by  fuppofition  )  .  Wherefore  D  meafureth  either  of  thefe  magni¬ 
tudes  c _A  B  and  B  C .  Wherefore  the  magnitudes  A  B  and  B  C  are  commenfurable .  If  ther¬ 
fore  two  magnitudes  commenfurable  be  compofed,  the  whole  magnitude  compofed  alfo  jhall 
be  commenfurable  to  either  ofthe  two  partes .  And  if  the  whole  magnitude  compofed  be  com* 


%An  other  way 
to  prone  tint 
the  lines  A,E s 
(,F,are  pro- 
pmmall. 


Demonflra- 

tionofthe 

firttpart* 


Demaritfratt' 
on  of  the  Jc-  ‘ 
eond  patt 
which  is  the 
conuer (e  of 
the  fir  it. 


<27?£>  tenth  cBooke 

menfurable  to  Any  one  of the  two  partes,thofe  two  partes fall  alfo  he  commenfurable :  which 
was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

A  Corollary  added  by  tJMontaureus. 

tA  Corollary » 

If  an  'Whole  magnitude  b  e  comm  en fur  able  to  one  of  the  two  magnitudes  Which  make  the  whole 
magnitude,  it  jhall  alfo  be  commenfurable  to  the  other  of  the  two  magnitudes .  For  if  the  whole  mag¬ 
nitude  A  C  be  commenfurable  vnto  the  magnitude  B  C,  then  by  the  a  .part  of  thys  15  Propofition:  the 
magnitudes  A  B  and  B  C  are  commenfurable  .  Wherefore  (by  the  firft  part  of  the  fame)  the  magnitude 
A  C  fhall  be  commenfurable  to  cither  of  thefe  magnitudes  A  B  and  B  C  .  This  Corollary  Them  vfeth 
in  the  demonftration  of  the  i7.Propofitionand  alfo  of  other  Proportions .  Ho  v/beit  Encode  left  it  out, 
for  that  it  feemed  eafie  as  in  a  maner  do  all  other  Corollaryes . 

,  _f  ft  '/■.-*  ’  .  •  T  T  r  .  '4.  .  ,r 

f/  The  13.  Theoreme.  The  16.  Propofition. 

If  two  magnitudes  incommenfur able  he  compofedf  he  lebole  magnitude  ak 
jo Jhall  he  incommenfur  able  Fnto  either  of  the  two  partes  coponentes.  And 
if  the  "tobole  he  incommenfur able  to  one  of  the  partes  compmentes  ythofe 
firfi  magnitudes  alfo  jhall  he  incommenfur  able. 


Demonflva- 
gion  of  the 
fir  It  part  by 
an  argument 
leadhtdg  to  an 
abfurditie . 


Demntfrati- 
on  of  the  fe- 

cond  pats 
leading  alfo  to 
an  impoffibi- 
iitte.And  this 
fecund  pan  is 
the  conuerfe  of 


they 'e-two  incommenfurable  magnitudes  A&&BC,  be  compofed,  or  added 
^ 1  '  *  JL  together .  T hen  1 fay,  that  the  whole  magnitude  A  C,  is  incommenfur  able  to 

fj,  either  of  thefe  magnitudes  A  B  and  B  C .  For  if  A  C  and  AB  be  not  inc om - 
f Amen  fur  able,  then  fome  one  magnitude  meafureth  them  (by  the  frfl  definition 
of  the  tenth  )  .Let  there  be fuch  a  magnitude,  if it  be  pvfible,  and  let  the fame 
be  D  .  ffow forafmttch  as  D  meafureth  C  A  and  A  B, 

it  alfo  meafureth  the  refidue  B  C,  dr  it  likewife  meafu-  d— - ? - - 

reth  A  B.  Wherefore  D  meafureth  A  B  and B  C.Wher- ,  p 
fore  ( by  'the frfl  defnitio  of  the  tenth )  the  magnitudes 

A  B  and  B  C  are  commenfurable .  But  it  is fuppofed  that  they  are  incommenfur  able :  which 
is  imfopble .  Wherefore  no  magnitude  doth  meafure  the  magnitudes  A  B  and  A  C.  Where - 
fore  the  magnitudes  C  A  and  AB  are  inc ommen fur able .  In  tike fort  alfo  may  we  pr  out, that 
the  magnitudes  A  C  and  C  B  are  inc  ommen  fur  able . 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  magnitude  A  C  be  incommenfurable  to  one  of  thefe  magnitudes 
A  B  or  BC,  and  frfi  let  if  he  incommenfurable  vnto  AB  .T  hen  I fay,  that  the  magnitudes 
A  3  and  B  C  are  incommenfurable .  For  if  they  be  commenfurable fome  one  magnitude  mea - 
fur&th  them  .-Let fome  one  magnitude  meafure  them,  &  let  the fame  be  D .  Nowforafmuch 
as  T)  meafureth  A  B  andB  C,  it  alfo  meafureth  the  whole  magnitude  A  C .  t_sfnd  it  meafu- 
reth  A'  B  :  Wherefore  1>  meafureth  thefe  magnitudes  C  A  and  A  B  .  Wherefore  C  A&  AB 
are  commenfurable .  And  they  are fuppofed  to  be  in  comen  fur  able :  which  is  impofible  Wher- 
fore  no  magnitude  mea  fureth  A  B  andB  C .  Wherefore  the  magnitudes  A  B  and  B  C  are  in- 
commenfurable .  And  in  like fort  may  they  be  proued  to  be  mcommenfurable,if  themagni- 
tiule  AC  be  fuppofed  to  be  incommenfurable  vnto  B  C .  if  therefore  there  be  two  magnitudes 
incommenfurable  compofed, the  whole  alfo  fall  be  incommenfurable  vnto  either  of  the  two 
paries  component,  and  if  the  whole  be  incommenfurable  to.  one  of  the  partes  component, thofs 

frf  magnitudes fall  be  incommenfurable :  which  was  required  to  be  proued,- 

* 

Corollary  added  by  CUont aureus- 

If  an  whole  magnitude  bee  incommenfurable  to  one  of  the  two  magnitudes  which  makgthe 
es  it  fall  alfo  be  incommenfurable  to  the  other  of  the  two  magnitudes.  For  it  the 

whole. 


ofSuclidesElementes .  FoLi^fy 

whole  magnitude  A  C  be  incomenfurable  vnto  the  magnitude  B  C,  then  by  the  z. part  of  this  xtf.Theo- 
reme.the  magnitudes  A BandB  C  fhall  beincommenfurablc .  Wherefore  by  the  firftpart  of  the  fame 
Theorerae,  the  magnitude  A  C  fhall  be  incomnienfurable  to  either  of  thefe  magnitudes  A  B  and  B  C, . 
This  Corollary  T heon  vfeth  in  the  demonftration  of  the  73„Theoreme3&  alfo  of  other  Propofmons . 

.  ,  •  .  ‘ ,snJr(v„ _  T  ^  ‘\  *  ■ 

«j[An  Affumpt. 

.  .  ' 

IfiWpon  a  right  line  he  applied  a  parallelogramme  wanting  in  figure  by  a 
fquare:  the parallelogramme fo  applied,  is  equall to  that  parallelogramme 
'which, is  contayned  lender  the  fegmentes  of  the  right  line ,  'Which fegmentes 
are  made  by  reafon  of  that  application. 

... 

Suppofe  that  vpon  a  right  line  A  B  be  applied  a  parallelograms  A  Granting  in forme 
by  the  fquare  GB  .T hen  I fay,  that  A  G  is  equall  vnto  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  A  D 
and  D  B, which  thing  is  of  it  felfmanifeJl.F  or 

forafinuch  as  G  Bis  a  fquare, therefore  the  line  G 

D  G  is  equall  vnto  the  line  D  B  :  and  the  pa-  -  —  - 

ralldograrmnc  A  G  is  that  which  is  contayned 
vnder  the  lines  ui  D  and  D  G,  that  is,  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  .  If  therefore  vp¬ 
on  a  right  line  be  applied  a  parallelogramme  yq — ■ — — - :  - „ 

wanting  in figure  by  a  fquare  :  the  parallelo-  ® 

grame  applied  is  equall  to  the  par. allelomame 

which  is  contayned  vnder  the  fegmentes  of  the  right  line,  which  are  made  by  reafon  of  that 
application,  which  was  required  to  be  demonfi rated. 

f  This  Ailumpt  I  before  added  as  a  C orollary  out  of  Fluffates  after  the  2  8 .  Pro¬ 
portion  of  the  lixt  booke. 

I  V 

fi  The  ~14.fr heoreme.  The  17.  Tropofition. 

If  there  be  two  right  lines  Wnequall,  arid  if Topon  the  greater  be  applied  a 
parallelogramme  equall  Ion  to  the fourth  part  of the fquare  of the  leffe  line, 
and'W  anting  in  figure  by  a  fquare,  if  alfo  the  parallelogramme  thus  appli* 
ed  deuide  the  line -where  Upon  it  is  applied  into  partes  commenfurable  in. 
length :  then  Jhall  the  greater  line  be  in  power  more  then  the  lefie,  by  the 
fquare  of a  line  commenfurable  in  length  Tmto  the  greater,  yfndif the grea* 
ter  he  in  power  more  then  the  lefie  by  the fquare  of  a  right  line  commenfu • 
r able  in  length  Imto  the  greater,  and  if alfo  Topon  the  greater  be  applied 
a  paralklogrdme  equall  Wnto  the fourth  part  of the fquare  of the  lefie  line, 
and  ■ Wanting  in  figure  by  a  fquare :  then faU  it  deuide  the  greater  line  in* 
to  partes  commenfurable. 

\Fppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  0/  and  BC,  be  vnequall:  of  which  let 
j  C  be  the  greater .  And  vpon  the  line  BC  let  there  be  applied  (by  the  28.  of 
\thefixt )  a parallelogramme  equall  vnto  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  being  the  lefie  (that  is,  equall  vnto  the  fquare  deferibed  vpon  half e  of 

FF.i.  the 


Conftruft'ton* 


Dcmonfiratio 
of  the  fir  ft 
part. 


Vemonftr*- 
tisn  of  the 
fecondpart 
"Which  it  the 
conuerfe  of 
thefirjl. 


3 


t  ^  <UW1  UA  fibres' 

and  DC  becmmienfw able  m  length  .  Then  l fay,  that  Q% iitnfgmf&wore then 

the  line  A,  by  the  fquare  of  aline  commenfurable  in 
length  vnto  the  fayd  line  B  C .  Demde  f  by  the  lo.of 
the  frjl  )the  line  B  C  into  two  e  quail partes  in  the  point 

M.Aqtd(  by  the  third  of thefrf)  vnto  the  line  D  F  put,'  '  v 

an  equall  line  E  F.Whetef ore  the  ref  due  DC  is  equall  > — -g-,. — 
vMc>  therefdueB  F.  And.  for af much  as  the  right  line  v  '( 

£  C  is  deluded  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  F,andinfptwo  vnequdU partes  fh  the  point 
D,therefore( by  the  q.ofthe fecond )  the  rectangle fgurecompkehendcdvnder  the  lines  B  D 
and  D  C.  together  with  thefquare  of  the  line  E  D,is  equall  to  thefquare  of the  line  E  C.And 
in  the fame  proportion  are  they  eche  being  taken fower  times  by  the  I  j.cftheffth'.  Wfierfore 
iljdhwhich  is  contained  -under  the  lines  B  D  and  D  C  taken  fower  times  together  wiihihep- 
fquareof  the  line  E.D  taken  alfo  fower  times, is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  C  taken 
fower  times. But  vnto  that  which  is  obtained  vnder  the  lines  BD  &  D  Cfoure  times  is  equal 
the fqtjpre  oft hell ns  A  By  fuppofition  .-for  the  parallelogramecontained  vnder  the  lines  BD 
and  D  C  once  is fuppofed  to  be  equallto  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  line  A .  Cfirid 
vnto  the fquare  of  the  line  D  E  taken  fonder  times  is -equall 'the fquare  of  the  line  D  F  ,  for 
the  Uni D  F  is  double  to  the  line  D  F.  <N(nd vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  C fewer  times  ta¬ 
ken  fis  equall  the  fquare  of  Use  line  B  Cfer-the  line  B  C  is  alfo  double  to  the  line  C  E.  Where¬ 
fore  the fqitares  of  the  lines  A  and  D  F  are  equall  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  UneBC.  Wherefore 
thefquare  of  the  fine  B  C,  is  greater  then  the  fquareof  the  line  A  ,•  by  thefquare  of  the  line 
Jtf'P .  Wherefore  t fie  greater  fine  BC  isinpowermore  then  the  lefe  line  A  ,  by  the fquare  of 
the  line  D  F. Now  reflet h  toproue  that  the  line  B  C  is  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  live 
D  F  Jfora  fnuch  as  byfupofition  the  line  BDis  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  DC ,  there- 
f§fk  (by  the  1 5. of  the  tenth  )  the  whole  line  B  C  is  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  D 
C:but  the  line  D  C  equallto  the  line  B  F .  Wherefore  the  whole  line  B  C  is  commenfurable  in 


fedth 

to  the  two  lines  B  F  and  C  D  taken  as  one  line:  therefore  the  lines  B  F  and  C  D  taken  as  one 
firte  are  commenfurable' in  length  to  the  line  F  D  (by  tide  depart  of  the  ry. of  the  tenth). Wher 
fore  alfo  tke'whok.km  BC.fi  comwfiftrakle  inkngfktQ  iktfine  F  D  by  the  firfi  part  of 
the fame. :  this  may  alfo  beproued  by  the  corollary  put  after  the  id.  proportion  of  this  booke. 
Wherefore  the  line  B  C  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  A  by  thefquare  of  a  line  commmen fi¬ 
nable  in  length  vnto  the  line  BC. 

J  But  now  fuppofe  that  the  line  B  C  be  in  power  more  then  the  tine  A ,  by  the fquare  of a 
fine  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  B  C.^yBnd  vpon  the  lineB  C  let  there  be  applied 
a  rectangle  parallel ograme  equall  vnto  the fourth  part  of the  fquare  of  the  line  A,and  wan¬ 
ting  in  figure  by  a  fquare,  and  let  the fayd  par allelograme  be  that  which  is  con  tained  vnder 
the  lines  B  D  andD  C.Then  mufi  we proue.that  the UneB  D  is  vnto  the  line  D  C commen¬ 
furable  in  length,  ffie fame  conductions  and  fuppofiti6ns,that  were  before,remayning,  we 
may  in  like  fort  prwe  that  the  line  B  C  is  in  power  mor&then  the  line  A ,  by  thefquare  of the 
line  F  D .  But  by fuppofitio  the  line  B  C  is  in  power  more  the  the  line  A  by  the  fquare  of  a  line 
cornen finable  vnto  it  in  length  .Wherf ore  the  lineB  C  is  vnto  the  line  F  D  comenfurable  in 
length  Wherefore  the  line  compofed  of the  two  lines  BF  and  D  Cis  comenfurable  in  length 
vnto the  line  FD  (hy  thf fecund  part  of the  1-5.  of the  tenth)  .  Wherefore  (by  the  12.  of  the 
tenth  or  by  the  fir  sip  art  of  the  1 5  .of  the  tenth )  the  line  B  C  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  compofed  of  B  Fund  D  C .  But  the  whole  line  conpofed  of  B  F  andD  C  is  cowmenfura- 
bfiirtkm  nhvnto  D  C.For  B  Ffas  before  hath  bene proiied)is  equall  to  DC .  Wherefore  the 

line 


of Suclides  ElemeniM  FoL 

Jim  B  C  is  comMenfurdbte  in  length  vnto  the  line  DC(  by  the  12 .  of  the  tenth )  .  Wherefore- 
alfo  the  line  B  D  is  commenfur  able  in  length  vnto  the  line  D  C( by  thefecond fart  of  the  is . ; 
eft' he  tenth )  .iftherfore  there  be  two  right  lines  vnequalyand  if  vpon  the  greater  be  applied 
a  parallelograme  equall  vnto  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  le  fe  and  wanting  inf  gun 
by  afquare ,  if  alfo  the  parallelogram  thus  applied  deuide  the  line  whereupon  it  is  applied 
into  partes  commenfur able  in  length:  then  jhall  the  greater  line  be  in  power  more  then  the 
lejfe  by  the fquare  of  a  line  commenfur  able  in  length  vnto  the  greater.  And  if  the  greater  be. 
in  power  more  then  the  lefe  by  the fquare  of  a  line  comme fur  able  in  length  vnto  the  greater, 
and ’  if  alfo  vponthe  greater  be  applied  a  fvrallelogr'ame  equall  vnto  the  fourth  part  of  the 
fquare  made  of the  lefe  and  wanting  in  fgure  by  afquare :  then  (hall  it  deuide  the  greater, 
line  into  partes  commenfur  able  in  length : which  was  required  to  beproued. 

Cam  fane  after  this  proportion  teacheth  how  we  mayredily  apply  vponthe  line 
B  C  a  parallelograme  equall  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  halfe  of  the  line  A,  and 
wanting  m  figure  by  a  fquare>after  this  maner. 

Deuide  the  line  BC  into  two  lines  in  fuch  fort  that  halfe  of  the  line  A  fhalbe  the  meane  propor¬ 
tions!!  betwene  thofe  two  lines,  which  is  poffible,when  as  the  line  B  C  is  fuppofed  to  be  greater  then 
the  line  A,and  may  thusbedone.Deuide  the  line  BC  into two  equal  partes  in  the  point  E  and  deferibe 
Vpon  the  line  B  C  a  femicircle  B  H  C.  And  vnto  the  line  BC, and  from  the  point  C  eredt  a  perpedicular 
line  C IC  and  put  the  line  C  K  equall  to  halfe  of  the  line  A . 

And  by  the  point  K  draw  vnto  the  line  E  C  a  parallel  line 
K  H  cutting  the  femicircle  in  the  point  Hj  (which  it  muft 
needes  cut,  fcrafmuch  as  the  line  B  C  is  greater  then  the 
line  A)  .And  fr6  the  point  H  draw  vnto  the  line  B  C  a  per 
pendiculat  hne  HD:  which  line  HD,  forafmuch  as  by  the 
54-ofthe  frit  it  is  equall  vnto  the  line  K  C,iliall  alfo  be  e- 
quail  to  haife  of  the  line  A  :  draw  the  lines  B  H  and  H  C . 

Wow  then  by  the,-:. of  the  third  the  angle  B  H  C  is  a  right 
angle .  Wherefore  by  die  corollary  of  the  eigh  t  of  the  fixe  A 

booke  the  line  HD  is  the  meane  proportiohall  betwene  1  — **-  <  — «  ■ 

the  lines  BDandDC  .Wherefore  the  halfe  of  the  line  A 

which  is  equall  vnto  the  line  HD  is  the  meane  proportio- 

nail  betwene  the  lines  B  D  and  D  C.  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  D  and  D  O 
is  equall  to  the  fourth  part  ofthe  fquare  of  theline  A.And  fo  if  vpon  the  lineB  D  be  deferibed  a  red- 
angle  parallelograme  haumg  his  other  fide  equall  to  the  line  D  C, there  ihalbe  applied  vpon  the  line  B 
a  rectangle  parallelograme  equall  vnto  the  fquare  of  halfe  ofthe  line  A  ,  and  wanting  in  figure  by  a 
fquare :  which  was  required  to  be  done.  °  b  * 

fThe  is.Tbeoreme.  The  18.  Tropojition- 

If  there  be  tfiea  right  lines  Unequally  and  iftyon  the  greater  be  applied  a 
parallelograme  equall  Ipnto  the fourth  part  of the  fquare  of  lejfe  9  andean* 

•  tingin  figure  by  afquare ,  if  alfo  the  parallelograme  ithus  applied  deuide 

the  line  thereupon  it  is  applied  into  partes  incommenfurable  in  length 
Z  fhe greater  line Jhalbe  in  poster  more  then  the  lejfe  line  by  the  fquare  of 

A  hie  incommenfurable  in  length  Imto  the  greater  line .  And  if  the  grea* 
ter  line  be  in  poster  more  then  the  lefe  line  yby  the fquare  of a  line  incomme* 

~  furable-in  length  Dnto  the  greater  ,  and  if  alfo  J>pon  the  greater  be  applied 
a  parallelograme  equall  Tonto  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  lejfe  and 
-■  '■^anting  in  figure  by  afquare:  then  Jhallit  deuide  the  greater  line  into 
partes  incommenfurable  in  length. 


*iib  *k 


Suppofe 


flew  to  de~ 
mde  the  hne 
B  C  redely  in 
/itch  fort  tu  tS 
required  in 
thepropo[ttdm 


DemnHra- 
1 10  of  the  firfl 

part. 


Dmoaffruti- 

cnoftbe/e- 

tondpdrt 

which  is  the 

tonxerfeoftbe 

former. 


Vppofe  that  thefe  trvo  right  lines  A  and  B  C  he  vnequall  the  one  to  the  other ,  of  . 
which  let  B  C  he  the  greater.  And  'upon  the fame  B  C  apply  a  pardlelograme  equall 
vnto  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  line  A, and  wanting  in fgure  hy  a  fquare: 
which how  to doo  was  before  taught  in  the  end  of  the 

former  propofition  .  And let  the  fa) d  parallelograms  B _ ?  _  E  v  c 

he  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  D  and 

D  C.  And  let  B  D  he  incommenfurahle  in  length  nun  » - * — - - 

to  DC. Then  I  fay  that  the  line  BC  is  in  power  more 

then  the  line  A, by  the  fqtiare  of  a  right  line  incommenfurahle  in  length  unto  the  line  B  C. 
FtrJl  let  the fame  order  of  conjlructton  ,and  demon  ft ration  he  ohferued  in  this  which  was  its 
the former  prop  of tion .  <f_And  we  may  in  like fort  proue  that  the  UneB  Cis  in  power  more  the 
the  line  A  by  thefquare  of  the  line  D  F.ffow  then  mufi  we  proue  that  the  lines  B  C  and  D  F 
ar e  incommenfurahle  in  length .  Forafmuch  as  by  fuppofitionthe  line  B  D  is  incommen fi¬ 
nable  in  legth  'unto  the  line  D  C:  therefore ( hy  the  iC.ofthe  tenth)  the  line  B  C  is  incommen¬ 
furahle  in  length  vnto  the  line  CD.  But  D  C  is  commen fur  able  to  thefe  two  lines  B  F  and 
D  C  added  together,  F  or  B  F  is  equal l  vnto  D  C. Where  fore  (  hy  the  1 3 .  of  the  tenth  )  BC  is 
incommenfurahle  vnto  thefe  two  lines  B  F  andD  C  compofed.  Wherefore  by  the  fecond part 
of  the  16. of the  tenth  the  line  compofed  of  the  lines  B  F  and  D  C  taken  as  one  line  is  incom¬ 
menfurahle  in  length  •unto  the  line  F  D  Wherefore  hy  thefrjl part  of  the  fame  1 6.propofiti- 
on  the  line  B  C  is  incommenfurahle  in  length  "unto  the  line  F  D  .  Wherefore  the  line  B  C  is 
in  power  more  then  the  line  A  hy  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurahle  in  length  'unto  the 
line  B  C.  ' 

BuPnow fuppofe  that  the  line  B  C  he  in  power  more  then  the  line  A  by  the fquare  of  a  line 
incommenfurahle  in  length  vnto  B  C .And  vpon  the  line  B  C  let  there  be  applied  a  parallelo¬ 
gramme  equall  vn  to  the  fourth  part  of  the fquare  of  the  line  A,  and  wanting  in  fgure  hy  :a, 
fquare, and  let  the  ftid parallelogramme  he  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  BD& 
D  C.T henmuft  we  proue  that  the  line  B  D  is  vnto  the  line  D  C  incommenfurahle  in  legth. 
The  fame  order  of conftruttion  and  demonft ration  being  kept, we  may  in  like fort  proue  that 
thefne  B  C  is.  inpower  more  then  the  line  A  by  thefquare  of  the  line  F  D  .But  nowfby fup- 
pojhion)  the  line  B  C  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  A  by  thefquare  of  a  line  incommen fu¬ 
mble  in  length  vnto  B  C.  Wherefore  the  line  B  C  is  vn to  the  line  F  D  incommenfurahle  in 
length. Wher fere  the  line  compofed  of  B  F  and  DC  taken  as  one  line,  fall  he  incommenfu¬ 
rahle  in  length  to  the  line  F  D  (by  the  fecond  part  ofthei6.ofthe  tenth):  wherefore  alfo  by 
the fr ft  part  of  the  fame, the  line  B  C fall  be  incommenfurahle  in  length  to  the  line  compo¬ 
fed  of the  lines  B  F  and  D  C.But  the  line  compofed  of  the  lines  B  F  and  DC  iscommenfu- 
rahkin  length  to  the  line  D  C  (for  that  B  F  (as  before  hath  bene  proued)  is  squall  to  D  C). 
Wher  fore  the  line  B  C  is  incomin fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  D  C  (by  the  13.  of  the  tenth). 
Wherefore  by  the fecondpartofthe  16.  of  the  tenth, the  line  B  D  is  incommefurahle  m legth 
'unto  the  line  D  C.  iftherfore  there  he  two  right  lines  vnequall, and  if 'upon  the  greater  he 
applieda  parallelogramme  equall  vnto  the  fourth  part  of the fquare  of  the  leffe  line,&wan' 
-ting  in  fgure  by  a fquare,  if  alfo  the  parallelogramme  thus  applied  dcuidc  the  line  wherupon 
His  applied  into  partes  incommenfurahle  in  length:  the  greater  line  fall  he  in  power  more 
then  the  leffe  line  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurahle  in  length  vnto  the  greater, 
Ofndifthe  greater  line  be  inpower  more  then  the  leffe, by  the  fquare  of  a  We  incommenft- 
rahlein  length  vnto  the  greater, and-if alfo  'Upon  the  greater  be  applied  a  parallelogramme 
equallvnto  the fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  leffe  line, and  wanting  in fgure  by  a  fquare, 
thenfallit  deutde  the  greater  line  into  partes  incommenfurahle  in  length  :  which  was  re- 


on, 


This  Propofltion  may  alfo  be  deraonflrated  by  the  former  propofirion^iam«fy,  the  firfl  part  of  diU 


Fol,i\6% 


An  other  de- 
monUration 
ly  an  argumeS 
leading  to  an 
abfur&tie. 


by  the  (econd  part  of  theformer.and  the  fecond  part  of  this  by  the  firif  part  of  the  form  erjby  an  argu¬ 
ment  leading  to  an  ablurditie.  For  as  touching  the  firfi  part  of  this  propofiuon,the  line  B  C  cqntayning. 
in  power  more  then  the  line  A  by  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  D,  if  the  line  B  C  be  not  incommenfurable  vn 
to  the  line  FX),  then  is  it  commenfurable  vnto  it.  Wherfore  ( by  the  fecond  part  of  the  17  prcpoiiaon) 
the  lines  B  D  and  D  G  alio  are  commenfurable, which  is  impoffible,for  they  are  Hippo  fed  to  beincom- 
teenfuFable.  So  likewife  as  touching  the  fecond  parte  of  the  fame,  the  line  B  C  contayning  in  power 
more  then  the  line  A  by  the  fquare  of  the  line  FD, if  the  line  D  B  benotincomnieniurable  to  the  lyne 
D  C,then  is  it  commenfurable  vnto  it  :  wherfore(by  rhe  fir/1  part  of  the  i7.proppfition)  the  lines  B  C 
and  F  D  are  alfo  commenfurableywhich  were  abfurde.For  the  lines  B  C  and  F  D  ai  e  fupp'6  fed  to  be  in- 
commenfurable  :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

cy  An  afiuinpr. 

Fora  [much  as  it  hath  bene  pro  tied  that  lines  commenfurable  in  length,  are  alwayes  alfo  An  Afiumpu 
commenfurable  in  power, but  lines  commenfurable  in  power  are  not  alwayes  commenfurable 
in  length, but  may  be  in  length  both  commenfurable  and  alfo  incommenfurable:  it  is  mani - 
fcfjhat  if  vnto  the  line  propounded, which  is  called  rationall  ofpnrpofe,  a  certayne  line  be 
cbmenfurahle  in  length, it  ought  to  be  called  rational!  and  corner  fur  able  vnto  it, not  only  in 
length, but  alfo  in  power :  for  lines  commenfurable  in  length  are  alfo  alwayes  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  power. But  if  vnto  the  line  propounded  which  is  called  rationall  ofpurpofe,  a  certayne 
line  be  commenfurable  in  power, then  if  it  be  alfo  commenfurable  vnto  it  in  length,  it  is  cal¬ 
led  rationall  and  commenfurable  vnto  it  both  in  length  and  in  power. But  againe  if vnto  the 
fud  linegeuen  which  is  called  rationall, a  certayne  line  be  commenfurable  in  power, and  in- 
commenfurable  in  length,  that  alfo  is  called  rationall, commenfurable  in  power  onely. 

An  annotation  ofProclus. 

H c  calleth  thofe  lines  ration  all, which  are  vnto  the  rationall  linefrjl fet  comenfurablem 
length  &  in  power, or  in  power  only.  And  there  are  alfo  other  right  lines,  which  are  vnto  the 
rationall  Imefrfifet *  in  commenfurable  in  length ,  and  are  vnto  it  commenfurable  in  power 
only' ,  an  cl  therf  ore  they  are  called  rationall,  <fr  commefurable  the  one  to  the  other  .*• for  which 
caufe  they '  ah  rational!. But  euen  the fe  lines  may  be  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other, 
either  in  length,  and  therefore  tn fewer,  or  els  in  fewer  onely  .  Now  if  they  be  commenfu¬ 
rable  in  length, then  are  thofe  lines  called  rationall,  commenfurable  in  length, but  yet  fo  that 
they  he  vnderft and  to  be  in  power  commenfurable:  but  if  they  be  commenfurable  the  one  to 
the  other  in  fo\  ver  onely, they  alfo  are  called  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely , 


^ A  Corollary; 

And  that  two  lines  or  more  being  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rational  line  firft 
fet^are  alfo  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other  in  length  ,hereby  it  is  manifeihfor  forafmuch  as  they 
are  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  fir  ft  fee,  but  thofe  magnitudes  whichc 
are  commenfurable  to" one  and  the  felfe  fame  magnitude;are  alfo  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other 
(by  the  11 .of the  tenth)  -wherfore  the  rationall  lines, commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rational  lyne  foil 
fet,  are  alfo  commenfurable  in  length  the  one  to  the 
ot'nir.Andas  touching  thofe whichare rationall  com  A 

pieufurablein.pbv/er  onely  to  the  rationall' line  firlt  *  1  *  1  -B 

fefjthey  al!b  muft  needes  be  at  the  lead  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  power  the  one  to  the  other.  For  forafmuch  as  3  _ _ _ _ 

their  fquarcs  are  rationall  they  (ball  bee  commenfu¬ 
rable  to  the  fquare  of  the  rationall  line  firft  fet.  Wher¬ 
fore  by  the  is.  ofthisbookeuhey  are  alfo  commenfu-  C  _ _ 

fable  the  one.  to  '.the  other.  Wherefore  their  lines  arc-  ••  ....  •» 
at  the  lead  commenfurable  in  power  the  one  to  the 


•A  CotoUary 


Mmimnm-t 


gqyver  onely, that  is,  incommenfurable  tn  length  vnto  it.  Let  there  be  alfo  an  other  line  C  commen 

FF.iij,  fura 


m  ■ 


Canfe, 

Caufeofm • 
f  resting  the 
difficulty  of 
this  booh* 
Note* 


Conflrudhen. 

Demonilra- 
tion » 


Differs  cafes 
inthispropo « 
fition. 
The/etond 
cafe* 


finable  in  length  to  the  lyneB  {'which  is  polfible  by  the  principles  of  this  booke.JNow  by  the  13  .of 
the  tenth, it  is  manifeil  that  the  line  C  is  incommenfurable  inlength  vnto  the  line  A.  But  the  iquare  of 
rhelineAis  comefurable  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  B  by  fuppofition, and  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  is  alfo 
commenfurable  to  the  fquare  ofthe  lineB  by  fuppofition.  Wherefore  by  the  iz.of  this  booke,  the 
fquare  of  the  line  C  is  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A.  Wherfore  by  the  definition,the  line 
C  ihall  be  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  line  A,as  alfo  is  the  line  B. Wherefore  there 
are  geuen  two  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  rationall  line  firll  fet,and  comme- 
iurable  in  length  the  one  to  the  other. 


Here  is  to  be  noted, which  thing  alfo  we  before  noted  in  the  definitions,  that  Cans- 
pane  and  others  which  followed  him,  brought  in  thefe  phrafes  of  (peaches,  to  call  fbme 
lynes  rationall  in  power  onely ,and  other  fome  rationall  in  length  and  in  power,  w  hich 
we  cannot  finde  that  Eu  elide  euer  vfed.For  thefe  wordes  in  length  and  in  power  are  ne- 
uerreferredto  rationalitieorirrationalitie,but  alwayes  to  the  commenfurabilitie  or 
incommenfurablitieoflines.Whichperuertingofwordes(as  was  there  declared) hat 
much  increafed  the  difficulty  and  obfcurencs  of  this  booke.  And  now  I  thinkeit  good 
agayne  to  put  you  in  minde,that  in  thefe  propofitions  which  follow,wemuft  euer  haue 
before  our  eyes  the  rationall  line  firft  fet,  vnto  which  other  lines  compared  are  either 
rationall  or  irrationalfaccording  to  their  commenfurability  or  incommenfurabilitie. 


ft  The  16.  Tbeoreme.  The  19.  Tropoftion. 

.4  recdangle  figure  comprehended  Wilder  right  lines  commenfurable  in 
kngthcy  being  rationall  according  to  one  0/  the  forefaide  H? ayes :  is  r a* 
tion  all. 


fVppofe  that  this  rectangle  figure  AC  be  comprehended  vnder  thefe  right  lines  A 
Band  BC  being  commenfurable  in  length,, and  rationall  according  to  one  of  the 
Jforefaid  wajes.Then  I  fay  that  the  fuperfeies  A  C  is  rationall  fie feribe  (by  the  46* 
of the  fir fi )  vpon  the  line  ABa  fquare  AD. 

Wherfore  that  fquare  A  D  is  rationality  the 
definition.  Andforafmuchas  the  line  A  B  is 
commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  BC , 
and  the  line  A  B  is  equallvnto  the  lyne  B 
therefore  the  lyne  B  D  is  commenfurable  in 
length  vnto  the  line  B  C.  And  as  the  line  B  D 
is  to  the  line  BC,fo  is  the  fquare  D  A  to  the 
fuperfiries  A  C  (by  thefirfi  of  the fixt)  :but  it  is  proued  that  the  line  B  D  is  commenfurable 
vnto  the  line  B  C,  wherfore  ( by  the  1  o  .of  the  tenth )  the  fquare  D  A  is  commenfurable  vnto 
the  rediangle  fuperfiries  A  C. But  the  fquare  D  A  is  rationally  wherfore  the  rediangle  fu- 
perfiries  AC  alfo  is  rationall  by  the  definition.  A  rectangle  figure  therfore  comprehended 
vnder  right  lines  commenfurable  in  length  fieyng  rationall accordyng  to  one  of  theforefayd 
psayes  is  rationall ;  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Whereas  in  the  former  demonftration  the  fquare  was  deferibed  vpon  the  IefTe  line,  we  may  alfo 
demonftrate  the  Propofiton,if  we  deferibe  the  fquare  vpon  the  greater  line,and  that  after  thys  maner. 
Suppofe  that  the  reoangle  fuperfiries  B  C  be  contayned  of  thefe  vnequall  lines  A  B  and  A  C,  which 
let  be  rationall  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other  in  length.  And  let  the  line  A  C  be  the  greater.And 

vpow 


of  Suclides  Elementes. 


FoLtapj. 


upon  .he  Hne  A  C  defcribe  the  fquare  D  C  .  Then 
It  fay,  chat  the  parallelogram  me  BC  is  rationall. 
for  the  line  A  C  is  com  menfurable  in  length  vnto 
the  line  A  B  by  fuppolition ,  and  the  line  D  A  is  e- 
quall  to  the  line  A  C  .  Wherefore  the  line  D  A  is 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  AB  .  But 
what  proportion  the  line  DA  hath  to  the  line 
A  B,  the  fame  hath  the  fquare  D  C  to  the  para’lc- 
logrammeC  B  (by  the  firll  of  the  fixt) .  Wherefore 
(by  the  io.  of  this  booke)  the  fquare  D  C  is  com¬ 
menfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  C  B .  Butitis 
manifett,  that  the  fquare  D  C  is  rational!,  for  that 
it  is  the  fquare  of  a  rationall  line,  namely,  AC. 
Wherefore  (by  the  definition)  the  parallelogram e 
alfo  C  B  is  rationall. 


Moreouer,forafmuch  as  thofe  two  former  demonflrations  feeme  to  fpeake  of  that  parallelograme 
which  is  made  of  two  lines,  of  which  any  one  may  be  the  line  firll  fet,which  is  called  the  firll  rationall 
line,  from  which(wc  favd)ought  to  be  taken  the  meafures  of  the  other  lines  compared  vnto  it,  and  the 
other  iscommeftirablein  length  to  the  fame  firll  rationall  line,  which  is  the  firll  kinde  of  rationall  lines 
comenfurablein  length  :  I  thinkeit  good  here  to  fetan  other  cafe  of  the  other  kinde  of  ratio  nail  lines, 
of  lines  I  fay  rationall  comenfurablein  length  compared  to  an  other  rationall  line  firll  fct,to  declare  the 
generall  truth  of  this  Theoreme,and  that  we  might  fee  that  this  particle  according  to  any  «fthe  farefod 
wajes  was  not  here  in  vaine  put.  Now  then  fuppofe  firll  a  rationall  line  AB  .Let  there  be  alfo  a  paral¬ 
lelograme  C  D  contayned  vnder  the  lines 

CE  and  ED,  which  lines  let  be  rationall,  C _ _ _ _ E _ _ F 

that  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  *  '  H  ' 

firll  rationall  line  propounded  A  B.  How- 

beit, letthofe  two  lines  CE  and  ED  be 

diuers  an d  vnequali  lines  vnto  the  firll  ra~  " 

tionallline  AB  .Then  Ifay, thatthe  pa- 

rallelogramme  C  D  is  rationall .  Defcribe 

the  fquare  of.the  line  D  E,  which  let  be  t~ - - — i - — ■*- - — i - - —  -  -  -  - 

E>F  .  Firllitismanifell(  by  the  iz.of this  ^ 

booke)that  the  lines  C  E  &  E  D,are  com¬ 
menfurable  in  legth  the  one  to  the  other-  A  ,  - _  A 

For  either  of  them  is  fuppofed  to  be  com¬ 
menfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A  B.  But  the  line  ED  is  equal!  to  the  line  EF.  Wherefore  the  line 
C  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  F .  But  as  the  lme  C  E  is  to  the  line  E  F,  lo  is  the  paralle¬ 
logramme  C  D  to  the  fquare  D  F  (by  the  firll  of  the  fixt)  .  Wherefore  (by  the  io.of  this  booke  )  the  pa¬ 
rallelogram  me  C  D  lhall  be  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  D  F .  But  the  fquare  D.F  is  commenfurable 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  which  is  the  firll  rationall  line  propounded  .  Wherfore  fby  the  u.of  this 
booke)  the  parallelogramme  C  Dis  commenfurable.  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B-.  But  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A  B  is  rationall  (by  the  definition)  .Wherforebv  the  definition  alfo  of  rationall  fiaures,the  pa¬ 
rallelogram  me  C  D  lhall  be  rationall.  .  r 

Now  relleth  an  other  cafe  of  the  thjrde  kinde  of  ratiortalllines  commenfurable  in  length  the  one 
to  the  other  jwhich  are  to  the  rationall  line  AB  firll  fet  commenfurable  in  power  onely,  and  yet  are 
therfore  rationall  lines.  And  let  the  lines  C  E  and  E  D  be  comenfurable  in  length  the  one  to  the  other. 
Now  then  let  the  felfe  lame  conftrufiion  remaine  that  was  in  the  former,:  fo  that  let  the  lines  C  E  and 
E  D  be  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely  vnto  the  line  A  B  .  Burlet  them  be  commenfurable  in 
length  the  one  to  the  other.  Then  1  fay,  that  in  this  cafe  alfo  the  parallelogramme  C  D  is  rationall.Firli 
it  may  be  proued  as  before,  that  the  parallelogramme  C  D  is  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  D  F.Wher- 
fore  (by  the  it. of  this  booke)  the  parallelogram  rob  CD  frail  be  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the 
dine  A  B .  But  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  i.s  rationall .  Wherefore  (  by  the  definition)  the  parallelograme 
C  D  lhall  be  alfo  rationall .  This  cafe  is  well  to  be  noted.  For  it  ferueth  to  the  dcmonllration  and  vn- 
derllandingofthe-af  .Propofitioo  ofthis  booke ,  !  } 


fThe  17.  Tbeoreme.  The  20.  Propofition. 

.  . 

Ifopon  a  rationall  tine  be  applied  a  rationall  reB angle  parallelogramme: 
the  other fide  that  maketh  the  breadth  thereof  fiall  be  a  rationall  line  and 
commenfurable  in  length  Ipnto  that  Ime^herupon  the  ratmall  paraUelo * 
gramme  is  applied, 

FF.iiij,  Suppofe 


The  fir  ft  hind 

ofrationaU 
lines  com-, 
menfurable  vt 
length* 


This  particle 
in  the  propqft * 
t ion  (accor¬ 
ding  to  any  of 
the  fore  fay  de 
wayesj  was 
not  cn  yayne 
put . 

Thefecond 
kinde  of  rati' ' 
on  all  lines  co~ 
menfurable  in, 
lengih , 

The  third 
cafe* 


The  third 
kinde  of  ratio* 
nail  lines  com* 
menfurable  m 
length* 

The  fourth 
cafe* 


1'bh  propor¬ 
tion  is  the  con 
usrfeofthe 
former  propo- 
Jhion . 

Conffruftion . 


Tkmonfra- 

tion. 


VU 


tAn  AJJumpt. 


Conftructhn  * 
Demon  flra - 
tion. 


The  tenthTookf  • 

|  Vppofe  that  this  rati  on  all  rectangle  parallelogramme  \_X  C,  be  applied  vpon 
the  line  A  B,  which  let  be  rationall  according  to  any  one  of  the  forefaid  wayes 
(whether  it  be  the fir  Ft  rationall  line Jet,  or  any  other  line  commenfurable  to 
the rationall line frf fet,and  that  in  length  and  in  power,  cr  in  power  onely  for 
one  of  thefe  three  wayes, as  was  declared  in  the  Afampt  put  before  the  1 9 .  Propoftion  of  this 
booke,  is  a  line  called  rationall)  and  making  in  breadth  the  line  B  C.Then  l fay, that  the  line 
B  Css  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  B  A .  Defcribe  (by  the  p. of  the 
frf )  vpon  the  line  B  A  a  fquare  A  D .  Wher- 
fore  ( by  the  9  .defnitio  of  the  tenth)  the fquare 
A  D  is  rationall  .  But  the  parallelogramme 
A  C  alfo  is  rationall  (by  fuppofi tion)  .  Where¬ 
fore  (ly  the  corner [ion  of  the  definition  of  ra¬ 
tionall  figures,  or  by  the  12.  of  this  booke)  the 
fquare  D  A  is  commenfurable  vnto  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  A.  C  .But  as  the fquare  D  A  is 
to  the  parallelogramme  A  C,fois  the  line  D  B  to  the  line  B  C  (by  the  frf  of  the fxt )  Wher - 
fore  {by  the  jo.  of  the  tenth)  the  line  D  B  is  commenfurable  •vnto  the  line  B  C .  But  the  line 
D  B  is  e  quail  nan  to  the  line  B  A .  Wherefore  the  line  A  B  is  comenfurable  vnto  the  line  B  C. 
But  the  line  A  B  is  rationall.  Wherefore  the  line  B  C  alfo  is  rationall  and  commenfurable  in 
length  vnto  the  line  B  A.  If  therefore  vpon  a  rationall  line  be  applied  a  rationall  reel  angle 
parallelogramme,  the  other  fde  that  maketh  the  breadth  therGf  jhall  be  a  rationall  line  com- 
men  fur able  in  length  vnto  that  line  whereupon  the  rationall  parallelogramme  is  applied: 
which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 

An  Aflinnpt. 

-  m.  |  J  -J„  .  .  |  ,  ‘  |  .  r  •  v« 

A  line  contayning  in  power  an  irrationalifuperfdesfs  irrational!. 

*5  ft  •  T  i  • '>  Z-]  •  .  \  C  ,  ‘r  *.  •  ^  i 

.  Suppofe  that  the.  line  A  B  coiaine  in  power  an  irrationall fuperfcies,that  isjetthe fquare 
defers  bed  vpon  the  line  A  B,  be  equall  vnto  an  ir rati  on  all fuperfeies .  'Then  l  fay,  that  the 
tine  A  B  is irrationalLFor  if the  line  f  B be  rationall,  thf frail 
the  fquare.  of  the  line  A  B  be  alfo  rationall  >  F.orfo  was  it  put  in  A  B 

the  def nitrons .  But  (by  fuppof tion  )  it  is  not  .  Wheriforrthe  *  ' 

line  A  B  is  irrationall ,  Aline  therefore  contayning  in  power  an  irrationall fuperfeies,  is  ir¬ 
rationall. 


\t  ifr  . 


f  The  18.  Theorem .  Then. Tropofition. 

. ';rrf  "  /•  '*'k  Q.  r  'AZh.  ifh  -•  ;  .!t  rvi*l  l  •  .  .  a-  '  -  : . * 

re Sidngle  figure  comprehended  'Pnder  two  rationall  right  lines  com* 
menfur able  in  power  onely gis  irrationall .  jfnd  the  line  ’Htbicb  in  power 
contayneth  thdt  reSlangle  figure  is  irrationally  (tsr  is  called  a  medidll  line . 


\perfcies  A  C.hkratipnffc^nfthy  hhe.  whkh.  cwtyynctf  it  in  power  is  irratio¬ 
nall, ahdis called  amediallline  fpeferibe  (by -the  ^tl.ofthejtrf )  vpon  the  line 
ABdfquareA  D  .  Wherefore  the  fquare  A  D  is  rationall .  Andforafmncb  as  the  line  A  B 
is  vnto  the  line  B  C  incommensurable  in  length,  for  they  are  fuppofed  to  be  commenfurable 
in  power  onely,  and  the  line  A  B  is  equall  vnto  the  line  B  D,  therefore  alfo  the  line  B  D  is 

*  *  '  *•  vnto 


v 1  vV  ‘  %v  - 
.  .  ».w.  ■  •  • 

V.  ..  h 


vnto  the  line  B  C  incommenfurable  in  length .  C/And  as  the  lint  D  B  is  to  the  line  8  effort 
the  fquare  AD  to  the parallelogramme  A  C  ( by  the  fir  ft  of the fixt )  .  Wherefore  { by  the  to* 
of  the  tenth )  the  fquare  D  A  is  vnto  theparallelogramme  A  C  incommenfurable ,  But  the 
fquare  D  A  is  ration  all  Wherefore  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  A  C  is  irrationall .  Where* 
fore  alfo  the  line  that  contayneth  the  fuper- 
ficiesA  Can  power ,  that  is  wlsofe  fquare  is 
equall  vnto  the  parallelogramme  A  C,  is 
(by  the  Affumpt going  before )  irrationall. 

And  it  is  called  a  mediall  line,  for  that  the 
fquare  which  is  made  of  it,  is  equall  to  that 
which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,and  therefore  it  is(  by  the fecond part  of  the 
1 7. of the  fixt )  a  means  proportionall  line  betwenethe  lines.  ABandBC  .A  reel  angle  f* 
eure  therefore  comprehended  vnder  rati  on  all  right  lines  which  are  commen fur  able  in  power 
onely,  is  irrationall .  And  the  line  which  in  power  contajneth  that  reft  angle figure  isirra- 
timall ,  and  is  called  a  mediall  lin$. 

At  this  Proposition:  doth  Euc/ide  RrBc  entreateof  the  generation  and  produdion  of 
irrationall  lines .  And  here  he  fearcheth  out  the  firft  kmde  of  them,  which  he,  calleth  a 
mediall  line .  And  the  definition  therof  is  fully  gathered  and  taken  outof  this  2 1  .Pro¬ 
portion  ,  which  is  this .  A -mediall  line  is  an  irrationall  line  whofe  fquare  is  equall  to  a 
retftangled  figure  contayned  of  two  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  It 
is  called  a  mediall  line,  as  Them  rightly  fay  th,  for  twocaufes,  fir  ft  for  that  the  power  or 
fquare  which  it  produceth  is  equall  to  a  mediall  fuperficies  or  parallelogramme  .  For 
as  thatline  which  produceth  a  rationall  fquare,  is  called  a  rationall  line,  and  that  line 
which  produceth  an  irrationall  fqtiare, ora  fquare  equall  to  an  irrationall  figure  gene¬ 
rally  is  called  an  irrationall  limf- :  fo  is  that  line  which  produceth  a  mediall  fquare,  ora 
fquare  equall  to  a  mediall  fuperficies,  called  byfpeciall  namea  mediall  line .  Secondly 
it  is  called  a  mediall  line,becaufe  it  is  a  meane  proportionall  betwene  the  two  lines  co- 
menfurable  in  power  onely  which  comprehend  the  mediall  fuperficies. 

!  •  i  .  I  <  _  -■  '  "X  ; 

A  Corollary  added  by  Flufates. 

Arcftangte  g/trAUlogrxfhme  csnfAjned  ’vnder  a  r Alien  all  line  *nd  a»  irrttt'ton/ill  line,  is  irrationall .  For  if 

the  line  A  B  be  rationall,  ah  d  if  the  line  C  B  be  irrationall,  they  fhall  be  incommenfurable .  But  as  the 
line  B  D  (which  is  equall  to  .the  line  BA)  is  to  the  line  B  C,  fo  is  the  fquare  A  D  to  the  parallelograme 
A  C  .  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  A  C  fhall  be  incommenfurable  to  the  fquare  A  D  which  is  ra¬ 
tionall  (for  that  the  line  A  C  wheruponit  is  deferibed  is  fuppofed  to  be  rationall)  .  Wherefore  the  pa- 
rallelagrammeAC  which  is  contayped  vnder  the  rational!  line  A  B*  and  the  irrationall  line  B  C,  is 
irrationall.  f  - 


A   B  y 


To  i  A  0  ~ 

& 

* 

A 


An  AfTumpt. 


If  there  he two  right fines ,as  the firjl  is  to  the  fecond, fo  is  the  fquare  lohich 
is  defer ibed  ypon  the  firjl, to  the  parallelograme  lehich  is  contained  "tinder 
the  two  right  lines. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C  IT  hen  I  fay  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to 
the  line  B  C  fio  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B,  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B 
and  BC.  Defer ibe(by  the  of.  of thefrf)vpon  the  line  A  B  a  fquare  A  D  .And  make  perfect 
the  parallelograme  A  C.^igw for  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  tothelineB  C  (for  the  line  A  B,  is 
equallto  the  lineB  D)fo  is  the fquare  AD  totheparalklograme  CA  by  the  firfi  of  the  fixt 

and 


Diffinition  of 
a  mediall  tine* 


%/l  QreHarjo 


This  affumpt 
is  nothing  els 
but  a  part  of 
thefirilpro - 
pofittoti  of  th $ 
fins  fo&kg* 


4 


tycmbnttra- 

tion. 


% 


Q 


& 


ini  AD  is  thefquarewhichi'i  made  of  the 
line  A  B, and  AC  is  that  which  is  contained 
•under  the. lines  B  D  and  B  C, that  is,  vnder 
the  lines  A  B  &  B  C:therfore  as  the. line  A  B 
is  to  fheiine  B  Cfo  is  the  fqUaredefcribed  vp 
poh  the  the  line  AB\to  the  rectangle  figure 
contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  fi.B  C.fffnd 
cofyuerfedly  as  the  parallelograme  which  is 
contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B,fo  is  the  line  C  Bio 
the  line  B  A. 

x*  *• 

f  The  ip.Theoreme. 


c 

. ■  .;r" 

•8  D 

V  •  . 

y 

(a 

v  I 


The  22.  Tropojition. 


If  'Bpon  a  rationallline  be  applied  the  fquare  of  a  me  di all  line:  the  other 
fide  that  maketh  the  breadth  thereof JbalbefdtioUall,  and  hicommetfura* 

■  hie ■  in  length  to  the  line  wherupon  the parallelograme  is  applied. 

Tppfi  ‘hat  A  lea  mediaUUne,andlet  BC  be  a  line  rationall ,  andvpon  the  lint 
^  G  deferibe  a  rectangle  parallel ograme  equal l  vntothe  fquare  oftheUneA ,  and 
ht  the fame  beBD  making  in  breadth  the  line  CD  .F hen  I fay  that  the  line  C  D 
is  rationall  a nd  inc omerfnrable  in  length  vnto  the  line  C  B .  For  for afnuch  as  A  is  a  mediaU 
line, it  container h  in  power  (by  the  21. of  the  tenth )  a  rectangle  parallelograme  comprehen¬ 
d'd  vncler  rationall-  right,  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely  .Suppofe  that  it  containe  in. 
powert  he  parallelogram  G  F  ■  and  by  fuppofition  it  alfo  contaimth  in  power  theparallelo- 
grarne:BF)  .  Wherefore  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  B  D  is  equal!  vnto  the par allelo-  n  6 

grame  G  F:and  it  is  alfo equiangle  vn¬ 
to  it  ,  for  that  they  are  ech  rectagle.  But 
in  parallelogrames  equall  and- equiangle 
'  the  fides  which  containe  the  e  quail  an-  ^ 
gles,are  rcciprocall  (  by  the  14.  of  the  " 
fixt) .  Wherfore  what  prop  ortio  the  line  ' 

B  C  hath  to  the  line  E  G ,  the  fame  hath 
the  line  E  F  to  the  line  C  D  .  T berefore  ^ 

(h.y.  the. 22.  ofthcfixL ).  as  the  fquare  of 
the  line  B  C  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
EG  ,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  E  F  to  -r  * 

the  fquare  oft  he  line  CD.  But  the fqiiare  of  the  line  BC  is  commenfurable  vnto  the fquare 
qf  the  line  E  Q  (by  fuppjfjfifon).  For.  either,  of  them,  is  rationall.  Wherefore  (by  the  the  10.  of 
the  tenth Jthe fquare  of  the  line  EF  is  commenfurable  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  Uni  CD  .  But 
the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  is  rationalLwhereforg  ihefqusirt  of  the  line  C  D  is  likewife  ratio- 
nail.  Wherefore  the  line  C  D  is  rational.  And  forafmnch  as  the  line  E  F  is  incommenfurable 
in  length  vnto  the  line  EG  ( for  they  are fuppofed  to  be  commenfurable  in  power  onely)  .But 
as  the  Ime  E  F  is  to  the  line  E  G,fo(  by  the  ajfumpt  going  before  )is  the fquare  of  the  line  E  F 
to  the  parallelograme  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines. E  F  and  E  G .  Wherefore  (  by  the 
10,  of  the  tenth  )  the fquare  of  the  line  EF  is  incommenfurable  vnto  the  parallelograme 
whichis  contained  vnder  the  lines  F  E  and  EG  .But  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  • 
the  fquare  of  the  line  CJ)  is  commenfurable  >  fir  it  is  protted  that,  either  fif  them  is, 

a  rationall 


QfEuciuiesEkmetttss*  "x  FoL z^pe 

a:ratiomll tine. And  thdt'vdsbMhihntaincd-umderlht  lines  D  C  Ond-CBis  commenfurabk 
‘'unto  that  which,  is  canfam^dvndek  th^'Un&nX^dfcdE  .  F ar-fbey  areb'othreqmllHthc 
fquare  of  the  line  A  Wherefore ( by  the  13  .of the  tenth  )  the fquare  of  the  line  C  D  is  incom¬ 
menfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  v&dertf, (lines  D  C  and  C  B.  But  as  the fquare  of  the 
line  C  D  is  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  line's  D  C  and  C  B,fo  (  by  the  ajfumpt  going 
bf ore)is  theJime.D,C  tophe  ■Unp.Cr^.:^h^tforeibp  /Jngip..Cisdncqmntenfur4blem  length 
'Onto  the  line  t  B 7  Whereforethe  TmeC  D  is  rati  (nail and inconirnenfurable  in  length  vntq 
the  line  C  B.  if  therefore  'upon  a  rationall  line,  he  appliedihe fquare  of  a  medial! line  ,  the  d- 
therfide  that  make fh  the  hreaawfh'e r(pjfbalhe0tiqndlh  and  incommenfurable.  in .  k'ngih. 
to  the  line  whereupon  the  p  or dllelo gramme  is  applied:  which  was.  required  to  be  printed, 

■  A  fquare  is  {ay  d  to  be  applied  vpon  a  lirie,when  it,  or  a  parailelograme  equal! v-nta 
itjs  applied  vpon  the  fayd  line  *  If  vpon  a  rationall  line  geuen  we  will  apply  a  redangle 
parailelograme  eq  uall  to  the  fquare  of  a  medial!  line  geuen, and  fo  of  any  line  geuen, we 
muftgby  the  1 i  .of  the  fixt,finde  out  the  thirdline  proportional!  with- the  rationall  line 
and  the  medial!  line  geuen  .-  fo  yet  that  the  rationall  line  be  thefirft,and  the  medial!  line 
geuen  , (which  containeth  in  power  the  fquare  to  be  applied  )  be  the  fecond .  I:or  then 
the  fiipetficies  contained  vnder  the  hrfi:  and  the  third  ,  fhalbe  equall  to  the  fquare  of 
•tire  mid  ie  line,  by  the  ly.ofthefixt.  "  i-  f* 

f  The  zo.  f  he  ore  me-.  Xhs  23.  fropojtt'ion. 

A  rigid  line  commenfurable  to  a  mediall linefts  alfo  a  mediall  line . 

Kppofe  that  A  be -a  mediall  line.  And  vnto  the  line  A  let  the  line  B  be  cbmrnen- 
fnr able , either  in  length, fy  in  power, or  in  power  only. .  T hen  1 fay  that  B  alfo  is  a 
mediaUline.Let  there  be  put  a  rationdllline  C  p .  And 'upon  the  line  CD,  apply 
\adecUnglepardlklograme  C  E ,  eqmflvnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  ,and  mar 
i  ’ing  inbregdth-the.line  E  D  .Wherefore  ( by  theprqpofition going befqrefche  line  E  D  isra- 
tiomU;w4falQmmnfwAble  in  length  'unto,  the  line  C  D  .  And  againe  vpon  the  line  CD 
apply  a  rectangle  parailelograme  C  F  equal l  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B ,  andmaking  in 
■breadth  the line  DF  .And for afmuch  as  ~ 

the  tine  A  is  commenfurable  vnto  the  line 
B,  therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is 
ccmmenfurabte  tqfhe  fquare  of  the  line 
B’But  tire  parailelograme  E  C  is  equal!  to 
the fquareofthehne  A, and  the  parallelo - 


A* 


3 


is  cfmenf&fqfU  Hint 0  the  parailelograme 
P  F.  Bui  as  the  parailelograme  EC,  >  is.  to 
f he  parade f ggame  C  F,fo  is  the  line  E  D 
to  the  IweDF  (by  the frjl  ofthefixt )  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  to.  of  the  tenth ).  the  ImeE  D  is 
commenfurable  in  length  vnto  theime  D  F.  But  the  line  ED  is  rationall  and  incomenfura , 
ble  in  length  vnto  the  line  D  C ,  wherefore  the  line  D  F  is  rationall  and  incommenfurable 
in  length  vnto  the  line  D  C(  by  the  13. of  the  tenth ) ..  Wherefore  the  lines  C  D  and  D  F  are 
rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely  .  But  a  rectangle  fgure  comprehended  vnder  ratio - 
gall. right  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely,is  (by  the  21. of  the  tenth)  irrationally  and  the 
tine  that  containeth  it  in  power  is  irrationall,and  is  called  a  mediall  line.  Wherefore  the  line 
that  containeth  in  power  that  which  is  comprehended  vnder  the  lines  C  D  and  D  F  is  a  me - 
diall  line, But  the  line  B  containeth  in  power  the  parailelograme  which  is  comprehended  vn~ 
«•  -v"*  der 


How  a  fquare 
is  fayde  to  be 
applied  ypprm 
ahne. 


ConBruttion* 


TsemonUra* 

tioiu 


der  the  lines  C  D  and  D  F  Wherefore  the  tine  B  is  a  mediall  line.  A  right  line  therfore  com* 
menf arable  to  a  mediall  lincjs  alfo  a  mediall  line:  which  was  required  to  be proued. 

\  ••  \  '  ■’  t  ■  -  \  \.  V  V*  sS  i  -  -  *  Y.  '  Vv  V.v*  ’.v,.*v  ,  .  *t 

y  Corollary. 

'  V  ■  ""  .  AV  '  -Vr •;-v A  J  '  v\ 

Hereby  It  is  manifefl  that  a  fuperficies  commenfurable  Tonto  a  mediall  fu * 
perficies  js  alfo  a  mediall  fuperficies. 

For  the  lines  which  containe  in  power  thofe  fuperficieces  are  commenfurable  in  power ,  of  Which 
the  one  is  a  mediall  line(  by  the  definit  to  of  a  mediall  line  in  the  a  i  .of  this  tenth )  :Whtrefore  the  other 
alfo  is  a  mediall  line  by  this  2  3  .prop  oft  io  l  And  as  it  Was  fayd  efrationall  lines fo  alfo  is  it  to  be  fay  d 
ef mediall  lines .namely ,  that  a  Itne  commenfurable  to  a  mediall  line , is  alfo  a  mediall  tine,  a  line  I  fay 
which  is  commenfurable  vnto  a  mediall  line, whether  it  be  commenfurable  in  length ,  and  alfo  in  po¬ 
wer, or  ells  in  power  onely.  For  vmuerfally  it  is  true, that  lines  commenfurable  in  length ,  are  alfo  com - 
menfitrable  in  power .  Now  if  vnto  a  mediall  line  there  be  a  line  commenfurable  in  power,  if  it  be  com - 
men  fur  able  in  length, the  are  thofe  lines  called  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  length  &  in  power-  But 
if  they  be  commenfurable  in  power  onely, they  are  called  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely . 

There  are  alfo  other  right  lines  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  mediall  line,and  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  power  onely  to  the  lame: and  thefe  lines  are  alfo  called  mediall,  for  that  they  are  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  power  to  the  mediall  line.  And  in  as  much  as  they  are  mediall  lines ,  they  are  commenfurable  in 
power  the  one  to  the  other.But  being  compared  the  one  to  the  other,  they  may  be  commenfurable  ei¬ 
ther  in  length.and  therefore  in  power,or  ells  in  power  onely  .  And  then  if  they  be  commenfurable  in 
length, they  are  called  alfo  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  length,and  fo  confequently  they  are  vndcr- 
ftanded  to  be  commenfurable  in  power .  But  if  they  be  commenfurable  in  power  onely  ,  yet  notwith- 
llanding  they  alfo  are  called  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely. 

Fluf ates rafter  this  propofition  teacheth  howto  cometothevnderftandingof  me* 
diall  fuperficieces  and  lines,by  furd  numbers,after  this  maner.Namely  to  exprelfe  the 
mediall  fuperficieces  by  the  rootes  of  numbers  which  are  notfquare  numbers  •-  and  the 
lines  cotaining  in  power  fuch  medial  fuperficieces,  by  the  rootes  of  rootes  of  numbers 
not  fquare.  Mediall  lines  alfo  commenfurable,  are  exprefled  by  the  rootes  of  rootes  of 
like  fuperhcial  numbers,butyet  not  fquare,  but  fuch  as  haue  that  proportion  that  the 
fquares  of  fquare  numbers  haue.  For  the  rootes  of  thofe  numbers  and  the  rootes  of 
rootes  are  in  proportion  as  numbers  are  ,  namely ,  if  the  fquares  beproportionall  the 
iides  alfo  lhalbe  proportionall  (by  the  2  2  .of  the  fixt) .  But  mediall  lines  incommenfu¬ 
rable  in  power,are  the  rootes  of  rootes  of  numbers,  which  haue  not  that  proportion, 
thatfquare  numbers  haue.  For  their  rootes  are  the  powers  of  mediall  lines  ,  which  are 
incommenfurable  (by  thep.of  the  tenth)  .  But  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  power 
onely,  are  the  rootes  of  rootes  of  numbers,  which  haue  that  proportion  that  Ample 
fquare  numbers  haue,and  not  which  the  fquares  of  fquares  haue.For  the  rootes(which 
are  the  powers  of  the  mediall  lines)are  commefurable,butthe  rootes  of  rootes  (which 
exprelfe  the  fayd  mediall  Iines)are  incommenfurable. 

Wherefore  there  may  be  found  out  infinite  mediall  lines  incommenfurable  in 
po  wer  ,  by  comparing  infinite  vnlike  playne  numbers  the  one  to  the  other  ♦  For  vnlike 
playne  numbers ,  which  haue  not  the  proportion  of  fquare  numbers  ,  doo  make  the 
rootes  which  exprelfe  the  fuperficieces  of  mediall  lines incomenfurabie  (by  the  p.  of  the 
tenth).  And  therefore  the  mediall  lines  containingin  power  thofe  fuperficieces  are  inco 
menfurable  in  length .  For  lines  incommenfurable  in  power,  are  alwayes  incommenfu¬ 
rable  in  length  (by  the  corrollary  of  the  p  .of  the  tenth) . 

fTbe  21.  T heoreme.  T he  24.  Tropofition . 

AreCtangle  farallelogramfne  comprehended  Tmder  mediall  lines  comen * 
fumble  in  length js  a  mediall rettangle parallelogramme . 


Tf. WtC%  A 


cfSudides  Elementes .  FoLi^  o# 

Vppofe  that  the  reel  angle  parallelogramme  A  C,be  comprehended  vnder  thefe 
mediall  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C; which  let  he  commenfurable  in  length .  T hen 
I  fay  ,  that  A  C  is  a  mediall  redangle  parallelogramme .  Defcribe  ( by  the  46. of 

_ ihefrft )  vpon  the  line  AB  a  fquare  A  D  .  Wherefore  the fquare  AD  is  a  me - 

diall ftipcr f.cies .  Andforafmuch  as  the  line  A  Bis  com- 
menfurable  in  length  unto  the  line  B  C,and  the  line 
A  B  is equallvnto the  line  B  D,  therefore  theline  B  D 
is  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  theline  BC  .But as 
the  line  D  B  is  to  the  line  BC,fo  is  the  fquare  D  A  to 
the  parallelogramme  AC  (by  the  firjl  of the fixi )  .Wher- 
fore  (by  the  / o.oft he  tenth) the  fquare  D  A  is  commen- 
fur able  vnto  the par allelograsnme  AC.  But  the  fquare 

DA  is  mediall,  for  that  it  is  defcribedvpon  a  mediall  line .  Wherefore  A  C  alfo  is  a  me  diall 
parallelograms)  by  the  former  Corollary).  A  reclangk.&c:  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


&  pffSlO* 


f  The  22.  Theoreme. 


The  2$.  Tropq/ttion. 


j[  rectangle  parallelogramme  comprehended  bonder  mediall  right  lines 
commenfurable  in  power  onely 3  is  either  rationally  mediall. 

CMcdiall  line  being  geuen,  there  may  be  found  an  other  line  commerfnra- 
le  vnto  it ,  in  power  onely  (  by  the  11  .of this  books  )  as  was  taught  there  tou- 
ching  rationall  lines .  Jgow  then fppofe  that  the  rectangle  par alldogrammt 
]AC  be  comprehended  vnder  thefe  mediall  right  lines  A  3  &  B  C.T hen  I fay , 
'■that  the  parallelogramme  AC  is  either  rationalfor  mediall .  Defcribe  ( by  the 
46. of  the fr ft)  vpon  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,their fquares  A  D  and  B  E .  Wherefore  either  of 
thefe fquares  A  D  and  BE  is  mediall  (by  the  21. of the  tenth ) .  Let  there  be  put  a  rationall 
line  F  G  l  And  vpon  the  line  F  C,  let  there  be  applied  a  red angle  parallelogramme  GHe- 
quallto  the  fquare  A  D,  and  making  the  breadth  the  line  FH .(  How  to  do  this  was  taught 
in  the  22. of this  booke  )  .  And  vpon  the  line  H  M,  apply  a  redangle  parallelogramme  M  K, 
e quail  to  the  parallelogramme  A  C,  and  making  in  breadth  the  line  H  K:  (to  do  this  ye  muft 
take  a  fourth  line  proportionall  with  the  lines  H  M ,  A  B  dr  B  C  (by  the  1 2  .of the fixt)  which 
fourth  line  let  be  H  K  wherefore  ( by  the  26. of  the fixt )  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
extremes  H  M  and  HK,ts  equall  to  the parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  meanes  A  3 
and  BC)  .  And  more- 
ouer  vpon  the  line  K  N 
apply  a  redangle  par  at - 
lelogramme  N  L  equall 
to  the  fquare  B  E,  and 
making  in  breadth  the 
UneKL.  Wherforethe 
lines  FH,HK&KL, 
are  in  one  and  the  fife 
fame  right  line .  (For 
thofc  parallelograrnmes 
fo  applied  vpo  the  lines  ^  tJ  K  L 

FG,H  M,and  KN,  are  redangle ,  and  the  angles  FHM  and  KHM  are  equall  to  two 
right  angles,  for  they  are  right  angles :  wherefore  the  lines  F  H  and  HK  are  in  one  right 
line,  by  the  i^.ofthefrft  .So  alfo  may  be fayd  of  the  angles  HK  N  and  LK  N)  . 

GG.  i.  forafmuch 


B  C 

3  K> 

4 

G  M  ' .  N 

“§ 

*4 

4 

si 
'  2 

#32. 

A 

3*3  * 

4 

^8 

V 

.  . 

CondruUim* 

Demon  ft ra~ 
non* 


Ccnflruftml 

DemonUr(h 
tm • 


In  thefe 
fern  1 vords 
confifieth 
the  full  de- 
tnon/lratto 
of tbe  corol¬ 
lary  follow  > 
dug. 


A }ote* 


5> 

»» 

>> 

») 

5> 


forafmuch  as  either  of  thefe fquares  A  D  and B  E  is  medially  and  the  [quart  AD  is  e quail 
to  the  parallelogramme  G  H ,  and  the fquare  BE  to  the  parallelogramme  "EfL :  wherefore 
either  of thefe far allelogrammes  G  H  and-N  L  is  mediall .  And  they  are  apply  ed  'upon  a  ra - 
tionall  line, namely  ,F  G .  Wherefore  ( by  the  22. of  the  tenth  )  either  of  thefe  right  lines  F  H 
and  K  Lisa  rationall  line, and  incomenfurable  in  length  unto  the  line  F  G.  And  forafmuch 
as  the fquare  A  D  is  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  BE  ( for  the  lines  A  B  and  B  Care fuppo- 
fed  to  he  commenfurable  in  power  )  therefore  the  parallelogramme  G  H  is  commenfurable  to 
the parallelogramme  ( for  they  are  equall  unto  the fayd fquares  )  .  But  as  the  paralle¬ 

logramme  G  H  is  to  the  parallelogramme  N  L,fo  ( by  the  first  of thefixt )  is  the  line  F)H  to 
the  line  K  L  .Wherefore  (by  the  10. of the  tenth)  the  line  F  His  commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  line  K  L  .  Wherefore  thefe  right  lines  F  H  and  K  L,  are  rationall  commenfurable  in 
length  the  one  to  the  other  (  commenfurable  in  length, l  fay, the  one  to  the  other, for  unto  the 
line  F  G,  by  reafon  of  which  they  are  rationall,they  are  incomen  fur  able  in  length  as  it  hath 
beneproued )  .  Wherefore  the parallelogramme  contayned  under  the  lines  F  H  and  K  L,is 
rationall  (  by  the  ip  .of  the  tenth  )  . 

And  forafmuch  as  the  line  D  B  is  equall  to  the  line  B  A,  and  the  line  X  B  to  the  line  B  C: 
therefore  as  the  line  D  Bis  to  the  line  B  C,fo  is  the  line  A  B  to  the  line  B  X .  But  as  the  line 
D  B  is  to  the  line  B  C,fo(by  the  frfi  oft  he  fix  t)  is  the fquare  D  A  to  the  parallelograme  A  C. 
And  as  the  line  AB  is  to  the  line  B  X,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  AC  to  the  fquare  CX. 
Wherefore  as  the fquare  D  A  is  to  the  parallelogramme  A  C,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  A  C 
to  the fquare  CX .  But  the fquare  A  D  is  equall  to  theparallelogramme  G  H,  and  to  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  A  C  is  the  parallelogramme  M  K  alfo  equall,  and  to  the  parallelogramme 
NL  is  equall  the  fquare  B  E :  Wherefore  as  the  parallelogramme  GH  is  to  theparallelo¬ 
gramme  M  K,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  MK  to  theparallelogramme  N  L .  Wherefore  (  by 
the  fir fi  of  the  fixt )  as 
the  line  F  H  is  to  the 
line  H  K,  fo  is  the  line 

H K  to  the  line  K L.  &  3  «°  a.  g  m  n 

Wherefore  (  by  the  17. 
of  the  fixt)  the  paralle¬ 
lograme  contayned  un¬ 
der  the  lines  F  H  and 
KL ,  is  equall  to  the 
fquare  of  the  UneHK. 

But  the  parallelograme  F  H  K 

contayned  under  the 

lines  F  H  and  K  L,  is  rationall,  as  hath  before  beneproued.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of the  line 
H  K  is  alfo  rationall .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  H  K  is  rationall. 

And  now  if the  line  H  K  be  commenfurable  in  length  unto  the  line  H  M,that  is,  unto  the 
line  F  G,  which  is  equall  to  the  line  H  M,  then  (by  the  ip. of  the  tenth)  theparallelogramme 
2{H  is  rationall  .But  if it  be  incommen fur  able  in  length  unto  the  line  F  G,  then  the  lines 
H  K  and  H  M  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  And fo Jhall  the  parallelograme 
H ‘Hjbe  mediall .  Wherefore  theparallelogramme  H  N  is  either  rationall,  or  mediall .  But 
theparallelogramme  H  fit  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  A  C .  Wherefore  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  AC  is  either  rationall,  or  mediall .  A  rectangle  parallelogramme  therefore  com¬ 
prehended  under  mediall  right  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely,  is  either  rationall,  or 
mediall :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 


**  s 

a 

4 

3C  B 

D 

- 

BtA 

9 

4 

^8 

How  to  finde  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely  contayning  a  rational! 
parallelogramme,and  alfo  other  medialllines  commenfurable  in  power  contayning  a 

mediall 


oFSuciides  Eiementef. 


FoLzji, 


i^eHiall-paj^kteg^aqatoe^fli^i afterward  betaughtin  the  27«and  .aS'iPirbpofitiohsof 

tWS.bopke.»-  •  '’^xvxv-  y  V-.:  ;  '  .  .  ■  •  ;  yA.  ~~y  V,  .  'visvv.T  \,y\  v,  ’■•  T 

Wta.  4>a.  Vi-y^.vsx  '.v-  :  , 


o 


•ja 


means 


that  thatwhich  "is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  Ci  is  the  meane  proporticnall  betwene  the 
fquares  A  D  arid  C  X  .This  Corollary  is  piicafter  the  yj.Propofition  of  this  booke  as  an  AlTumpt,a»d 
there  demonftr^ted,which  there  in  his  place  you  lball  finde .  But  becaufe  jtfoiloweth  of  this  Propofi- 
tion  fo  euidently  and  briefly  without  farther  demonllration,!  thought  it  not  amiffe  here  by  the  way  to 
note  it. 


yj  The  23.  Theorem e. 

v.  .1  ...  '  Y,Vli 


26. 


•;p;v ,  i\ '•••. 


oiitton . 

r« 


.  > 


r 

 . . . 

V 


jt  medial! fuperfides  excedeth  not  a  mediall fugerfeies  ?  by  a  rational!  fu* 
perfities, 

bOr  if  it  he  gopbk,let  A  B  being  a  mediall fugerfeies, exceede  A  C  being  alfo  a. 
L  mediall f Mger  fries  i  by  T)  B  being  a  rationaU fugerfeies .  And  let  there  be  gut  a 
™  rationallright  line  E  F .  And'vgon  the  line  E  F  aggly  a  reU angle  garallelo- 
gramrne  F  Ft,  equaUvnto  the  mediall fugerfeies  A  B,  tvhofe  other  fde  let  be 
[F  H :  and  from  the  pardllelogrammeFB  take  away  thegarallelogramme  F  G, 
equall  vnto  the  mediall fugerfeies  A  C .  Wherefore  ( by  the  third  common  fentence )  the  re - 
fdue  B  D  is  equal!  to  the  ref  due  K  H .  But  ( by  fuggoftion  )  the  fugerfeies  D  B  is  rationall. 
Wherfore  the  fugerf  eies  K II  is  alfo  rationall.  Andforafmuch  as  either  of  thefe  fngerfcieces 
AB  and  AG  is  mediall, and  yyi  Bis  equall  vnto  F  B,  ,  ^  ^ 

&  AC  vnto  F  G  :  therefore  either  of  thefe fugerficieces 
F 11  and  F  G  is  medtall :  and  they  are  agglyed  vgon  the 
rationall  line  E  F.  Wherefore  ( by  the  22.  of  the  tenth ) 
either  of  thefe  lines  II E  and  E  G  is  rationall  fr  incom- 
menfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  E  F.Andforafnuch 
as  the  fugerfeies  D  B  is  rationall,  and  the  fugerfeies 
K  H  is  equailvnto  it  therefore  K  B  is  alfo  rationally 
and  it  is  applied  vgo  the  rationall  line  B  E  ( for  it  is  ag- 
glied vgon  the  line  G  K, which  is  equall to  the  line  FF ). 

Wherefore  (by  the  20. of  the  tenth)  the  line  G  H  is  ratio- 
nail  and  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  GK. 

But  the  line  G  K  is  equall  to  the  line  E  F .  Wherfore  the 
line  G  B  is  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  E  F .  But  the  line  EG  is  ra¬ 
tion  all  and  incommen  fur  able  in  length  to  the  UneE  F.  Wherefore  (by  the  13.  of  the  tenth) 
the  line  E  G  is  incommen  fur able  in  length  vnto  the  line  GB .  And  as  the  line  E  G  is  to  the 
line  G  If  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  to  thegarallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
F  G  and  G  B  (by.  the  Ajfumgt gut  before  the 21  .of  the  tenth )  .  Wherefore  (by  the  10.  of  the 
tenth)  the fquare  of the  line  F  G is  incommen  fur  able  vnto  thegarallelogramme  contayned 
vnder  the  lines  E  G  and  G  B .  But  vnto  the fquare  of  the  line  E  G  are  commenfurable  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  F  G  and  G  B,for  either  of  them  is  rationall,as  hath  before  benegroued. 
Wherefore  the  fquares  of the  lines  E  G  and  G  B  are  incommenfurable  vnto  the  garallelo >- 
gramme  contay?iea  vnder  the  lines  E  G  and  G  B .  But  vnto  thegarallelogramme  contayned 
vnder  the  lines  E  G  and  G  B ,is  commenfurable  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
E  G  and  G 11  twife  ( for  they  are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as  number  is  to  number , 

GG.ij.  namely, 


At 


Conliruetmt 


Demon f  ra¬ 
tion  leading  t& 
an  abfHrditie* 


C&nffruflien. 

Demon  ^ra¬ 
tlin* 


1 - -  ' - — 

X 

i 

r 

A 


mmely,*svnitieis  to  the  number  2,  eras  2. is  to  4:  and  therefore  (by  the  6.  of  this  lo oh} 
they  are  commenfurable  )  .  Wherefore  (by  the  13.  of  the  tenth )  the fquares  of the  lines  E  G 
and  G  H  are  incommenfurable  unto  that  which  is  contayned  under  the  lines  EG  and  GH 
twife .  (  This  is  more  briefly  concluded  by  the  corollary 
of the  iy.ofthe  tenth )  .But  the fquares  of  the  lines  E  G 
and  GH  together  with  that  which  is  contayned  under 
the  lines  E  G  and  G  H  twife  are  equall  to  thefquare  of 
the  line  EH  (  by  the  4.  of  the  fecond )  .  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  EH  is  incomenfur able  to  the  fquares 
of  the  lines  E  G  and  G  H  (  by  the  id. of  the  tenth )  .  But 
the fquares  of  the  lines  EG  &  G  H  are  rationall.Wher- 
fore  the fquare  of  the  line  E  H  is  irrationall .  Wherefore 
the  line  alfo  EH  is  irrationall .  But  it  hath  before  bene 
pro  tied  to  be  rationall :  which  isimpoflible.  Wherefore 
a  mediall fuperfleies  exceedeth  not  a  mediall fuperfleies 
by  a  rationall  fuperfleies  :  which  was  required  to  be 

proued. 

' 

f  T he  4.  Trohleme.  T he  27.  Tropojition. 

T 0  finde  out  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  flower  onelj ,  containing  a 
rationall  parailelogramme. 


.\nsvi.r. 


B 


Et  there  be  put  two  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely , namely ,  A  and 
B.And( by  the  13  .of  the  fix}  take  the  meant  proportionall  betwene  the  lines  A  and 
B,and  let  the  fame  line  be  CXAfnd  as  the  line  ^slisto  the  line  B,fo  (by  the  12.  of 
the  fixt)  let  the  line  C  be  to  the  line  D.  And  forafmttch  as  and  B  are  rationall 

lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely, therf ore  ( by  the  2i.ofthe  tenth )  that  which  is  contay - 
ned  under  the  lines  A  and  B,that  is ,t he fquare  of  the  line  C.  For  the fquare  of  the  line  C  is 
■equall  to  the parallclogramme  contayned  under  the  lines  A  anh  B  (by  the  ff.  of  the fixth)is 
mediallytherfore  C  alfo  is  a  mediall  line.  And  for  that 
as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  B,fo  is  the  line  C  to  the  line 
D, therf  ore  as  the fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  thefquare 
of  the  lyne  B^  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  D  (by  the  22.  of  the ftxth) .  But  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  and  B  are  commenfurable,  for 
the  lines  A  and  B  are  fuppofed  to  be  rationall comme- 
furable  in  power  onely.  Wherefore  alfo  the fquares  of 
the  lines  C  and  D  are  commenfurable  (by  the  10.  of 
the  tenth )  wherfore  the  lines  C  and  D  are  commenfu¬ 
rable  in  power  onely  .And  C  is  a  mediall  line.  Wherfore  (by  the  23.  of the  tenth )  D  alfo  is  i 
mediall  line  Wherfore  C  and  D  are  mediall  lynes  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  Now  alfo 
J fay  that  they  contay  ne  a  rationallparallelogramme.F or  for  that  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line 
Bfo  is  the  line  C  to  the  line  D  :  therfore  alternately  alfo  (by  the  iff.oftbcflft)  as  the  line  A 
is  to  the  line  Cfo  is  the  lyne  B  to  the  lyne  D  .But  as  the  lyne  A  is  to  the  lyne  C,fo  is  the  line  C 
to  the  lyne  B :  wherfore  as  the  line  C  is  to  the  line  Bfo  is  the  line  B  to  the  lyne  D.  Wherfore 
the  parallelograme  cotay  ned  under  the  lines  C  and  D  is  equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B.But 
thefquare  of  the  lyne  B  is  rationall.  Wherfore  the  parallelograme  which  is  contayned  under 
the  lynes  C  and  D  is  alfo  rationall. Wherfore  there  are  found  out  mediall  lines  commenfura - 

^  hk 


t - - 

—  "  1  ,T» 

54*2.4 

f 


A 


S.  1  ^ 


VemonUra- 
tm » 


of  Suclides  Elemented  FoLiji* 

bk  in  power  onely, containing  a  rationall  parallelogramme :  which  Was  required  to  be  done , 

The  s.  (problems .  The  28.  Propoftion. 

T 0  finds  out  medUU  right  Ijnes  commenfurable  in  power  onelygontayning 
a  mediall  parallelogramme. 

r2£T^f  E  t  there  be  put  three  rationall  right  lines  commenfurable  in  power  only, name¬ 
ly,  and  C, and \ly  the  is .  of  the fix  t)  take  the  meant proportional  betwene  CwfouSUotti 

the  lines  A  and  B,&  let  the fame  be  D.  An  das  the  line  B  is  to  the  line  C,fo(  by 
the  1 '2.  of  the  fixt)  let  the  line  D  be  to  the  line  E.  And  forafmuch  as  the  lines 
A  andB  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely  therefore  (by  the  21 .  of 
the  tenth )  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A 
andB ,  that  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  D,  is  mediall. 

Wherfore  D  is  a  mediall  line.  And  forafmuch  as  the 
lines  B  and  C  are  commenfurable  in  power  on  el), and 
as  the  line  B  is  to  the  line  C,fo  is  the  line  D  to  the  line 
E :  wherfore  the  lines  D  and  E  are  commenfurable 
in  power  onely  (by  the  corollary  of  the  tenth  of  this 
booke )  but  D  is  a  mediall  line.  Wherefore  E  alfo  is  a 
medialllinefby  the  2$.  of this  booke.)  JVherfore  D  & 

E  are  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely.  1 
fay  alfo  that  they  containe  a  mediall  parallelograme . 

For for  that  as  the  line  B  is  to  the  line  Cfo  is  the  line  D  to  the  line  E  •  therfore  alternately 
(by  the  16  of  the  fft )  as  the  line  B  is  to  the  line  D  fo  is  the  line  C  toy  line  E  But  as  the  lyne 
B  is  to  the  line  D,  fo  is  the  line  D  to  the  line  A ,  by  conuerfe  proportion  ( which  isproued  by 
the  corollary  of  the fourth  of  the  fifth )  Wherfore  as  the  line  D  is  to  the  line  A,f 1  is  the  line 
C  to  the  line  E.  Wherfore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  dr  C,is  (by  the  16. of  the 
fixt )  e quail  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  dr  E.  But  that  which  is  contained 
vnder  the  lines  A  and  C  is  medial(  by  the  21. of  the  tenth. )Wherf ore  that  which  is  cotained 
vnder  the  lines  D  and  E  is  mediall.Wherfore  there  are  found  out  mediall  lines  commenfu¬ 
rable  in  power  onely, containing  a  mediall fuperfeies  :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

AnAflfumpt. 


B 


Be  8 


"Pi.  <T 


To finde  out  taco  fquare  numbers 1 vhicb  added  together  make  a  fquare 
number. 

"  '■  ■  :  ■  '■  >;v  o  "  . . :  'V  •.  W  u  ■  ■ 

\  .  ■ 

Let  there  be put  two  like  fuperfciall numbers  <Al  B  and B  C  ( which  howto  fnde  out,  , 
hath  bene  taught  after  the  p.propofition  of  this  booke)  ^And  let  them  both  be  either  euen 
numbers  or  odde.  And  let  the  greater  number  be  A  B.  ^And forafmuch  as  if  from  any  euen 
.number  be  taken  away  an  euen  number, or  fro 

an  odde  number  be  taken  away  an  odde  num-  A . D . C . .  B 

her, the  ref  due fall  be  euen(  by  the  2 f.and  26 

of the  ninth) .  if  therfore from  A  B  being  an  euen  number  be  taken  away  B  Can  euen  num¬ 
ber, or from  A  B  being  an  odde  number  be  taken  away  B  C  being  alfo  odde :  the  ref  due  A  C 
fall  be  euen.  Deuide  the  number  A  C  into  two  equall  partes  in  D  : wherefore  the  number 
which  is  produced  of  A  B  into  BC  together  with  the fquare  number  of C  D, is  (by  the fixt  of 
'thefccondjds  Barlaam  demonfirateth  it  in  numbers )  equall  to  the  fquare  number  of  B  D. 

GG.iij.  But 


iA  CoroUary * 

To  fitide  out 
two  Square 
numbers  ex¬ 
ceeding  the 
one  the  other 
by  a  fquare 
number* 


An  Afiumpu 


But  that  which  is  produced  of A  B  into  BCisa fquare  nuber.  For  it  roas  proued (by  thefrfi 
of  the  ninth )  that  if  two  like  plaine  numbers  multiplieng  the  one  the  other,  produce  any  m- 
her, the  number  produced jhal  be  a  fquare  number.  Wherfore  there  are  found  out  two  fquare 
numbers, the  one  being  the fquare  number  which  is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C,  and  the  other 
the  fquare  number  produced  ofC  D  ,which  added  together  make  a  fquare  number,  namely , 
the fquare  number  produced  ofB  D  multiplied  into  himfelfe,forafmuch  as  they  were  demo - 
(bated  equall  to  it. 

#  A  Corollary. 

And  hereby  it  is  manifest, that  there  are found  out  two  fquare  numbers, namely, the  one 
the  fquare  number  of B  D ,  and  the  other  the fquare  number  ofCD,fo  that  that  number 
wherin  thone  excedeth  the  other,  the  number  ( I fay  )which  is  produced  of A  B  into  B  C,  is 
alfo  a  fquare  number :  namely , when  A  B  & 

BC  are  like  playne  numbers.  But' when  they  A . D  . ....  C . B 

are  not  like playne  numbers ,  then  are  there 

found  out  two  fquare  numbers, the  fquare  number  ofB  D,and  the  fquare  number  of  D  C3 
whofe  excefe,that  is, the  number  wherby  the  greater  excedeth  the  lefe, namely,  that  which  is 
produced  of  A  B  into  B  C,is  not  a  fquare  number . 

An  Afftimpt. 

T  o  finde  out  two  fquare  numbers  which  added  together  make  not  a fquare 
number. 

Let  A  B  and  BC  be  like  playne  numbers, fo  that  ( by  thefirfi  of  the  ninth )  that  which  is 
produced  of  A  B  into  BCisa fquare  number, and  let  AC  be  an  euen  number.  And  deuide  C 
A  into  two  equall partes  in  D .  ‘Igow  by  that  which  hath  before  bene  fay  d  in  the former  af- 
frnpt,  it  is  manifefl  that  the  fquare  number  produced  of  ABintoBC ,  together  with  the 
fquare  number  of  CD, is  equall  to  the fquare  number  ofB  D.  Take  away  from  C  D  vnitit 
D  E  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the  fquare,  of  C  E  is 
lefe  then  the  fquare  number  of 

B  D.  T(ow  then  I fay  that  the  A  . .  G  . .  H  .  D  .  E  .  F  .* .  C . B 

fquare  number  produced  of  A  B 

into  B  C  added  to  the  fquare  number  ofC  E,make  not  a fquare  number.  For  if they  do  make 
a  fquare  number, then  that fquare  number  which  they  make, is  either  greater  the  the  fquare 
number  ofB  E,or  equall  into  it, or  lefe  then  it.  Firjl,  greater  it  cannot  be,  for  it  is  already 
proued  that  the  fquare  number  produced  of^A  B  into  B  C, together  with  the  fquare  number 
ofC  E,is  lefe  then  the fquare  number  ofB  D .  But  betwene  the  fquare  number  ofB  D,  and 
the fquare  number  ofB  E, there  is  no  meant  fquare  number.  For  the  number  B  D  excedeth 
the  number  B  E  onely  by  vnitie :  which  vnitie  can  by  no  meanes  be  deuided  into  numbers . 
Or  if  the  number  produced  of A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  of  the  nuber  C  Efhould 
be  greater  then  the fquare  of the  number  B  E,  then  fhould  the felfe  fame  number  produced 
of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  of  the  number  C  E,be  equall  fo  the  fquare  of  the 
number  B  D  ,the  contrary  wherof  is  already  proued. Wherfore  if it  be pofjiblejet  that  which 
is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  number  of  the  number  CE  be  equall  to 
the  fquare  number  ofB  E.^And  let  G  Abe  double  to  vnitie  D  E,that  is,  let  it  be  the  num¬ 
ber  two.  T{ow forafmuch  as  the  whole  number  A  Cis  by  fuppofition  double  to  the  whole 
number  C  D, of  which  the  number  A  G  is  double  to  vnitie  D  Esther  fore  (by.  the  y. of  the  ft- 


ofSuclides  Elementes « 


uenth)  the  refiduc, namely, the  number  GC  is  double  to  the  refdue, namely, to  the  number  E 
C. Wherfore  the  number  G  C  is  deuidedinto  two  equall partes  in  E.  Wherefore  that  which  is. 
produced  ofG  B  into  B  C  together  with  the  fquare  number  of  C  E  is  equall  to  the  fquare  mi-, 
ber  ofB  E.  But  that  which  is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C,  together  with  the  fquare  number  of 
C  E,is fuppofed  to  be  equal  to  the  fquare  number  of B  E-  wherfore  that  which  is  produced  of 
G  B  into  b  C  together  with  the fquare  number  ofC  E  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of 
A  B  into  B  C,  together  with  the  fquare  number  ofC  E.  Wherefore  taking  away  the  fquare. 
number  of C  E, which  is  common  to  them  both, the  number  A  B fall  be  equall  to  the.  num¬ 
ber  G  B, namely, the  greater  to  the  leffe, which  is  imp  of jible. Wherfore  that  which  is  produced 
of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  number  ofC  E,is  not  equall  to  the  fquare  number 
ofB  E.  I  fay  alfo  that  that  which  is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  mim 
her  of C  E  is  not  lefe  then  the fquare  number  ofB  E.For  if  it  bepofible,the fall  it  be  equal 
to fome fquare  number  leffe  then  the fquare  number  ofB  E  .Wherfore  let  the  number  produ¬ 
ced  of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  of  the  number  CE  be  equal  to  the  fquare  num¬ 
ber  ofB  E.And  let  the  number  H  Abe  double  to  the  number  D  E: The  alfo  itfolloweth  that 
the  number  HC  is  double  to  the  number  C  F,  fo  that  H  C  alfo  is  deuided  into  two  equall 
fartes  in  F,and  therfore  alfo  the  number  which  is  produced  of H  B  into  B  C,  together  with 
the fquare  number  of  EC, is  equall  to  the  fquare  number  of  the  number  B  F.  But  by fuppof- 
tion,the  number  which  is  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the  fquare  number  ofC  E 
is  equall  to  the  fquarenumber  ofB  F.  Wherfore  it follow  sth  that  the  number  produced  of  A 
B  into  B  C  together’  with  the  fquare  number  of  C  E,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  produced  of  H 
B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  number  C  F, which  is  impojfible.  For  if  it  Jhouldbe  e- 
quall, then for afmuch  as  the fquare  ofC  F  is  leffe  then  the fquare  of C  E,themmber  produ¬ 
ced  ofH  B  into  B  C fbould  be  greater  then  the  number  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C.  And fo  al¬ 
fo  fhould  the  number  H  B  be  greater  then  the  number  A  B, when yet  it  is  leffe  then  it.  Wher¬ 
fore  the  number  produced  of  A  B  into  B  C  together  with  the fquare  number  of  CE,  is  not 
leffe  then  the fquare  nuber  ofB  E.And  it  is  alfo  proued  that  it  cannot  be  equall  to  the fquare 
number  ofB  E, neither  greater  then  it.  Wherfore  that  which  is  produced  cf^AB  into  B  C 
added  to  the  fquare  number  ofC  E,maketh  not  a  fquare  number.  And  although  it  be poffiblc 
to  demonfrate  this  many  other  way es, yet  this  femeth  to  vs  fuff  cient, leaf  the  matter  beyng 
otter  longfould feeme  to  much  tedious. 


f  The  6.  Trohleme.  T he  29.  Tropoftion. 


T 0  jhide  out  two  fuch  rationall  Tight  lynes  commen fur  able  in  power  on* 
ly/hat  the greater fh  all  he  in  power  more  then  the  iefiefby  the fquare  of  a 
right  line  commenfurahle  in  length  Ion  to  the  greater. 


Et  there  be  put  a  rational  line  A  B,  and  take  al¬ 
fo  two fuch  fquare  numbers  C  D  and  D  E,that 
their  exce/feCE  be  not  a  fquare  number  (by 
the  cor olary  of  the frfi  affumpt  of  the  2  8. of the 
tenth )  And  vpon  the  line  AB  defenbe  a  femicircle  A  FB. 
And  by  the  corollary  of  the  6. of the  tenth,  as  the  number 
7)  C  is  to  the  number  C  E,fo  let  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  B  A 
be  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E.And  draw  a  line from  F  to 
B.  E(ow  for  that  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  A  is  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  F,fois  the  number  CD  to  the  nnm- 


GG.iiiy. 


ber 


ConftruRm. 


Dmonttrih 

mn. 


Montaurem 
vutk?th  tbit 
an  Afeumpt; 
as  the  Greek# 
text/ecmetb 
to  do  tike  wife 
but  letthout  a 
tattfe. 

Conftruftiott, 


VemonUr*- 
um e 


7 be  tenth ‘Boofy 

her  C  E,therfore  the  [quart  of  the  line  JS  A  hath  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  F,  that  proper* 
tion  that  thenuber  C  D  hath  to  the  number C  E .  Wherfore  the  fquare  of the  line  BA  is  co¬ 
me  furable  to  the  fquare  of the  line  A  F  (by  the  6. of  the  teth).But  the fquare  of the  line  A  B 
is  rational.Wherfore  alfo  the fquare  of  the  line  A  F  is  rational  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  AF  is 
rationall.And forafmuch  as  the  number  C  D  hath  not  unto  the  number  C  E  that  proporti¬ 
on  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number, therf ore  neither  alfo  hath  the  fquare  of 
the  line  ABto  the fquare  of  the  line  A  F  that  proportion 
that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number.  Wherfore 
(by  the  p.  of  the  teth )the  line  A  Bis  unto  the  line  A  F  in- 
commenfurable  in  length.  Wherfore  the  lines  A  F  and  A 
B  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  And  for 
that  as  the  number  DC  is  to  the  number  CE,  fo  is  the 
fquare  of the  line  ABto  the fquare  of  the  line  A  F :  ther- 
fore  by  cornier (ion  or  euerfeproportio  which  is  dernonf  ra¬ 
ted  ( by  the  corollary  of  the  ip .  of  the  fifth )  as  the  number 
C  D  is  to  the  number  D  E,  fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  F,  which  is  the  exceffe  of  the  fquare  of  the  line  AB  aboue  the 
fquare  of the  line  F  (by  theafumpt  put  before  the  14.  of  this  booke ) .  But  the  number  C 

D  hath  to  the  number  D  E  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number : 
wherfore  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B  hath  to  the fquare  of the  line  B  F,  that  proportion  that  a 
fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  (by  the  p.  of the  tenth )  the  line  A  B  is 
commenfurable  in  length  unto  the  line  B  F » And  ( by  the  47.  ofthefirft)  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  B  is  e  quail  to  the fquare  s  of  the  lines  A  F  and  F  B .  Wherfore  the  line  A  Bis  in  power 
more  then  the  line  A  F  by  the fquare  of  the  line  B  F  which  is  commenfurable  in  length  un¬ 
to  the  line  A  B.  Wherefore  there  art  found  out  two  fuch  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in- 
power  onely  namely  , A  B  and  A  F,fo  that  the  greater  line  A  B  is  in  power  more  then  the  lejjk 
line  K_AF,by  the fquare  of  the  line  F  Bpwhich  is  commenfurable  in  length  unto  the  line  A 
B :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


ffThe  7. Theoreme. 


T he  3  0.  Propofition . 


T 0  finde  out  tfyo  fuch  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in po’fter  onely  ?  that 
the  greater fhalbe  in  popper  more  then  the  lefle  by  the  fquare  of a  right  line 
incommenjurable  in  length  to  the  greater. 

:  Et  there  be  put  a  rationall  line  A  B ,  and  take  alfo  ( by  the  2.  ajfumpt  of the  2$.  of 
the  tenth )two  fquare  numbers  C  E  and  E  D ,  which  being  added  together  make 
'  not  a  fquare  number, and  let  the  numbers  C  E  and  E  D  added  together  make  the 
number  C  D .0 Fnd upon  the  line  A  B  deferibe  a  fencircle  A  F  B a^And,  (  by  the 
corollary  of the  6.  of  the  tenth  )  as  the  number  D  C  is  to  the 
number  C  E  fo  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  be  tothe fquare 
of the  line  A  F  ,and  draw  a  line from  F/0B.  And  we  may  in 
like  fort, as  we  did  in  the  former  propofition ,  proue  that  the 
lines  B  A  and  A  F  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  one¬ 
ly.  And  for  that  as  the  number  D  C  is  to  the  number  C  E, 
fo  is  the fquare  of the  line  A  B  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  F.*  ^4 
therefore  by  conuerfon  ( by  the  corollary  oft  he  /  p  .of the fifte) 

as  the  number  C  D  is  to  the  number  DE,/tf  is  the  fquare  of  C . .  E....  D 

the  line  AB/fl  the  fquare  to  the  line  FB.  But  the  number  C 

;  -  '  Tihaik  ' 


D  hath  not  to  the  number  DE  that  proportion  that  a  f quart  number  hath  to  a  fquare 
number  .  Wherefore  neither  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  hath  to  the  f quart  of  the 
line  B  F  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  the  line 
A  B  is  (by  the  p  oft  he  tenthfincornmenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  B  F  .  And  the  line  A  B 
is  in  power  mere  then  the  line  AF  by the fquare  of the  right  line  B  F ,  which  is  incommen- 
furablein  length  vnto  the  line  A  B.  Wberfore  the  lines  A  B  and  A  F  are  rational!  cornmen- 
fur  able  in  power  onely.  And  the  line  A  B  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  A  F  by  the  fquare  of 
the  line  F  B  which  is  commcnfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A  B  .*  which  was  required  to 
be  done . 

An  Aflumpt. 

If  there  be  ttoo  righ  t  lines  hauing  hetivene  them  feints  any  pr  opor  tion :  as 
the  one  right  line  is  to  the  other  }fo  is  the parallelograme  contained  lander 
both  the  right  lines  to  the fquare  of  the  lej?e  of  thofe  two  lines ■. 

Suppofe  that  thefe  two  right  A  B  and  B  C  be  £  x> 

in  fome  certaine  proportion.  Then  I  fay  that  as  the 
line  A  B  is  to  the  line  B  C  fo  is  the  parallelograme 
contained  vnder  A  B  and  B  C  to  the  fquare  ofB 
G.Defcribe  the fquare  of  the  line  B  C  and  let  the 

fame  be  CD  >a.nd  make  perfect  the  parallelograme  ,  ,  _ ,  _ 

AD  now  it  is  manifest  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  z  3  . 

the  line  B  C  ,Jo  is  the  parallelograme  AD  to  the 

parallelograme  or fquare  B  E  (by  the frfi  of  the fact )  .  Put  the  parallelograme  AT)  is  that 
which  is  bontained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  Cfor  the  line  B  C  is  equal l  to  the  line  B  D 
and  the  parallelograme  B  E  is  the fquare  of  the  line  B  C  .  Wherefore  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the 
line  B  G  fe  is  the  parallelograme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  B  C  3whkh  was  required  to  beproued. 


f  The  B.  Trobleme „  T he  3 1,  Tropofition a 

T ofinde  out  typo  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  porter  onely  yomprehen* 
ding  a  rationall fuperficies fo  that  the  greater fhall  be  in  poloer  more  then 
the  tefie  by  the fquare  of a  line  commenfurable  in  length  Ion  to  the  greater. 


2p  .of the  ienth)two  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in  pow¬ 
er  onely  A  and  Bfo  that  let  the  line  A  being  the  greater  be  in  power  more  then  the 
UneBfeing  the  le(fe  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line 
A.  And  let  the fquare  of  the  line  C  be  equallto  the  parallelograme  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  andB  which  is  done  by  fnding  out  the  meaneproportionall  line  3  namely  the  line  C  be- 
twene  the  lines  A  and  B  (by  the  13  .of the fxt )  .Now  the  parallelograme  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  and  B  is  mediall  (by  the  21.  of  this  booke ) .  Wherefore  (by  the  corollary  of  the  23.  of 
the  tenth )  the fquare  alfo  of  the  line  C  is  mediall.  Wberfore  the  line  C  alfo  is  medialhVnto 
the  fquare  of  the  line  B  let  the  parallelograme  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  and  D  be  equal l 
(by fnding  out  a  third  line  proportional l )  namely  the  line  D  to  the  two  lines  C  and  B  (  by 
the  x  1  .of  the fxt )  .But  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  is  rationall.  Wherfcrs  the  parallelograme  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  line  C  and  D//  rationall.  ^And  for  that  as  the  line  A  istothelmeB, 


"This  A(fump% 
fetieth  forth 
nothing  els 
but  that 
which  the  frf 
ofthefi%t  jet - 
tethforth^and 
therefore  m 
feme  exem¬ 
plars  ttts  not 
found** 


Con  ft  ruction* 


fremnftrd- 

tion. 


Conjlructhn* 


VemrMra- 

mn» 


'  V  '■ 

jJt' 


Uv*a  n  u 
A* 


w 


fols  the  parallelogram  contained vnder  the  lines  A 
<*/*£  B  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  (by  the  afiurnpt  go¬ 
ing  before) .  But  vnto  the  parallelograme  Contained ^ 
vnder  the  lines  AandB  is  equall  the  fquare  of  the  C 
Une  G,and  vnto  the  fquare  of the  line  B  is  equal  the  ^ 
parallelograme  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  andD, 
as  it  hath  now  bene  proued.-therefore  as  the  line  A  is  ® 
io  the, line  Bfo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  C  to  the pa¬ 
rallelogram  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  ,D .  But  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  is  to  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  andDfo  is  the  line  C  to  the  line  D  .Wherefore  as  the  line  A 
is  to  the  line  Bfo  is  the  line  C  to  the  Une  D  .  But( by  fuppoflHon )  the  line  A  is  cowmen  fura- 
ble  vnto  the  line  B  in  power  onelj .  Wherefore  ( by  the  1 1  .of the  tenth )the  line  Ca/fo  is  vnto 


- - - . 

■r  ; 

WP749 

11  v’:‘-  -  J  A  a  4 

iV-1  iv. 


C  to  the  Une  D  :but  the  line  A  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  B ,  by  the  fquare  of a:  line  com - 
mcnf arable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A  (  by  fuppvfiti on  )  .  Wherefore  the  line  C  alfoisin 
power  more  then  the  line  D  by  the  fquare  of  [a  line  cojnmenfnrable  in  length  vnto  the  line 
C  .Wherefore  there  are  found  out  two  mediall  lines  C  and  D  commenfurable  in power  one  - 
ly  comprehending  a  rational l  fuperfeies ,  and  the  line  C  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  D,by 
the  fquare  of a  line  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  C .  And  in  like fort  may  be found 
out  two  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely  contayning  a  rational l  fuPerfcies, 
fo  that  the  greater jlalbe  in  power  more  the  the  left  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incomenfurable  in 
legth.t othe.gr eater  ^namely, when  the  line  A  is  in  power  more  the  the  line  B  by  the  fquare  of  <t 
line  incomenfurable  in  Irngth  vnto  the  line  A, which  to  do  is  taught  by  the  30.  of this  booke . 

The  felfe  fame  confoudtion  remaining, that  part  of  this  propofition  fro  thefe  wordes .And for  that 
as  thclmt  A  is  to  tbelmc  S,  to  thefe  Wordes.  by  fuppefition  )  the  line  A  it  commenfurable  9 ntp  the  line  B, 
may  more  eafely  be  demo  nitrated  after  this  maner .  The  lines  C,B,D,  are  in  continuall  proportion  by 
the  fecohdpart  of  the  17.br  the  fixt.  But  the  lines  A,C,D  are  alfo  in  cpntinuall  proportion  by  the  fame. 
Wherefore  by  the  1 1  .of  the  fifth,as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  C ,  fo  is  the  line  B  to  the  line  D.  Wherfore 
alternately  as  theline  Aistothe  line  Bfo  is  the  line  C  to  the  line  D.  &c.  which  was  required  to  be 
doone. 


An  afTumpt. 

If  there  he  three  right  lines  hailing  het^ene  them  f elites  any  proportion: 
as  the  firjl  is  to  the  third  fo  is  the  parallelograme  contained  'tinder  the firfl 
and  the  fecondfio  the  parallelograme  contained  'tinder  the  fecondandthe 
third. 


Suppofe  that  thefe  three  lines  AB,  B 

C  And  C  D  be  in  fame  certqyne  proporti-  e _ F _ H _ k 

on. Then  I  fay  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the 
line  (ZD  fo  is  the  parallelograme  contai¬ 
ned.  vnder  the  lines  AB  and  B  C  to  the 

parallelograme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  [___ _ _ _ _ L____ 

B  C  and  CD.  From  the point  A  raifevp  A  B  C  & 

vnto  the  line  AB  a  perpendicular  line  A 

1z,and  let  A  E  be  equall  to  the  line  B  C  ••  and  by  thepojnt  E  draw  vnto  the  line  A  D  apa- 
rallelline  E  K:  and  by  euery  one  of  the  poyntcsf>,G,andD  draw  vnto  the  line  A  E parallel 
lines  B  F,  C  H  ,and  D  K.And for  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  B  C  fo  is  the  parallelo¬ 
gram  A  F  to  the  parallelograme  B  H  (by  the  frjl  of  the fixt):  and  as  the  line  B  C  is  to  the 


of  Sue  tides  Elementeu 


Folia, 


line  C  Dfo  is  the  parallelograme  B  H  to  the  parallelograme  G  K.  Wherefore  ofequalitk  as 
the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  C  Dfo  is  the  far  dido  grume  A  F  to  the  parallelograme  C  K.  But 
the  parallelograme  A  F  is  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  Q,for  the  line 
AH  is  put  c  quail  to  the  line  B  C  .  And  the  parallelograme  C  K  is  that  which  is  contained 
-vnder  the  lines  B  C  and  C  D  for  the  line  B  C  is  equal  to  the  line  C  VI,  for  that  the  line  C 
H  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E(  by  the  qq-.ofthefrf)-,  if  therefore  there  be  three  right  lines  ha¬ 
iling  betwene  them  felues  any  proportion :  as  thefrjl  is  to  the  third  ,fo  is  the  parallelograme 
contained  vnder  thefrjl  and  the  Jecond,to  the parallelogramme  cotained  ‘under  the  fecond 
and  the  third  .-which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated. 

f  T he  9-  frobleme.  The  sz.Tropojttion. 

T o  finde  out  two  medial l  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely ,  comprehend 
ding  a  medial! fuperfkies  Jo  that  the  greater jhallhe  in  power  more  then 
the  leffefy  the Jquare  of a  line  commenfurable  in  length  into  the  greater. 

Et  there  be  taken  three  rationall  lines  comenfurable  in  power  onely,  A ,B,C, 
fo,ihat  ( by  the  29. of  the  tenth)  let  the  line  A  be  in  power  more  then  the  line 
C ,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  <vnto  the  line  A.  And 
vnto  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  dr  B,let  the fquare 
of  the  line  D  be  equall .  But  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  and 
B  is  mediall.  Wherefore  ( by  the  Corollary  of  the  23  .of the  tenth)the  fquare 
of  the  line  D  alfo  is  mediall .  Wherefore  the  line  D  alfo  is  mediall .  And  vnto  that  which  is 
contayned  vnder  the  lines  B  and  C,  let  be  equall  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D 
and  E  ( which  is  done  by finding  out  a  fourth  line  proportionall  vnto  the  lines  T>,B,C, which 

let  be  the  line  E  )  .  And  for  that  ( by.  the  Afi 

“  '  '  4  ^ _ 3^4 


3 


~E 


fumpt  going  before  )  as  that  which  is  cent  ay 
ned  vnder  the  lines  A  and  B  is  to  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  B  and  Cfo  is 
the  line  A  to  the  line  C .  But  vnto  that  which 
is  co  ntayned  vnder  the  lines  A  &  B,is  equall 
the fquare  of  the  line  D, and  vnto  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  B  fr  C,  is  equall 
that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  and  E .  Wherefore  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  C,fo 
i  s  the fquare  of  the  line  D ,  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  and  E .  But  as  the 
fquare  of  the  line  B  is  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  and  E,fo  is  the  line  D 
to  the  line  E  (by  the  Afumptput  before  the  2  2. of  the  tenth  )  .  Wherefore  as  the  line  A  is  to 
the  line  C,fo  is  the  line  D  to  the  line  E .  But  the  line  A  is  vnto  the  line  C  commenfurable  in 
power  onely .  Wherefore  the  line  D  is  vnto  the  line  E  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  But  J> 
is  a  mediall  line  .Wherefore  (by  the  23  .of the  tenth )  E  alfo  is  a  mediall  line .  And  for  that 
as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  Cfo  is  the  line  D  to  the  line  E,and  the  line  A  is  in  power  more  then 
the  line  C,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A .  Wherefore  (by 
the  1 4. of  the  tenth)  B  is  in  power  more  then  E,by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenjlurable  m 
length  vnto  the  line  B .  1  fay  moreouer  that  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  and 
E  is  mediall .  For  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  B  &C,  is  equall  to 
that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  B  and  E  :  but  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  B  and  C  is  mediall .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  s  D  and  E  is  al¬ 
fo  mediall.  Wherefore  there  are  found  out  two  mediall  lines  D  and  E, comenfurable  in  power 
onely ,  comprehending  a  mediall fuperficies,  fo  that  the  greater  is  in  power  more  then  the  lefle, 
by  the  fquare  of  aline  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  greater ;  which  was  required  to  be 

done 


Confiructm* 


DemoftSlra - 
tm. 


The  tenth  ^Boo^e 

f  p  fj  do'/lS »  -dnil  thus  it  it  euidtut  y  how  in  like  forte  may  be fttmde  tut,two  mediatt lines  ctmmtrifitrablein  ps&gp 
f  4t* '  o»ely,conUjning  a  mediallfuferficiesfi  that  the  greater  p>*ttbein  fewer  more  then  the  lefe ,  by  the fjuare  of* 

imemcemmenfurabU  in  length  Snto  the greater,  when  the  line  A  is  in power  more  then  thelmeCt 
h  the  future  of  a  line  inc  men  fur  able  in  length  vnto  the  line  A:as  the  thirteth  teacheth  vs. 


An  AfTumpt. 


JL 

2. 

3. 

4* 


a 


•  •  \  _  »■»  .»  .  •_  •  •>  \  .  .  ■  i «i  A  w «  •» *  ■  *  1  •  •  ■  «  •  ■  •  .  .  ..  .  „  .  .  .  ,  j  1  • 

$  uppofe  that  there  he  a  rectangle  triangle  A  B  C, hatting  the  angle  B  AC  a  right  angle . 
And  (by  the  12. of the fir {l ) from  thepoyntA  to  the  right  line  BC  ,  a  perpendicular  line 
bang  drawn  AD  :  then  I fay frf,  that  the parallelogramme  contayned  'under  the  lines 
C  B  and  B  D,  is  equdl  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  A .  Secondly  I  fay ,  that  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  BC  and  CD,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of the  line  C  A, 
Thirdly  l fay, that  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  B  D  and  D  C,  is  equall  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D  .  And  fourthly  I fay, that  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder 
the  lines  BC  &  AD, is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  cotayned  vnder  the  lines  B  A  &  AC. 

As  touching  the frf , that  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  B  and  B  D,  is 
equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B,  is  thusproued. 

F  or  for af much  as  in  the  reft angle  triangle  B  A  C, 
from  the  right  angle  vnto  the  bafe  is  dramn  a  per¬ 
pendicular  line  A  D  pherforcfy  the  S.of the fixt ) 
the  triangles  csf  B  D  and  ADC ,  are  like  to  the 
whole  triangle  ABC,  and  arealfo  like  the  one  to 
the  other  .  And for  that  the  triangle  ABC  is  like 
to  the  triangle  A  D  B,  therefore  both  the  triangles 
are  equiangle  by  the  defimtio  of  'like figures  Wher- 
fore  ( by  the  4.0ft he  fixt )  as  the  line  C  B  is  to  the 
line  B  A  ,  fo  is  the  line  ^rlB  to  the  line  B  D. 

*A  Corollary  added  by  I. Dee.  *  Wherefore  (  by  the 

*  Therefore  if  you  deuide  the  fquare  of  the  V-  of  the  fixt )  the 
fide  A  B  By  the  fide  B  C  :  the  quotient  will  be  parallelogramme  Con - 

B  D.  Which  maketh  D  Calfo  knowen :  by  ei~  tamed  vnder  the  lines  BC  D,  is  equall  to  the,  fquare  of 
ther  ofwhich  (by  the  47.  of  the  firll)  the  per-  the  line  A  B 

.  f ***< rduh~ x 

threefidesAB,  AC^andBC,  areknowen  or  tained  vnder  the  lines  BC  andCD,  isequallto  the  fquare 
geuen-  of  the  line  A  C  is  by  the  felfe  fame  reafon  proued .  For  the 

triangle  ABCis  like  to  the  triangle  ADC .  Wherefore  as  the 
I. Dec  *The  fecoxd  Corollary ,  tine  B  C  is  to  the  line  A  C,Jb  is  the  line,  AC  to  the  tine  DC* 

*  Therefore  if  vou  deuide  the  fquare  of  the  *  Wherefore  the  fmlklogrmme  cmtymti  vnder  thelines 
fide  A  c,by  the  fide  BC,the  portion  D  C,  will  B  C  and  CD,  is  equalltothe fquare  of  the  tine  AC.  Astou- 
be  the  product.  &c.  as  in  the  former  Corol-  chingthe  third,  that  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder 
^  *  the  lines  B  D  and  D  C,  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  A * 

is  thus  proued?  F  or ,  for  afmuch  as  if  in  a  rebiangle  triangle  be 
drawn  fro  the  right  angle  to  the  bafe  a  perpendicular  line,  the  perpendicular fo  dramn  is  the 
meane  proportional  betrnne  the fegmets  of the  bafe(  by  the  corollary  of  the  8. of the  fixt)  :ther 
fore  as  the  line  B  D  is  to  the  line  D  A,fo  is  the  line  AD  to  the  line  D  C  .  Wherefore  ( by  the 
17. of  the  fixt)  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  thelines  B  D  and  DC,  is  equality 
the  fquare  of  the  line  DA.  As  touching  the fourth,  that  the  parallelogramme  contained 

vnder  the  tines  BC  and  AD,  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines 
B  A  and  A  C,  is  thusproued .  For forafnuch  as  ( as  rve  haue  already  declared)  the  triangle 
ABC  is  tike,  and  therefore  equiangle, to  the  triangle  ABD,  therefore  as  the  line  B  C  is  t§ 
v.’:  '  "  the 


ofSuclides  Elemmtes. 


Fol.i*>6, 


I. Dee  *The  thirdeCorottary* 

*  Therfore  if  the  parallelogramme  of  B  A* 


the  lint  A  C,  fois  the  line  B  A  to  the  line  A  D  (  hj  the  4.  of 
the  fixi )  *  But  if  there  befoureriqbt  lines  proportion  all, 

>h«Misrui«cM',  th'frjt  w theia  »Tn  andYcTd:Sra™oL°^! 
to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  two  rneanes  (  by  the  16.  geUe  the  perpendicular  D  A.  Thefe  three  Co- 
ofthefxt )  .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  under  the  rollaryes  in  pra&ifd  Logifticalland  Geometri* 
lines  B  C  and  A  D,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  under  • we  ProucaWe  • 
the  lines  B  A  and  AC . 

1 faj  moreouer ,  that  if  there  be  made  a  pardlelogramme  complete ,  contained  under  the  An  other  de- 
lines  B  C  and  A  D,  which  let  be  EC :  and  tfUkewife  be  made  complete  the  pardlelogramme  melioration 
contained  under  the  lines  B  A  and  A  C,  which  let  be  A  F ,  it  may  by  a,n  other  way  bepro&pd  of  this  fourth 
that  the  pardlelogramme  E  C  isequall  to  the  parallelogramme  A  F .  For ,  forafmuchas  ei- 
ther  of  them  js  double  to  the  triangle  AC  B  (by  the  41.  of  the firfi  )  :  and  t hinges  which  are  K  ' 

double  to  one  and  the  fe If e  fame  thing ,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  that  which 
is  contained  under  the  lines  BC  and  AD,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the 
lines  B  A  and  AC . 

2.  «f[An  Affumpt. 

e  ' 

If  a  right  line  be  deuided  into  two  lonequall partes :  as  the  greater  partis 
to  the  left e  ,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  contained  loader  the  If  hole  line  and 
the  greater  part,  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  lander  the  Tv  bole  line 
and  the  lefte part. 

Deuide  the  right  line  A  B  into  two  une  quail partes  in  the  point  E :  And  let  A  E  be  the 
greater  part  .Then  I fay,  that  as  the  line  E  is  to  the  line  E  B,fo  is  the  pardlelogramme 

contained  under  the  lines  B  A  and  A  E  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  under  the  lines 
BA  BE .  Defcrtbe  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B,  and  let  the 
fame  be  AC D  B.  And from  the  point  E  draw  unto  either 
of  thefe  lines  A  C  and  D  B  a  parallell  line  E  F .  Tfow  it  is 
mamf eft, that  as  the  line  cA  E  is  to  the  line  E  B,  fois  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  A  F  to  the  parallelogramme  B  F  (by  theftrft 
of  the  ftxt)  .  Bu  t  the  parallelogramme  A  F  is  contayned  un¬ 
der  the  lines  B  A  and  A  E  (for  the  line  A  C  is  equall  to  the 
line  ^AB)  and  the  parallelogramme  BE  is  contained  un¬ 
der  the  lines  A  B  and  BE  (  for  the  line  DB  is  equall  to  the 
line  A  B)  .  Wherefore  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  B,fo 
is  the  parallelogramme  contained  under  the  lines  BA  and 

kA  E,  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  under  the  lines  A  B  and  BE :  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  demonftrated. 

Thir  Affumpt  differed!  lidefrom  the  firfi  Propofition  ofthe  fixt  book*. 

"■N 

3-  An  Affumpt. 

If  t here  he  two  Unequal!  right  lines, and  if  the  lefte  he  deuided  into  two  e* 
quail  partes :  the  parallelogramme  containedlander  the  two  Unequal!  lines, 
is  double  to  t  he  parallelogramme  contained  Tender  the  greater  line  o  halfe 
of  the  lefte  line. 

x  *  *  '  HH.i.  Suppoft 


A 


Caftibti'cHon. 


Demmfra- 

Uoa* 


Suppofe  that  there  be  two  vnequall  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  of  which  UtfAB  hethe 
greater, and  deuide  the  line  B  C  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  D.  Then  I fay, that  thepa- 
ralklogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B&BC,  is  double  to  theparallelogrammc  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  D  .  From  the  point  s  raife  vp  vpon  the  right  line  B  C,a 
perpendicular  line  B  E,and  let  BE  be  e quail  to  the  line  B  A .  And  drawing  from  the  point 
C  and  D,  the  lines  CG  and  D  F parallels  and  equall 
to  BE :  and  then  drawing  the  right  line  G  F  E,the  G  p  E 

fgure  is  complete .  Flow  for  that  as  the  line  D  Bis 
to  the  line  D  C,fois  theparallelogrammc  BF  to  the 
faralldogramme  D  G  (  by  the  i.  of  the fixt )  :  ther- 
fore  by  compofition  of  proportion,  as  the  whole  line 
B  C  is  to  the  lint  D  Cfo'is  the par allelogramme  B  G 
to  the par  allelogramme  D  G  (  by  the  18.  of the f ft ). 

But  the  line  B  C  is  double  to  the  line  DC .  Where¬ 
fore  the  par  allelogramme  BG  is  double  to  the  pa- 
ritlielo gramme  D  G  .But  theparallelogrammc  B  G 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  )  for  the 
line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  h  E  (  and  the  parallelo¬ 
grams  DG  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  ABandBD  )  for  the  line  B  D  is  equall  to  the 
line  D  C,  and  the  line  B  to  the  line  D  F :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


-B 


f  The  io.  firobleme.  The  33.  Tropofition. 

To 'f hide  out  two  right  lines  incommenfurable  in  power  fiichofe fquares  ad* 
ded  together  make  a  rationall fuperficies  }and  the  par  allelogramme  contain 
ned  Crider  them  make  a  mediall fuperficies. 

Akcbythe  30.  of  the  tenth, two  rationall  right  lines  commenfur able  in  power 
j  onelj,  namely, B  and  BC,fo  that  let  the  line  A  B,  being  the  greater,  be  in 
power  more  then  the  line  B  C  being  the  leffe,by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommen¬ 
furable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A  B.  \_And  by  the  to.  ofthefrjl,  deuide  the 
line  B  C  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  D,  And  vpon  the  line  A  B  apply  a 
faralldogramme  equall  to  the  f quart 
either  of  the  line  B  D  or  of  the  line  D 
C,  and  wanting  in  figure  by  a  f quart, 
by  the  2  8.0ft he fixth,  and  let  that  pa- 
r allelogramme  he  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B. 

And  vpon  the  line  AB  deferihe  a  fe- 
micircle  A  F,B.  And  by  then .  of  the frffrom  the  point  E, raife  vpvnto  the  lint  0/  B,  A 
perptndiculer  line  E  F jutting  the  circumference  in  the  point  F.  And  draw  lines from  A  to 
F,and '  from  F  to  B.  And  forafmuch  as  there  are  two  vnequall  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  and 
the  line  A  B  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  B  C,  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in 
length  vnto  A  B,and  vpon  the  line  A  Bis  applied  aparallelograme  equall  to  the fourth  part 
of  the fquare  of  the  line  B  C,that  is, to  the fquare  of  the  halfe  of  the  line  B  C,  and  wanting 
in  figure  by  a  fquare,  and  the  faid  faralldogramme  is  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  E  and  E  B .  wherfore  by  the  2.  part  of  the  1 8.  of the  tenth, the  line  A  E  is  incomme- 
fur able  in  length  vnto  the  line  E  B.  But  as  the  line  AT  is  to  the  line  EB,fo  is  the paralldo- 
gramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  A  and  A  E,to  the  faralldogramme  contayned  vnder 
the. lines  A  B  and  B  E  by.  the fecond  ajfumpt  before  put .  And  that  which  is  contained  vnder 
-cV  *  iV’  the 


ofEuclides  Elementeu 


Fol.zsj' 


the  lint  A  A  and  4  E  is  equall  to.  the [quart  of  the  line  A  F,by  the ficondpart  of  thefrfi'af- 
fumpt  he f oh: put.  And  that  which  ss,  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  E  is  by  thefirjl 
part  of  the, fame  dfjumpt,  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  F.Wherfore  the fquare  of the  lint 
A  F  is  incommen fur able  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  F.  Wherfore  the  lines  A  F  and  B  F  are 
mconnne? fur  able  in  power  a^And forafmuch  as  A  Bis  a  rationall  linefi  by  fuppofition ^.there¬ 
fore  (by  the  7  .definition  of the  tenth )  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B  is  rationall.  Wherefore  alfo 
the 1  fquares  of  the  lines  A  F  and  F  B added  together  make  a  rationall fuperfcies.F or  (h  the 
4j .  ofthefrft)thej  areequalto  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  .Again forafmuch  as  (by  thethird 
part  of  the  firH  afiumpt  going  before )  that  which  is  contained  -under  the  lines  A  B  and.E  B, 
is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  F.  But  by  fuppofition  that  which  is  contained  vender  the 
lines  A  B  and  E  B  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  D.  Wherfore  the  dine  F  Bis  equall  to 
'the  line  B  Ft.  Wherfore  the  UncBC ’is double  to  the  line  F  E.  Wherfore  (by  the  third  afiumpt. 
going  before)  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  is  double  to  that  which 
is  contained  -under  the  lines  t ^4 B  and  E  F .But  that  which  is  contained  -under  the  lines  A 
B  and  B  C,isby  fuppofition  mediall.  Wherfore  (  by  the  corollary  of  the  23.  of  the  tenth),  that 
which  is  contained -under  the  lines  A  B  and  E  F  is  alfo  medi  all,  but  that  whicheis  con- 
t  ay  ned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  E  F ,  is  (by,  the  lajl  parte  of  the  frjl  afiumpt  go jng  be¬ 
fore)  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AF  and  FB.  Wherefore  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AF  &  F  Bis  a  mediall fuperficies.And  it  is proued,thai 
that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  oft  he  lines  A  F  and  F  B  Added  together  is  rational 7. 
Wherfore  there  an  found  out  two  right  lines  A  F  and  FB  incommen  fur  able  in  power, whafe 
fquares  added  together, make  a  rationall [uperficies ,ancl the  parallel ogramme  contained  sun¬ 
der  then. i)  is  a  mediallfuperfcies :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

f  The  1 1.  (problems .  T he  34.  P ropofit'm . 

To  finds  out  two  right  lines  incommenfiurcihle  in  power yftbofe fquares  ad * 
ded  together  make  a  mediall fuperficies}  and  the  parallelogramme  cent  ay* 
ned  Wilder  themjnafiearationallfiiperficies. 

r  Ake  (by  the  31. of  the  tenth)  two  mediall  lines  AB  andBC,  commenfurable  in 
1  power  onely, comprehending  a  rationall  [uperficies,  fi>  that  let  the  line  AB  be  in 
power  more  then  the  line  B  C  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  inetimmenfitrable  in  length 
'junto  the  line  A  B.e^And  deferibe  vpenthe  line  B  afemicirck  A  JD  B.Ayfd  by 

the  10.  of  the  frjl,  deuide  the  line  B  C 
into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  E. 

And  (by  the  28 .  of  the fixt )-upon  the  line 
A  B  apply  a  parallelogramme  equall  to 
the fquare  of  the  line  B  E,.andwantyng 

in  figure  by  a fquare,  and  let  that  paral-  G  + - — 

lelogramme  be  that  which  is  contayned 
-under  the  lines  A  F  and  F  B .  Wherfore 
the  line  A  F  is  incommenfur able  inlength  vnto  the  line  F  B  (by  the  2 .  part  of  the  /  8 .  of  the 
tenth).  And  from  the  point  F  vnto  the  right  line  A  B,raife  vp  (by  the  u. of the  frjl)  a  per- 
pendiculer  line  F  F,and  draw  lines  from  A  to  D,and from  DtoB.  And  forafmuch  as  the 
line  A  F  is  inc  ommenfurable  vnto  the  line  F  B  :  but  (by  the fecond  afiumpt  going  before  the 
3  3  .of -the  tenth)  as  the  line  A  F  is  to  the  line  F  B,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  contayned  -under 
the  lines  B  A  and  A F,  to the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  BA  and  B  F,wher- 
fore  (by  the  tenth  of  the  tenth)  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  A  and  A  F  is  in* 
commenfurable  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  F :  buttbat  which  is 


HH.i\. 


C  dfp~ 


of  the  deter¬ 
mination  con¬ 
cluded. 


Jbefccotsd 
part  deluded. 

7  he  tot  all 
ccmltijicn .  - 


ConfinSkn, 


T>emon8ra~ 

lien. 


I 


The  fir fl  part 
of  the  deter¬ 
mination  con¬ 
cluded* 


Thefccond 

pan  codude 
The  totail 


ten  clsifion. 


Conftrkflkn* 


DemonUra- 
tion . 


The  fir  ft-  part 
e onduded. 


contained  vnder  the  lines  B  A  and  A  F  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D,  and  that 
which  is  contained  vnderthe  lines  A  B  and  B  F  is  alfo  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  B 
(by  the fecond  part  of  the  frjl  afumpt  going  before  the  33.  of  the  teth )  wherfore  the [quart 
of  the  line  A  D  is  incmienfurable  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  D  B .  Wherefore  the 
lines  AD  and  D  Bare  incommenfura- 
blein  power,  o And  forafmuch  as  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  B  is  mediall,  there¬ 
fore  alfo  the  fuperfeies  made  of  the  G 
[quarts  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  ad¬ 
ded  together  is  mediall.For  the  fquares 

of  the  lines  A  D  and  DB  are  (by  the  47.  of  the  frjl )  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A 
B.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  B  C  is  double  to  the  line  F  D  (as  it  was  proued  in  the  pro¬ 
portion  going  before)  tfjereforethe  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  AB  and 
andB  C  is  double  to  the parallelogramme  contained  vnderthe  lines  AB  and FD  (by  the 
third  ajfumpt  going  before  the 3  3.  prop  oft tion)  wherefore  it  is  alfo  c ommtn fur  able  vnto  it 
(by  thefixt  of  the  tenth)  But  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is fuppo- 
fed  to  be  ratipnalLWherfore  that  which  is  contained  vnderthe  lines  A  B  and  F  D  is  alfo  ra- 
tionall.But  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  F  D,is  equall  to  that  which  is 
contained  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  (by  the  lajlpart  of  the firfl  afumpt  going  before  the 
3  3  .of  the  tenth)  Wherfore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  is  alfo  ra¬ 
tion  all.  Wherefore  there  are  found  out  two  right  lines  A  D  and  D  B  incommenfurable  in 
power, whof fquares  added  together, make  a  medial! fuperfeies, and  the  parallelogramme  co- 
tayned  vnder  them, make  arationall fuperf  cies :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


f  The  12.  Trobleme.  The  $s.  Tropojttion. 

T  0  finds  out  two  right  lines  incommenfurable  in  power fvhofe fquares  ad* 
ded  together ,make  a  mediall fuperfeies ?and  the  parallelogramme  contain 
ned 'Vnder  them  jnake  alfo  a  mediall  fuperfeies }  which  parallelogramme 
moreouerjhall  he  incommenfurable  to  the  fuperfeies  made  of  the  fquares 
ofthofe  lines  added  together. 


&smp4ke(by  the  32.  of  the  tenth)  two  mediall  lines  A  B  and  B  C  commenfuralle  in  power 
onely ,  comprehending  a  mediall fuperf  cies, fo  that  let  the  line  A  B  be  in  power  more 

_ y then  the  line  BC  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A 

B.  And  vpon  the  line  A  B  deferibe 
a femicircle  AD  B,  and  let  the  ref 
of  the  confruclion  be  as  it  was  in 
the  two  former  propoftions.  And 
forafmuch  as  (by  the  2  part  of  the 
1 8.0ft he  tenth )  the  line  A  F  is  in¬ 
commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the 
UneFB,  therforethe  line  AD  is 

incommenfurable  in  power  vnto  the  line  DB  (by  that  which  was  demonf rated  in  the  pro- 
poftio going  before )  .Andforafmuchasthe fquare  of the  line  A  Bis  mediall,  therefore  that 
alfo  which  is  compofedoftbe fquares  of  the  lines  AD  and  D  B  (which fquares  are  equall  t» 
the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  by  the  47.  of  the  firttfs  mediall.  And  forafmuch  as  that  which  is 

‘  '  'v  "  con-  ■ 


25 


ofSuclidesElei 

contained  under  the  lit 

F  D  ,for  by  fuppofti  x  .  k  _  _ 

quail  to  the fquare  of  the  line  E  B,and  the fim  e  parallel o gramme  is  e  quail  to  the fquarc  of 
the  line  D  F (by  the  third part  of the  firjl  affumpt  going  before  the  3  3  .of the  ieth )  .If. her f  re 
the  line  B  E  it  equal l  to  the fmtD'-F.Wherfore-thclme  B  C  is  double  to  the hm  F  D.  Where¬ 
fore  that  which  is  contained,  under  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  is  double  to.  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  under  the  lines  A  B  and  F 1)  .Wherfore  they  are  commenfnrabk  by  the fixt  oft  his  beke: 
but  that  which  isccntained.underthe  lines  A  Band  B  C  is  medi all  by  fuppofitim  Wherfore 
alfo  that  which  is  contained. under  the  lines  A  B  andF  D  is  medial 7  ( by  the  corollary  of  the 
2 3,  of the tenth)  but  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  B  andF  D,is  ( by  the  fourth 


’rfbw  — r,:mt)rn*  >'  V  »«' »  »»— '  ......  ^  ‘  J  J 

D  B  is  alfo  mediall.^And forafnuch  as  the  line  A  Bis  incommenfnrabls  in  length  unto,  the  B*n  CviiH  e  * 
line  B  C.But  the  line  B  C  is  commenfurabk  in  length  unto  the  line  BEWkerforefby  the  13 
of  the  tenth)  the  line  A  B  is  incommenfurabk  in  length  unto  the  line' B  E,  Wherefore,  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  Bis  incommenfurabk  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines. ^AB 
and  B  E  (by  thefirft  of  the fixt  and  1 0. of  this  books) 'But  unto  the fquare  of  ’  the  line  r. A  B: 
are  equallthe  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  DB  added  together  (by  the  47  .of the  finft):  and 
unto  that  which  is  contayned  under  the  lines  A  B  and  BE,  is  squall  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  under  the  lines  A  B  and F  D,that  is,wkhshts  contained  under  A  D  and  X)  B.  For  the 
par alldcgr ammo  contained  under  the  lines  A  B  and  F  D  is  equall  to  the  pardklogramrne 
contained  under  the  lines  A  D  and D  B  ( by  the  laf  part  oft  he  frf  afiumpt  going  before  the 
3  3  .oft  his  tenth  booke)  Wherfore  that  which  is  comp  of  d  of the fquares  of the  lines  A  D  and  A  'oe  ^}rd- 
ip  B  is  incommenfurabk  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B-  Where-  Pa  " c,c  >M  4 
fore  there  are  found  out  two  right  lines  A  B  and  DB  incomrricn 


llvl 

v&  & 

VM% 


rable  to  the fiiperfciescompofed  of  the fquares  of thofe  lines  added  together,  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  he  done. 


The  beginning  of  the  Senaries 

by  Compofition. 


f  *  *Vh4 


Vc,X::.\XlC\  fc  QVttWi! 

o 

!  \x\  if 


•  M 


2f.  J.  peorme.  T  X  be 


•Stt! 

ropo/ition. 


Ifnoo  rational!  lines  common fur able  in  power  onely  be  added  together :the  ^  Se~ 

^hoieline  is  irrationalfand  is  called  a  bmomiumgora  hinomiall  line.  pofetion . 


|  Fppofi  that  thefe  two  rational, l  right  lines  A  B  and ’BC  being  commenfurabk 
Mu*  \in  power  onely  be  added  together  (,  then. of  the  tenth  teacheth  tofnde  out  two 
kNDJA  ' ^nes  ^ ^ ^en  if1}  that  the.  whole  line  ACts  irrationall .  For  forafnuch  as 

the  line  A  B  is  incommenfurabk  in  length  unto  the  line  BC,.  (for  they  are fup-  Bwonttrf  ; 
pofedto  be  commenfurabk  in  power  onely ■)•  hut as  the  '  .  tm* 

line  A  Bis  to  the  line  B  C  ,fo  (  by  theafumpt  put.be-  f  ^  g 

fore  the  2  2. of  the  tenth)  istheparalklogramecontaU  y.  \  iy.A  irAi, 
tied  under  the  lines  A  B  and  3~C  to  the  fquare  oft  he  . 

line  B  C,wha  efonefby  ins  1  owf  tins  bcoke  )  the paralklograpie  contayned  under  the  lines  A . 


*lhefentb*Boo}g 

B  andBC  is  tncommenfurabie  to  the  [quart  of  the 

Une  B  C  .  But  vnto  the  parallelograme  contained ^ 
vnder  the  lines  A  B  andB  C  is  commenfurahle  the 
parallelograme  contained  -under  A  B  and  B  C  twife 

(hy  the  <5. of  'the  tenth  )  :  wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  A  B  andB  Ctwifeisin » 
commenfurahle  to  the  fquare  of  the  lineB  C(  by  the  13  of  the  tenth )  .  But  vnto  the fquare 
of  the  line  B  C  is  commenfur  able  that  which  is  compofed  of the  fquaresofthe  lines  A  Band 
BC(by  the  i$.ofthe  tenth)  for  byjuppoftion  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  commenfurahle  in 
power  onely  .  Wherefore ( by  the  1 3  .of  the  tenth  )  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  A  Band  B  C  added  together  is  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  B  andBC  twife .  Wherefore  (  by  the  \6.  of the  tenth  )  that  which  is  contained  un¬ 
der  A  B  and  B  C  twife  together  with  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C ,  which  (  by  the  4. 
of  the fecond)  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  whole  line  A  C,is  incommenfurable  to  that  which 
is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  A  B  and  B  C  added  together .  But  that  which  is  compofed  of the 
fquares  of  'A  B  and  B  C  added  together  is  rational l , for  it  is  commenfurahle  to  either  of  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  G  of  which  either  of  them  is  rationall  by  fuppofition.-wherfore 
the fquare  of  the  line  A  C  is  (by  the  1 0  .definition  of  the  tenth  )irrationall.Wherefore  the  line 
A  Calfois  irrationall, and  is  called  a  binomiall  line  . 


Difftttitian  of 
a  binomiall 

4me . 


Stxe  kindes  of 

bmomiall 

lines. 


This  propofition  (heweth  the  generation  and  production  of  the  fecond  kinde  ofir- 
rational  lines  which  is  called  a  binonoium.or  a  binomial  line.The  definition  whereof  is 
fully  gathered  out  of  this  propolition,and  that  thus. 

A  binomum  or  a  bmormall  line, is  an  irrationall  line  compofed  of  two  rationall  lines  commensu¬ 
rable  the.oneto  the  other  in  power  onely .  And  it  is  called  a  binomium ,  thatis  ,  hauing  two 
names,becaufe  it  is  made  of  two  fuch  lines  as  of  his  partes  which  are  onely  commenfu- 
rahle  in  power  and  notin  length  :  and  therefore  cch  part  or  line ,  or  at  the  Ieaft  the  one 
of  them3as touching length,is  vncertaine  andvnknowne.Wherefore  being ioyned to¬ 
gether  their  quantise  cannot  be  exprefled  by  any  one  number  or  name  ,  butechpart 
le'mayneth  to  be  feuerally  named  in  fuch  fort  as  it  may.  And  of  thefe  binomiall  lines 
there  are  fixe  feuerall  kindes ,  the  firft  binomiall ,  the  fecond,  the  third ,  the  fourth,  the 
fifth,and  the  fixt,  of  what  nature  and  condition  ech  ofthefe  is  fhalbe  knowne  by  their 
definitions  which  arc  afterward  fet  in  their  due  place. 


yj  T he  25.  T heoreme .  The  37.  Propofition. 


Demtijlra- 

StOfi. 


If  two  mediall  lines  commenfurahle  in  poster  onehp  containing  a  rationall 
fuperficies  ,  he  added  together: the  Tobole  line  is  irrational^  and  is  called  a 
firft  bimediall  line. 

\Et  thefe  two  mediall  lines  ABandBC  being  commenfur  able  inpower  onely ,  and 
contayninga  rationall fuperfcies( the  2j.  of  the  tenth  teacheth  tofndeouttwo fuch 

_  lines)  be  compofed « T heri  1  fay  that  the  whole  line  A  C  is  irrationall .  For  as  it  wai 

'fiiydin  the  propofition  next  going  before that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines 
A  B  and  B  C  is  incommefurable  to  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  under  the  lines.  A  B  and  B  C  twife  .'wherefore  ( by  the  ^  ^ 

1 6 .of  the  tenth)that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  ,  . — - - -  ■  ■  ■-  » 

the  lines  ABandBC  together  with  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife ,  that  is,  the 

fquare  of the  line  AC  is  incommenfurable  to  that which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  AB 
andB  C  twife. Bui  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  is  comment- 
[finable  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  andB  C  oncefby  the  d.ofthetenth ) 

wherfort 


ofSuclides  Elementes.  Fo/.zjp* 

wherefore  the fquare  of the  whole  line  A  C  >  is  ( hy  the  /  of  the  tenth)  incommenfurable  to 
that  which  is  containedvnder  the  lines  A 3  andE  C  once.  But  byfuppofition  the  lines  A  B 
and  B  C  comprehend  a  rationall fuperfcies .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the.whole  line  AC  is 
irrationa.il :  wherefore  alfo  the  line  A.  C  is  irrationall.Andit  is  called  a  frjlhmediall  line. 

The  third  irrational  line  which  is  called  a  firft  bimcdiallline,is  Ihewed  by  this  pro- 
pofition,and  the  definition  thereofis  by  it  made  manifeft,which  is  this.  A  firft  bimedtatt 
line, if  an  irrationall  line, 'which  is  compofedcf  two  mediall  lints  ccmmenfurable  in  power  onely  con¬ 
taining  a  rationaHparallelogrante.lt  is  called  a  firft  bimediall  line  ,  bycaufe  the  two  mediall 
lines  or  partes  whereof  it  is  compofed  contayne  a  rationall  fuperficies,which  is  prefer¬ 
red  before  an  irrationall. 


ffTbe  26.  Theoreme. 


T  he  3  SfPropoJition. 


If  ffoo  mediall  lines  commenfurahle  in  poster  onely  containing  a  mediall 
fuperfcies 3be  added  together :  the  ‘tobole  line  isirrationalf  and  is  called  a 
fecond  bimediall  line. 

Ft  thefe  two  medial  lines  A  B  andE  C  being  commenfurahle  in  power  one¬ 
ly, and  contayninga  mediall  fuperfcies  (the  2$  .of the  tenth  teacheth  tofnde 
out  two  fuch  lines)  be  added  together.  T hen  I fay  that  the  whole  line  AC  is 
irrationally ake  a  rationall  line  D  E.  And  (by  the  44.. ofthefrft )  vpon  the 
line  D  E  apply  the  parallelograme  D  E, equal  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C, 
whofe  other  fide  let  be  the  line  D  G .  And  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the 
line  AC  is  (hy  the  4. of  the fecond)  equall  to  that  which 
is  compofed  of the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  to-  A  ? 

gether  with  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B 
and  EC.  twife: but the fquare  of  the  line  A  C  is  equall  35 
to  the  parallelograme  D  F  .Wherefore  the parallelograme 
D  V  is  equall  to  that  which  is  compofedcf  the fquares  of 
the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  together  with  that  which  is  con- 
tayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  andE  C  twife.  2\ {ow  then  a- 
gayne( hy  the  44, of  the firft)  vpon  the  line  D  E  apply  the 
parallelograme  E  H  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A 
B  and  B  C .  Wherefore  the  parallelograme  remayning , 
namely , HE, is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder 
the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife .  And  forafmuch  as  either 
of thefe  lines  A  B  and  B  C  is  mediall, therefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  andE  C  are  ah 
fo  mediall.  And  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  andE  C  twife  is( by  the  corolla 
ry  ofthe  ?4.of the  tenth)mediall.F or  by  the  d. of  this  booke  it  is  commefurable  to  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  once,  which  is  by  fuppofition  medial.  But  vnto  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is  equall  the parallelograme  E  H ,  and  vnto  that  which  is 
contayned  vnder  theiines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  is  equall  the  parallelograme  H  F  .•  wherefore 
either  of thefe  parallelograms  H  E  and  A  F  is  mediall:  and  they  are  apply  ed  vpon  the  ratio¬ 
nall  line  E  E>.Wherefore(  by  the  2 2.  of the  tenth )  either  of  thefe  lines  D  H  and  H  G  is  a  ra¬ 
tionall  line, andincommenfur able  in  length  vnto  the  line  D  E.  And  forafmuch  as  (by  fuppo- 
fition)the  line  AB  is  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  B  C‘ .  But  as  the  line  A  B  is 
to  the  line  B  Q,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B  to  theparallelograme  which  is  contained  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  (by  thefrsl  of the  fixt )  .  Wherefore  (by  the  10  of  this  booke)  the 
fquare  of the  line  A  B  is  incommenfurable  to  the  parallelograme  contayned  vnder  the  lines 

AH. iff  AB 


Btffinitbm  of 
a  firft  lime  di¬ 
al  line* 


ConUruttm * 


Vemnftra - 
tm. 


m 


The  PenthHooke 

■% 

A  B  andB  C.But  to  the  fquare  ofiheline  A  'his com* 
me rt fable  that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  p 

lines  A  B  and  BC  (  by  the  i$. of  the  tenth  )  .  For  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  AB  and  B  C  are  co?nmenftir able 
(when  as  the  lines  A  B  andh  C  arc  put  to  be  cowmen * 
fur  able  in  power  onely) .  And  to  that  which  is  contayned 
under  the  lines  AB  and  BC  is  commenfurahle  that 
which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife 
(by  the  6  of  the  tenth )  wherefore  that  which  is  compofed 
of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  is  incornmenfu- 
rable  to  that  which  is  contayned  under  the  lines  A  B 

and  B  C  twife .  But.  to  the  fquares, of  the  lines  A  B  and  . ,  ^ 

B.C  is  e quail  the  parallelograms  EH  ,  And  to  that '  * . ^  ‘ 

which  is  contayned  under .  the  lines  A  B.  and B  C  twife  is  eqrnll  the  pardlelograme  F  H. 
Wh  erf  on  the  paralkldgrame  F  H-'/jf  wcommmfurabUtoIhepdrdlklAgrame  H  E.Wherfore 
the  line  DH/r  tree  ctnmenf nr  able  in  length  to  the  line  H  G  (by  the  i  'of the  fat  and  so  of 
this  booh).  And  it  is  proued  that  they  are  rationall  lines .  Wherefore  the  lines  D  H  &  H  G 
are  rationall  commenfurahle  in  power  onely .  Wherefore  (  by  the  $  6  .  of  the  tenth)  the  whole 
UnelFGis  irrdtionfll .  And  theimAO  E  is  rationall. But  a  rett angle  paper  fries  compre¬ 
hended  under  a  rationall  line  and  an:  irrationalUahe  is  (by  the  corollary  added  after  the  21  of 
the -tenth)  irrationally  Wherefore  the fuperficies  D  F  is  irrationall.And  the  line  alfo  which 
contained)  it  in  power  is  irrational  i  But  the  line  A  C  containetb  in power  the fuperfeies  D 
lb.  Wherefore  the  Ime  A  C  ss  irrational!.  And  it  is  called  a  fecond  birncdialllme. 


1  ,  ■  ■  — 1  — 1  ■  * 

■'D  H  & 

-  i  d  I.  ad' 

J 

v  , 

This  Proportion  fheweth  the  generation  of  the  fourthirrationall  line,  called  a  fecond 
*  V7  .  bimediail  line  .  The  definition  whe-rof  is  euident  by  this  Proportion,  which  is  thus,, 
Diffinitmi  of  ^4 fecond  bimediall  line  is  an  irrdtionall  line ,  which  is  made,  two.  mediall  lines  CQmmenfkrable.  in 
a  fecond  bme  power  onely  ioyned  togetherfWhich  comprehend  a  medtalljuperficies .  Andit  is  called,  a  fecond  bi- 
diallline.  inedialljbecaufe  the  two  mediall  lines  of  which  it  is  compofed,c6taine  a  mediall  fuper- 
ficies,and  not  a  rationall.  Now  a  mediall  is  by  nature  &in  knowledge  after  a  rationall. 

i  15s  v, \  d  .VdA  •aA’i-.'V;  ,  -x  u 

f  The  27.  Theorem,  f  Theip.^ropofition, 

■  *1*.  -w  .•  .  .  .V,  ,,,  4.  s  .  . .  fa ,  . 

If  two  right  lines  incornenfurdhle  in  power  be  added  together, hauing  that 
which  is  compofed  of the  fquares  of them  .rationall,  arid  the  parallelogram e 
contajniedFmder  them  mediall:  they  hale  right  line  is  irrationall ,  and  is 
called  a  greater  line. 


Wi, 


V-v 


Tkmonslra- 

tion. 


Ft  thefe  trbd  right  Mrs  A  %  and  B  C  bemgincommenfurable  inpower  onely, 
and  Making  that  which  is  required  in  ihegFrogoftion  (  The  jy.  of  the  tenth 
tiachetblo  fnde  bititwofnch  lines  )  be' added  together .  T  hen  I  fay ,  that  the 
whole  line  A  C  is  irfatWmll.  Forforafauch  as  ( by  fuppdfition )  the parallel#-., 
"w^^^gramme  contained  under  the  lines  AB  and  BC  is  mediall,  therefore  the  pa - 
rdllelogramrne  contained  twife  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and B  C  is  moduli .  (  For  /hat  which  k 
contained  under  A  B  and  B  C  twife,  is  commenfurahle  to  that  which  is  co  fained  under  A  S 
.and  BC  once  (by  the  S. of  the  tenth)  fvhenfore  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  2  f.  of  the  tenth ) 
that  which  is  contained  under  A  B  &BC  twife,  is  mediall)  -.  But  by  fupfofttion  that  which 
Is. compofed  ofthefqmfesofthe  lines  A  B  and  B'Cfis  rationall .  Wherefore  that  which  U 
cofaincdumderihe  lines' A  3  and  B  V  twife  is  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  compofed 

of  the 


of  Sue  tides  Elementeh 

of the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C.  Wher- 
fore  ( by  the  id. of  the  tenlh)thai  which  is  com-  f 
pcfed  of  the f quart's  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  to¬ 
gether  iviih  that  which  is  contained vnder  the 
lines  AB&BC  twife ,  which  is  ( by  the  4. of  the fecond)  equallto  the f quart  of the  line  A  t, 
is  incommen fur able  to  that  which  is  compofed  of  the f quarts  of the  lines  A  B  and  B  C .  But 
that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  is  rationall .  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of  the  whole  line  A  C,  is  ir rationall .  Wherefore  the  line  A  Calfo  is  irrationall .  And 
is  called  a  greater  line  .And  it  is  called  a  greater  line  for  that  that  which  is  compofed  of  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  AB&BC  which  are  rationall, is  greater  then  that  which  is  contained 
vender  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife,  which  are  mediall .  Now  it  is  meets  that  the  name  Jhould 
begeuen  according  to  the  propertie  of  the  rationall. 

Aii  Aflumpt. 

And  that  the fuperfeies  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  is greater  then 
that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AB  and  BC  twife,  may  thus  beproued  .  Firfi  it  is 
man  if  eft,  that  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  vne quail:  for  if  they  were  e quail,  then  the fquares 
of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C Jhould  be  e  quail  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and 
B  C  twife,  fo  that  that  which  is  cot ained  vnder  A  B 

and  B  C,  Jhould  alfo  be  rationall:  which  is  contrary  p  3  C 

to  the  fuppofttion .  Wherefore  the  lines  kA B  and  *  1  '  1 

B  C  are  vnequdl .  Suppofe  then  that  the  line  kA  B 

be  the  greater,  dr  let  the  line  B  D  be  e quail  to  the  line  B  C.  Wherfore(by  the  7. of  the fecond ) 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  eA  B  and  BD,  are  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  B  and  B  C  twife  and  to  the fquare  of  the  line  AD  .  But  the  line  D  B  is  equall  to  the  line 
B  C .  Wherefore  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  are  equall  to  that  which  is  contained, 
vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  and  to  the  fquare  ofthefme  A  D  .  Wherefore  the  fquares 
efthe  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  greater  then  that  which  is contayned  vnder  the  lines  lAB  and 
B  C  twife,  by  the  fquare  of  the  line\A  D  :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

This  Propofition  teacheth  the  produ&ion  of  the  fift  irrationall  line, which  is  called 
a  greater  line :  which  is  by  the  fenfe  of  this  Propofition  thus  defined. 

<A greater  line  is  an  irrationall  line, Which  is  compofed  of  two  right  lines  which  are  incommen  fa - 
r able  in  powir,t  he  fquares  of  Which  added  together,  make  a  rationall  fiperfictes,  and  the  parallel a- 
gramme  which  they  containe,  is  mediall .  It  is  therefore  called  a  greater  line,  as  Theon  fay  th, 
beeaufethe  fquaresofthetwo  lines  of  which  it  is  compofed  jadded  together  being  ra¬ 
tionalise  greater  then  the  mediall  fuperficies  contained  vnder  them  twife.  And  it  is 
conuenient  that  the  denomination  be  taken  of  the  proprietie  of  the  rationall  part,  ra¬ 
ther  then  of  the  mediall  part, 

yfThe  28.  Theoreme.  The  40.  Propofition. 

If  two  right  lines  incomenfiiraik  in  power  he  added  together,  hatting  that 
’ which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of them  added  together  mediall ,  and  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  contayned  Tinder  them  rationall :  the  'Whole  right  line  is  tr * 
rationall,  and  is  called  a  line  containing  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall 
fuperfeies. 

Lei 


Folz6o . 

£  G 


An  Afiumpt* 


Diffinition  of 
a  greater  lint • 


Demon firti- 

fin 


teacheth  tofinde  out  twofuch  lines  )  .  T hen  J fay,  that  the  whole  line  AC  is  irra- 
tionall .  For  for afnuch  as  that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B 
and  B  C  is  medially  but  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  is  ratio ) 
natty  therefore  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  is  incommen - 
fur  able  to  that  which  is  contained  Vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife .  Wherefore  {by  the  16. 
of  the  tenth)  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  and  B  C  together  with 

that  which  is  contayned  Vnder  the  lines  AB  and  BC 
twife ,whkh  (by  the  4. of  the fecond )  is  thefquare  of 

the  whole  line  A  C'fis  incommen  fur  able  to  that  which,  f  ® _ G 

’is  contained  vnitef the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  .  But 

that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  Band  BC  L  *•  ^ 

twife, is  rationatt  ,for  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  once  is  put  to  be 
rat  ion  all .  Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  whole  line  AC  is  ir rationatt .  Wherefore  the  line  A  C 
alfo  is  irrational! .  And  it  is  therefore  catted  a  line  containing  in  power  a  rakenall and  a  me- 
diall  fuperfcieSybecaufe  the  power  thereof contayneth  two fuperficieces,  whereof  the  one  is  ra~ 
tiOHatt, namely, that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  two  partes, and  the  other  mediall, namely , 
that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  partes  added  together .  o And  by  reafon  that  the  ra¬ 
tionatt  is  in  order  of  nature  &  of  knowledge  before  the  medially  t  her  fore,  the firfi part  of the 
denomination  is  taken  of  it ,  and  the fecond part  is  taken  oft  he  mediall •  which  was  required 
to  be  proved.  - - — . 

In  this  Proportion  is  taught  the  generation  of  the  fixt  irrationall  line,  which  is  cal¬ 
led  a  line  vvhofe  power  is  rationall  and  mediall.  The  definition  of  which  is  gathered  of 
thys^rOpofition  aft  er  this  maner.  ^  '■ 

A  line  W  bo/e  perverts  rationall  and  mediall,  is  an  irrationall  line  which  is  made  of  two  right  lines 
Difjinirion  of',  incommen  fur  able  in  power  added  together,  wboje fij  uares  added  together  makea  mediall fuperf cits 9 
a  line  vboft  hut  that. Juperficies  which  they  containe  is  rationall .  The  reafon  of  the  name  is  before  fet  forth 
p'fter  is  rati-  vin  the  Propofition6 

cmll and  *'  ■  ‘  '  : ,  1 ,  '  \ 

fT he  29.  T heoreme .  The  41.  fropoftion. 

If two  right  lines  incommen fuY able  in  power  he  added  together ,  hauyng 
that  lohkh  is  compofed  of the  fquares  of  them  added  together  mediall 3  and 
the  pdrdllelogrmnme  contayned  bonder  them  medially  and  alfo  incommen* 
fur  able  to  that  ‘which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  them  added  together; 
thelohole  right  line  is  irrationall 3and  is  catted  a  line  contayningin  power 
two  medials.  '  - 


IfhEt  thefetwo  right  lines  A  BandB  C  being  incommenfur able  in  power, and hauing 
that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  oft  he  lines  A  B  and  B  C  mediall, and  the  pa - 

_ rattelogramme  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  mediall ,  and  alfo 

s  incommen  fur ableto  that  which  is  compofed  of the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  added 
CmttruBhn .  together, be  added  together  ( the  3$.  of the  tenth  teacheth  to finde  out  two fuch  tines )  Then  t 
fay  that  the  whole  line  A  C  is  irrationall.  Take  a  rationatt  line  D  E,  and  ( by  - he  44.  of  the 
frfi)  vpon  the  line  D  F  apply  the parattelogramme  D  F  equatt  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A 
B  and B  C.And  vpon  the  line  G  F, which  is  equatt  to  the  line  D  E,  apply  the  parallelograms 
G  H  equatt  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  dines  A  B  and  B  C  twife .  Wherefore  the 

whole 


ofSuclides  Elementes.  F0L16U 

whole  par allelogramme  D  H  isequallto  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C  (by  the  4.  bf the fecond.) 
And forafmuch  as  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  G  is  mediall 
and  is  e quail  to  the  parrllelogramme  D  F :  therfore  D  F  alfo  is  mediall  {by  that  which  was 
(aid  in  the  $  2  proportion  Ofthis  booke).  And  it  is 
applied  upon  the  rationall  line  EE.  Wherefore  the 

line  E  G  is  rationall  and  incommenfurable  in  legth  f _ _ _ <3 

* pntoji  line  E  E(by  the  2  2. of  the  teth ).  And  by  the 
fame  reafon  the  lyne  G  K  is  rational  &  income  fur a- 
ble  in  length  unto  the  line  G  F,that  is, unto  the  line 
D  E.And  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  compofed  ofy 
fquares  of  the  Lines  A  B  &B  C  added  together, is  by 
fuppofition  incomen  fur  able  to  that  which  is  obtained 
under  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife ,  therfore  alfo  the 
pardlelogramme  E  F  is  incommenfurable  unto  the 
parallelogramme  G  H. Wherfore  alfo  the  line  DG  is 
incommenfurable  vnto  the  line  G  K  (by  the  fir  si  of 
the fixt )  and  by  the  tenth  of  the  tenth.  But  it  is  now 
proued  that  they  are  rationall.  Wherfore  the  lines  D 
G  and  G  K  are  rationall  common  fur  able  in  power 
onely.  Wherfore  (by  the  36.  of  the  tenth )  the  whole 
■line  E  K  is  rationall, and  is  called  a  binomiall  line ,  but  the  line  E  E  is  irrationdl.Wherfort 
the  parallelogramme  E  II  is  irrationall(by  the  corollary  added  after  the  ?  2  .propofitio  of  the 
tenth ) .  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  which  contained ;  it  in  power  is  irrationall :  but  the  line  A  C 
contained)  it  in  power.  Wherfore  the  line  A  C  is  irrationally  and  it  called  a  line  contayning 
in  power  two  medials.lt  is  called  a  line  containing  in  power  two  medials,  for  that  it  contay ~ 
neth  in  power  two  mediall  fuperfeieces, one  of which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of -the  lyftes 
AB  and  BG  added  together  And  the  other  is  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  B  & 
B  C  twife :  which  Was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 

In  thispropofition  is  taught  the  nature  of  the  7.kinde  ofirrationall  lines  which  ii 
called  a  line  wbofe  power  is  two  medials.  The  definition  whereof  is  taken  of  this  pro* 
pofition  after  this  uianef. 

A  Ene  Whofe  power  is  two medials ,is  an  irrationall  line  Whic  h  is  compofed  of tWo  right  lines  in- 
eommen fur  able  in  poWer,the fquares  of  which  added  together,  make  a  mediall  fuperficies,  and  that 
Which  is  contained  vnderthem  is  alfo  mediall,  and  moreouer  it  is  incommenfurable  to  that  Which  is 
compofed  of  the  t-Wof  Hares  added  together.  . 

The  reafon  why  this  line  is  called  a  line  whofe  power  is  two  medials,  wasbefor6  inf 
theende  of  the  dcmonftration  declared. 

And  thatthe  faid  irrationall  lines  are  deuided  oneway  onely,  that  is ,  in  one  point  onely , 
into  theright  lines  ofwhich  they  are  compofed,  andwhich  make  euery  one  of  the  kindes  of 
thofe  irrationall  lines,  fall firaigkt  way  be  demOnf rated :  butfrjlwillwe  demonftrate  two 
ajfumptes  here following. 

«[  AnAflhmpt. 

E  ake  Aright  line  and  let  the fame  be  A  B,  anddeuide  it  intoiWo  unequal! partes  M  the 
point  C,and  againe  deuide  the fame  line  A  B  into  two  other  unequal  partes, in  an  other  point 
namely,  in  E,  and  let  the  line  A  C  (by  fuppofition)  be  greater  then  the  line  E  B .  Then  I  fay 
* '  l  >  that 


1 


L 

i 


F  M 


DemwRro* 
tion , 


TEffniiion  of 
a  Ike  contai¬ 
ning  in  power 
two  medials* 


An  Afinmpu 


Thetenth'Bookg 

that  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  B  C  added  together, are  greater  then  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  A D  and  D  B  added  together.  Deuide  the  line  AB  (by  the  io.  of  the  fir jl )  into  two  e- 
quall partes  in  the  point  E .  And  for  a [much  as  the  line  A  C  is  greater  then  the  line  D  B,  take 
away  the  line  D  C  which  is  common  to  them  both  •  wherfore  the  refidue  A  D  is  greater  then 
the  refidue  C  B,but  the  line  A  E  is  equall  to  the  line  E  B .  Wherfore  the  line  D  E  is  lefts  then 
the  line  E  C.  Wherfore  the  point  es  <C  and  D  are  not 

equally  diftant  from  the point  E, which  is  the  point  a  v  c  r 

of  the feciion  into  two  equall  partes.  And  foraf-  * — — — — * — t - -+■— — f 

much  as  ( by  the  $.  of  the  fecond )  that  which  is  con¬ 
tayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  together  with  the f quart  of  the  line  E  C  is  equall  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  E  B .  And  by  the fame  reafon  that  which  is  cohtayned  vnder  the  lynes  A  D 
and  D  B  together  with  the fquare  of  the  line  D  E,is  alfo  equall  to  the  felf fame fquare  of the 
lineE  B :  wherfore  that  which  is  contained  'under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  together  with  the 
fquare  of  the  line  E  C  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  to¬ 
gether  with  the fquare  of  the  line  D  E  :  of  which  the fquare  of  the  line  D  E  is  lefie  then  the 
fquare  of the  lineE  C  (for  it  wasproued  that  the  line  D  E  is  lefie  then  the  line  EC).  Wher - 
fore  the parallelogrammcremayning,contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  is  lefie  the  the 
parallelogramme  remay ning  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  T)  B.  Wherfore  alfo  that 
which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twifieis  lefie  then  that  which  is  contayned 
vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife. But  (  by  tlx  fourth  of the fecond)the fquare  of the  whole 
line  A  Bis  equall  to  that  which  is  compo fed  of  the  fquares  of  the  Until  A  C  and  CB  toge¬ 
ther  with  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lynes  AC  and  CB  twife,  and  by  the 
fame  reafon  the  fquare  of  the  whole  line  A  B  is  equall  to  that  which  is  compofed  of  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  together  with  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lynes  A 
D  and  D  B  twife :  wherfore  that  which  is  compofed  of the fquares  of  the  lynes  A  C  and  C  B 
together  with  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lynes  A  C  and  CB  twife,  is  equall  to  that 
which  is  compofed  of the fquares  of  the  lynes  A  D  and  D  B, together  with  that  which  is  con - 
tayned  vnder  the  lynes  A  D  and  D  B  twife.  But  it  is  already prouedthat  that  which  is  con¬ 
tayned  vnder  the  lynes  A  C  and  C  B  twife,  is  lefie  then  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  tb& 
lines  AD  &  D  B  twife. Wherfore  the  refidue, namely, that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares 
of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  is  greater  then  the  refidue, namely,  then  that  which  is  compofed  of 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  V  and  D  B  .•  which  rvas  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 

'^AnAffumpt. 

J  rationaU fuperficies  exceedeth  a  ration aU fuperficies,  by  a  ration  all fit* 
per f cm,  .  .  . 


Let  AD  be  a  rationaU fuperficics,  and  let  it  txceede  A  F 
being  alfo  a  rationall  fuperficies  by  thefuperficies  E  D.Then 
I  fay  that  thefuperficies  E  D  is  alfo  rationaU.  F or  theparal - 
If  logramme  si  D  is  esmmen  fur able  to  the  parallelogramme 
A  F, for  that  either  of  them  is  rationall.  Wherefore  (by  the 
fecond  part  of  the  15. <f the  tenth)  the  parallelogramme  odf 
F  is  commenf arable  to  the  parallelogramme  ED.  But  the 
the  parallelogramme  A  F  is  rationall.Wherfore  alfo  the  pa- 
ralldogramme  E  D  is  rationale 


3 


E 


JL 


\  r. 


fTU 


wmMm 


of  Suclitles  Elemcntes «  FoLz6z» 

f  The  3  o.Theoreme.  T he  42.  Tropojition . 

A binomiall  line  is  in  one  point  onely  derided  into  his  names . 


Fppofe  that  A  B  be  a  binomiall  tine,  and  in  the  point  C  let  it  be  deuided  into 
his  names,  that  is, into  the  lines  wherof  the  whole  line  A  B  is  compofed.  W there¬ 
fore  thefe  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  rationall  cowmen  fur  able  in  power  onely. Now  I 
fay  that  the  line  A  B  cannot  in  any  other point  bsjides  C  be  deuided  into  two  ra¬ 
tionall  lines  commenfur able  in  power  onely. For 

if it  bepoffible,let  it  be  deuided  in  the  point  D,  f. _ f-f - It _ 5 

fo  that  let  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  be  rationall 

commenfurablc  in  power  onely. Fir Jl  it  is  manifest, that  neither  of thefe pointes  C  and  D  de- 
uideth  the  right  line  A  B  into  two  e quail partes.  Otherwife  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  fhould  be 
rationall  commenfur  able  in  length, and fo  likewife  fhould  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  be.  Tor  e- 
uery  line  meafureth  it felfe,  and  any  other  line  e quail  to  it felfe. AMoreouer  the  line  D  B  is 
either  one  and  the  fame  with  the  line  A  C,that  is, is  equall to  the  line  A  C,  or  els  it  is  greater 
then  the  line  A  C, either  els  it  is  leffe  then  it.lfDB  be  equall  to  the  line  A  C, then putting  the 
line  D  B  upon  the  line  C  eche  endues  of  the  one,  (hall  agree  with  eche  endes  of  the  other. 
V/herfore  putting  the  point  B  vpon  the  point  A  ,t he  point  D  alfo  fall fall  upon  the  point  C, 
and  the  line  A  D  which  is  the  ref  of  the  line  A  C,fhall  alfo  be  equall  to  the  line  C  B, which  is 
the  ref  of the  line  DB.  Wherfore  the  line  AB  is  deuided  into  his  names  in  the  point  C.Andfo 
alfo foal  the  line  A  B  being  deuided  in  the  point  D  he  deuided  in  the f elf  fame  point  that  the 
fe  if  fame  line  AB  was  before  deuided  in  the  point  C, which  is  cotrary  to  the fuppoftio.For  by 
fuppofitio  it  was  deuided  in fundry  pointes, namely,  inCfyD  .But  if  the  line  DB  be  greater 
the  the  line  AC, let  the  line  A  B  be  deuided  into  two  equal partes  in  the  point  E. Wherfore  the 
points  C  dr  Dfhal  not  equally  be  difant fro  the point  F.Now(  by  the  fir f  afupt  going  before 
tbispropcfitio)tbat  which  is  copofed  of  the fquares  ofy  lines  A  D  dr  D  B  is  greater  the  that 
which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  AC  dr  CB.  But  that  which  is  compofed  of the 
fquares  of  the  lines  AD  dr  DB  together  with  that  which  is  cotained  under  the  lines  AD  dr 
D  B  twife,is  equall  to  that  which  is  compofedofthe  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  dr  CB  together 
with  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twifefor  either  of  them  is  equall 
to  the  fqu are  of  the  whole  line  A  B  (by  the  4. of  the  fecond) :  wherefore  how  much  that  which 
is  c  opofed  of the fq  uares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  added  together  is  greater  then  that  which 
is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  added  together,  jo  much  is  that  which  is 
contained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife greater  then  that  which  is  contained  under  the 
lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife.  But  that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D 
B  excedeth  that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of the  lines  A  C  and  CB  by  a  rationall  fu- 
perficies(  by  the  2.  afumpt  going  before  this  propojition.)  For  that  which  is  compofed  of  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  is  rationall,  and fo  alfo  is  that  which  is  compofed  of  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B.for  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  are  put  to  be  rationall  commen - 
fir  able  in  power  onely, and fo  likewife  are  the  lines  AC  andc  B.  Wherfore  alfo  that  which  is 
contained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife ,  exceedeth  that  which  is  contained  under  the 
lines  A  D  dr  DB  twife  by  a  rationalfuperfcies,wheyet  notwithjlading  they  are  both  medial 
fuperfcieces  ( by  the  21 .  of the  tenth ) :  which  (by  the  26.  of the fame )  is  impofible.  And  if  the 
line  D  B  be  lejfe  then  the  line  A  C,we  may  by  the  like  demon  (Ir at  ion  proue  the felfe fame  im- 
pofibilitie.  Wherfore  a  binomiall  line  is  in  one  point  onely  deuided  into  his  names ;  Which 
spas  required  to  be  demonfirated. 


IX.;. 


The  fecond  Se 
nary  by  com - 
pojit'mn. 


Demonflrri* 

0>t  leading  to 
an  impojiibi - ' 

line. 


Cor  rollary 


*4  CeroHary . 


DtmmBrd- 
Sion  leading  to 
attimfjiofiibi- 

Ime . 


Dmonfijratio 
Heading  to  m 
impojfibUnie, 


Corollary  added  by  Fluffates. 

1  wo  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely  being  added  together  cannot  be  equatt  to  two 
other  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely  added  together  .  For  either  of  them  fhould 
make  a  binomiall  line,and  fo  fhould  a  binomiall  line  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  moc 
poyntes  then  onenvhich  by  this  propofition  is  proued  to  be  impoffibie  *  The  like  fliall 
follow  in  the  fiue'ncxt  irrationall  lines  as  touching  their  two  names, 

f  T he  .?  i.  Trobleme.  X he  43.  Tropofition. 

. 

A firft  bimediall  line  is  in  one poynt  onely  deuided  into  his  names. 

Fppofe  that  AB  be  afirfi  bimediall  line ,  and  let  it  he  deuided  into  his  partes 
the  point  C  fo  that  let  the  lines  AC  and  C  B  he  mediall  comenfurable  in  power 
onely, and  containing  a  rationall fuperfcies. T hen  I fay  that  the  line  A  B  can  not 

_ I  he  deuided  into  his  names  in  any  other  poynt  then  in  C .  For  if it  hepofftble  let  it 

he  deuided  into  his  names  in  the poynt  D  ,  fo  that  let 

AD^DB^  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in  power  A  pc  B 

onely, comprehending  a  rationallfuperfcies.  flow  for-  ■  f 

afmuch  as  how  much  that  which  is  contayned  vnder 

the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  trvife  differreth  from  that  which  is  contayned  'under  the  lines  A  C 
and  QB  twife,  fo  much  differreth  that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  AT) 
and  D  B  from  that  which  is  compofed  of the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  .•  but  that 
which  is  contayned 'under  the  lines  A  D  andD  B  twife  differreth  from  that  which  is  contay 
ned  'under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife, by  a  rationall  fuperfcies  (  by  the  fecondaffumpt go¬ 
ing  before  the  41. of  the  tenth). For  either  of  thofe fuperfcieces  is  rationall .  Wherefore  that 
which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  differ eth  from  that  which  is  com 
pofed  of  the  fquares  of the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  by  a  rationall  fuperfcies ,  when  yet  they  art 
both  mediall  fuperfcieces  .-which  is  impoffibie.  Wherefore  a frjl  bimediall  line  is  in  one  poynt 
onely  deuided  into  his  names:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

ff  The  32.  Theorems.  The  44.  ^Propofition. 

Afecond  bimediall  line  is  in  one  poynt  onely  deuided  into  his  names . 

Fppofe  that  the  line  AB  being  a  fecond  bimediall  line ,  be  deuided  intohys 
names  in  the  poynt  C  :fo  that  let  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  be  mediall  lints  com - 
menfurable  in  power  onely, comprehending  a  mediall  fuperfcies .  It  is  manifefi 
that  the poynt  C  deuideth  not  the  whole  line  AB  into  two  equalt partes .  For 
the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  not  commenfurable  in  length  the  one  to  the  other. Now  l fay  that 
the  line  A  B  cannot  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  any  other  poynt  but  onely  in  C .  For  if  it  be 
poffiblefiet  it  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  the  poynt  D,fo  that  let  not  the  line  AC  be  one  and 
the fame, that  is, let  it  not  be  equall,with  the  line  D  B  .But  let  it  be  greater  then  it.  Now  it  is 
' manifefi  ( by  thefirfi  affumpt going  before  the  42 .  propofition  of  this  bookt )  that  the fquares 
of the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  greater  then  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  andT)  B  .  And  alfa 
that  the  lines  A  V)  and  D  B  are  mediall  lines  commenfurable  in power  onely,  comprehending 
a  mediall  fuperficies.T ake  a  rationall  line  E  F  ,And(  by  the  44. of  the firfi )  vpon  the  line  E  F 
apply  a  rectangle  parallelograme  E  K  e  quail  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B .  From  which pa- 
rallelograme  take  away  the parallelograme  EG  e quail  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AC  and 
C  B  Wherefore  the  r ejidue, namely , the parallelograme  HK  is  equal 7  to  that  which  is  contxi- 


ned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  .Ag ay ne from  the  the parallelograme  E  K  take  aivdjl 
l  he  parallelogram  e  E  L  equall  to  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  which  are  lefe  then 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B .  Wherefore  the  re- 

f due, namely,  the.  parallelograme  M  K  is  equall  to  that  A _ TO  c  3 

which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  arid  D  B  Wife, 

And fordfmuch  as  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B 
are  mediall,  therefore  the farallelograme  E  G  alfo  is  me- 
diall.And it  is  apply  ed vpon  the  rationall line  E  F ;  where¬ 
fore  the  line  E  H  is  rationall  and  incommenf arable  in 
length  to  the  line  E  F  .  cAnd  by  the  fame  reafon ,  the 
farallelograme  H  K  is  mediall  ( for  that  which  is  e- 
quallvnto  it, namely, that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  A  C  and  C  B  wife  is  mediall )  therefore  the  line 
H  N  is  alfo  rationall  and  iniommen  fur  able  in  length  vn- 
to  the  line  E  F  And forafmuch  as  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B 
arc  mediall  lines  commenfur able  in  power  onely,  therefore 
the  line  A  C  is  incommensurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  C  B.  But  as  the  line  A  C  is  to  the 
line  C  B  fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  AC  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C 
and  C  B  (by  the  1 .  of  the fixt ) .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C  is  mcommenfurable  to 
that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  .But  ( by  the  16. of  the  tenth  )vnto  the 
fquare  of the  line  A  C  are  commenfur  able  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  added  to¬ 
gether,  for  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  commenfur  able  in  power  onely  And  vnto  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  is  commenfur  able  that  which  is  contayned  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife .  Wherefore  that  which  is  compcfed  of  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  A  C  and  CB,  is  incommenfirable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C 
and  C  B  twife .  But  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  is  equall  the  parallelograms 
E  G,and  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  is  equall  the par a- 
lelograme  b\YW her  fore  the.  parallelograme  E  G  is  incommenfirable  to  the  parallelograms 
H  K  Wherefore  alfo  thelineE  B  is  incommenfirable  in  length  to  the  line  B  N  .  And  the 
lines'E  H  and  H  N  are  rationall.Wheref ore  they  are  rationall  commenfur able  in power  one- 
If:  but  if two  rationall  lines  commenfur  able  in  power  onely  be  added  together, the  whole  line  is 
irratidndll,and  is  called  a  binomiall  line  (  by  the  3d.  of the  tenth )  .  Wherefore  the  binomiall 
line  E  N  is  in  the  poynt  H  deuidedinto  his  names.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  it  be 
proued  that  the  lines  E,  M  andtsA  N  are  rationall  lines  commenfur  able  in  fewer  onely.  Wher 
fore  EN  being  a  binomiall  line  is  deuidedinto  his  names  in fundry  poyntes,. namely  ,inW 
and  M,  neither  is  she  line  E  H  one  and  the fame, that  is, equal  with  M  N  .For  the fquares  of 
the  lines  A  C  and C  B  are  greater  then  the  fquares  of the  lines  B  D  and  AD  (by  the  i.af 
fumptput  after  the  4i.of the  tenth  )  •  But  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  are  greater 
then  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife  ( by  the  affumpt  put  after 
the  30  .of the  tenth ) .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  andCB,that  is, the  parallelo¬ 
grame  EG  is  much  greater  then  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AD  and  DB 
twife, that  is  then  the  parallelograme  M  K  .Wh  erf  ore  (  by  the  fir fl  of thefixt )  the  line  EH  is 
greater  then  the  line  M  N .  Wherefore  EHw  not  one  and  the fame  with  M  N . Wherefore  a 
binomiall  line  is  in  two  fundry  poyntes  deuidedinto  his  names. Which  is  impcfjible .  T  he felfe 
fame  abfurditie  alfo  will  follow  if the  line  AG  be  fuppofed  to  be  lefe  then  the  line  D  B  .  A 
fecond  binomiall  line  therefore  is  not  deuidid  into  his  names  in  fundry  poyntes. Where  fore  it 
is  deuidedin  one  onely  iwhich  was  required  to  bedemonflrated. 


M  H  N 


T)ar,onfhait* 
on  leading  to 
an  impcjhbi* 
Hue. 


f  T he  33-  T heoreme.  The  4s.  ’Tropofition. 

‘J greater  line  is  in  one  poynt  onely  deuided  into  his  names . 

U.f 


L&f 


Demon  ft  rati¬ 
on  leading  to 
an  impof&bi- 
itie . 


Demnflrati- 
on  leading  to 
an  impofitbi- 

ink. 


*Ihetenth<Booke 

\Et  AB  being  a  greater  line  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  thcpoynt  G,fo  that  let  the 
lines  A  C  and  CB^  ration  all  incommensurable  in  power,  hauing  that  which  is 
compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  ration  all, and  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  'under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  mediall.Then  J  fay  that  the  line  A  B  can  not  in  an y  o- 
ther poynt  then  in  C  be  deuided  into  his  names.  F or 

if  it  bepoffiblejet  it  be  deluded  into  his  names  in  the  .  "DC  B 

poynt  D,fo  that  let  AD  WDB  be  lines  incomme-  - - - - — - - 

furabkin  power, hauing  that  which  is  compofed  of 

the  fquares  oft  he  lines  A  D  and  D  B  rationally  and  that  which  is  contayned  under  the  lines 
A  D  and  D  B  mediall.Now forafmuch  as  how  much  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B 
differ  from  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  andD  Bfo  much  differ  eth  that  which  is  contained 
under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife  from  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A.  C  and 
C  B  twifefy  thofe  thinges  which  haue  bene  fayd  in  the  demonstration  of  the42.propofiti - 
on. But  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AG  and  C  B  exceede  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AD  and 
Ty&by  a  raticnallfuperfcies( for  they  are  either  of  them  rationall)  Wherfore  that  which  is 
contained  under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife  exceedeth  that  which  is  contained  under  the 
lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  by  a  rationall fuperfcies:  when  as  either  of  them  is  a  mediall fuper- 
jlties. Which  is  imp  off  ble  (  by  the  26. of  the  tenth  )  .  Wherefore  a  greater  line  is  in  one  poynt 
onely  deuided  into  his  names:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


f  The  34.  Theoreme.  The  46.  Tropofition . 


^A  line  contayning  in  power  a  rational!  and  a  medially  is  in  one  point  one* 
ly  deuided  into  his  names. 

Et  A  B  being  a  line  containing  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  medial! ,  be  deui¬ 
ded  into  his  names  in  the  point  C,fo  that  let  the  lines  A  C&CBbc  incom- 
menfurable  in power,  hauing  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  A  C  and  C  B  mediall,  and  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines 
AC  and  C  B  rationall. T hen  I  fay, that  the  line  A  B  can  not  in  any  other 
point  be  deuided  into  his  names  but  onely  in  the point  C .  For  if  it  be  pop- 
ble,  let  it  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  the  point  I), 

f>  that  let  the  lines  AD  andD  B  be  incommenfura-  ■  js  C  B 

ble in power,  hauing  that  which  is  compofed  of the  t  .  1  ■»  ■ — t  ■ ■  > 

fquares  of the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  mediall, and  that 

"which  is  contayned  under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  rationall .  Now  forafmuch  as  how  much 
that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  AD  &DB  twife  differethfrom  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife, fo  much  differ  the  fquares  of the  lines  A  C  dr  C  B 
added  together  from  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  added  together .  But  that  which 
is  contayned  under  the  lines  AC  and  CB  twife  excedeth  that  which  is  contained  under  the. 
lines  A  DandDB  twife  by  a  rationall fuperfcies  ( for  either  of  them  is  rationall )  .  Wher¬ 
fore.  alfo  the  fquares  oft  he  lines  A  C  and  CB  added  together,  exceede  the fquares  of  the  linet 
A  D  and  DB  added  together  by  a  rationall fuperfcies,  when  yet  ech  of them  is  a  mediall  ft - 
perfeies :  which  is  impofible .  Wherefore  a  line  containing  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  medi¬ 
al!,  is  in  one  point  onely  deuided  into  his  names :  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 


ofSudides  Efementes* 

fjThe  3 S' Theorems.  The  47*  fropofitlon. 

jf  Hue  con  t  ay  rung  in  power  two  tnediuls  t  is  in  one  point  onely  deuided  ini  & 
bis  names . 


p-ppofe  that  A  B  being  a  tine  containing  in  fewer  Mo  medialh,  be  deuided  into 
his  names  in  thefoint  C,fo  that  let  the  lines  A  C  and  C  h  be  incommenfnt  avis 
in  power, hauing  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  n  u  &  C  B 

mediall,  and  that  alfo  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  msaiail, 

■  .  .  r  .  11  /  .j. nFtl>v  fruixvac  aft  ha  ftvtrt  A  C  &ftd 


A 


V  c 


3 


apdmoreouerincOmmenfurable'to  that  which  is  compofed  of  thefcpuaris  cjthe  lines  A 
CB  .  Then  I  fay , that  the  line  A  B  can  in  no  other  point 
be  deuided  into  his  names  but  onely  in  the  point  C .  For  if 
it  bepofible,  let  it  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  the  point 
3,fo  that  let  not  the  line  A  C  be  one  and  the  fame, that  is, 
e  quail  with  the  line  D  B:bui  by fuppofition  let  the  line  A  C 
be  the, greater .  And  take  a  rational!,  line  E  F.And  (by  the 
4}  .oflhefrf)  v'poh  the  line  EE  apply  ar  eel  angle  par  die- 
loqrame  E  G  equall  to  that  which  is  copofed  cfthefqmres 
cf  the  lines  A  C  and  GB  :  and  Ukeivife  ropon  the  line  H  G, 
which  is  equall  to  the  line  E  F,  apply  the parallelogramme 
UK  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C 
and  C  B  twife.  Wherefore  the  whole parallelogramme  E  K 

is  equall  to  thefqtiare  of  the  line  A  B.  Againe.vpon  the  fame  UneE  F  deferibe  theparalle- 
logramme  E  L  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B .  Wherefore  the  refidue, name¬ 
ly,  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  line's.  AD  and  D  B  twife,  is  equall  to  the  far  allele - 
gramme  remaining, namely, to  M  K .  Andforafmuch  as  that  which  is  copofed  of  the  fquares 
of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B,  is  (by fupptrft ion)  medial f therefore  the parallelograme  E  G  which 
is  equall  vnto  it,  is  alfo  mediall :  and  it  is  applied  vpon  the  rationall  line  E  F  .  Wherefore 
(by  the  22.of  the  tenth)  the  line  H  E  is  rational! and inconmenfur able  in  length  vnto  the 
line  EE .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  the  line  U  N  is  rationall  and  incomm  en fur able  m 
length  to  the  fame  line  E  F .  Andforafmuch  as  that  which  is  empefe'd  of the  fquares  of the 
lines  AC  am  CB  is  incqmmmfafable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder.  the  lines  AC  and 
C  B  twife  ( for  it  is  fuff  o fed  to  be  incopmenfurable-to  that  which  is  cptamed  vnder  the  lines 
AC  and  C  B  once  )  :  therefore  the- parallelogramme  EG  is  incommenfurable  to  the  far  alls- 
logramme  H  K .  Wherefore  the  line  E FI  alfo  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  H  IF, 
and  they  are  rationall  lines :  wh  erf  ore  the  lines  EH  and  UN  are  rationall  common  fur  able 
in  power  onely  .Wherefore  the  whole  line  EN  is  a  binomial!  line,  and  is  deuided  into  his 
names  in  the  point  U.  And  in  like fort  may  we  prone, that  the fame  binomiall  line  EN  is  de¬ 
cided  into  his  names  in  the  point  M,  and  that  the  line  E  H  is  not  one  and  the  fame  that  is  e-< 
email  with  the  line  M  N,  as  it  was  proued  in  the  end  of  the  demonstration  of  the  44.  of  this 
booke .  Wherefore  a  binomiall  line  is  deuided  into  his  names  in  twofwdrypointes:  which  is 
impofible  ( by  the  42. of  the  tenth)  .  Wherefore  aline  containing  in  power  two  medialsfs  not 
infundry  point  es  deuided  into  his  names . .  Wherefore  it  is  deuided  in  one  point  onely  :  m 


1 !.(((. 


9  Second 


Shcekjndes  of 

bimmui 

lints. 


,A  binomiall 
line  can/ifteib 
of  two  partes. 


dFirftdijfwi - 
sms. 


Stand  di fil¬ 
ms  ion • 


Third  iijfms - 

t'mn 


f  Second  {Definitions.  > 

T  was  (hewed  before  that  of  binomiall  lines  there  were  fixekindes,  the 
definitions  of  all  which  are  here  now  fet,and  are  called  fecond  definitios. 
All  binomiall  lines,  as  all  other kindes  of  irrationall  lines, are  coceaued, 
cofidercd,and  perfectly  vnderftandedonely  in  relpe&e  ofarationall  line 
(whofe.partes  as  before  is  taught,.are  certayne,and  knowen,  and  may  be 
diftin&ly  expreffed  by  number)  vnto  which  line  they  are  compared. Thys 
rationall  line  muft  ye  euer  haue  before  your  eyes, in  all  thefe  definitions,fo  lhall  they  all 
be  eafieinough. 

A  binomiall  Iine(ye  know)  is  made  of  two  partes  or  names,  wherof  the  one  is  greater 
then  the  other.  Wherfore  the  power  or  fquare  alfo  of  the  one  is  greater  then  the  power 
or  fquare  of  the  other .  The  three  firftkindesofbinomialllincs,nameIy,thefirft,thefe- 
cond,&  the  third,are  produced,when  the  fquare  of  the  greater  name  or  part  of  a  bino¬ 
mials  excedeth  the  fquare  of  the  lefle  name  or  part, by  the  fquare  of  a  line  which  is  com¬ 
mensurable  in  length  to  it, namely,  to  the  greater.  The  three  laft  kindes,  namely,  the 
fourth ,  the  fifigand  the  fixt,are  produced,when  the  fquare  of  the  greater  name  or  part 
exceedeth  the  fquare  of  the  Idle  name  or  part,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable 
In  length  vnto  it,that  is, to  the  greater  part. 

jdfirft  binomiall  line  is  ,Tvhofe  fquare  of  the  greater  part  exceedeth  the 
fquare  of  the  life part  by  thejquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  greater  part ,  and  the  greater  part  is  alfo  commenfurable  in  length  to 

the  rationall  line  firfl  fet. 

As  let  the  rationall  line  firft  fet  be  A  B  :  whofe  partes  are  diflin&ly  knowen  :  fuppofe  alfo  that  the 
line  C  E  be  a  binomiall  line,  whofe  names  or  partes  let  be  CD  and  DE  .  And  let  the  fquare  of  the  line 
C  D  the  greater  part  excede  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  E  the  lelfe  part  by  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G :  which 
line  F  G,  let  bee  commen-  •-» 

furabie  in  length  to  the  line  „ 

C  D,  which  is  the  greater  A  > - - - ' - ■ - * - * 

part  of  the  binomiall  line.  -p 

And  moreouer  let  the  line  '-l  ' - 1 - 1 - 1 - ' - 1 - 1 - 1 * •  ■  *  * 

C  D  the  greater  part  be  com 

menfurble  in  length  to  the  F  t - 1 - 1 - * - t - » — -i  0 

rationall  line  nrftiet,  name¬ 
ly,  to  A  B.So  by  this  defini¬ 
tion  the  binomiall  line  C  E  is  a  firfl  binomiall  line. 


J fecond  binomiall  line  is  3  Tohen  the  fquare  of  the  greater  part  exceedeth 
the  fquare  of the  lejfe  part  by  the fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length 
j>nto  it 2  and  the  le fie  part  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line 

firftfet. 


As  (fuppofing  euer  the  rational!  line)  let  CE  be  a  binomiall  line  deuided  in  the  poynt  D.  The 
fquare  of  whofe  greater  part  C  D  let  cxceede  the  fquare  of  the  leffe  part  D  E  by  the  fquare  of  the  line 

FG,  which 

line  F  G  let  be  C - - - - - - - g. 

comenmrable 

in  length  vnto  p  f _  ,  c- 

the  line  CD 
the  -  greater  -  ■ 

part  of  the  binomiall  line  .  And  let  alfo  the  line  D  E  the  leffe  part  of  the  binomiall  line  be  commenfu- 
rable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  firft:  fet  A  B  .  So  by  this  definition  the  binomiall  line  C  E  is  a  fecond 

binomiall  line. 

A  third  binomiall  line  is 3  Tohen  the  fquare  of the  greater  part  excedeth  the 

-  'fquare 


/ 

I 


Fohitip* 


fquare  of  the  lejfe  partly,  the /quart  of a  line  comenfurahle  in  length  ImtQ 
it.  And  neither  part  is  commenj arable  m  length  to  the  rationall  line gene. 

As  fuppofe  the  line  C  E  to  be  a  binomial!  line :  whole  partes  are ioyned  together  in  the  poynt  D*. 
and  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  D  the  greater  part  exceede  the  fquare  of  the  Idle  part  D  E  by  the  fquare 
of  the  line  F  G,  and 

let  the  line  F  G  be'  ^  , _  .  .  - . — - - - - - t  E 

commenfurable  in 

length  to  the  line  f  v  ..  .  ..  .  ,  Q 

C  D  the  greater  part 
of  the  binomiall . 

ftloreouer,  let  neither  the  greater  part  C  D,  nor  the  leffe  part  DE,  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
rationall  line  A  B,  then  is  the  line  G  E  by  this  definition  a  third  binomiall  line. 


Jl  fourth  binomiall  lineis,Mtohen  the  fquare  of the  greater  part  exceedeth 
the  fquare  of the  lejfe  by  the fquare  of a  line  incommenj arable  in  lengthen* 
to  the  greater  part .  And  the  greater  isalfo  commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  rationall  line. 


Fourth  dipt* 
union r* 


As  let  the  line  C  E  be  a  binomiall  lineywhofe  partes  let  be  C  D  &  D  E,  Sc  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  C 
D  the  greater  part 
exceede  the  fquare 

of  the  line  DE  the  A*-* — 1—1 — t — 1—+—1 — h  B 

leffe,  by  the  fquare  V 

of  the  line  FG,  **  « — ,-*■-+-#  t  *  r  t  i  •  - 

And  let  the  line  F 

Gbeincommenfu-  ^  < - t  <? 

rable  in  length  to 

the  line  CD  the  greater.  Let  alfo  the  line  CD  the  greater  part  be  commenfurable  in  length  vnto 
ehe  rationall  line  A  B  .  Then  by  this  definition  the  line  C  E  is  a  fourth  binomiall  line. 

A fift  binomiall  line  is,  Tohen  the fquare  of  the  greater  part  exceedeth  the  Fifth  iiffkb 
fquare  of the  lefle  part,  by  the fquare  of a  line  incommenfurable  lonto  it  in  Hon* 
length .  And  the  lejfe  part  aljo  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall 
Itnegeuen. 


As  fuppofe  that  C  E  be  a  binomiall  line,  whofe  greater  part  let  be  C  D,  and  let  the  leffe  part  be  D  E, 

And  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  CD  exccde  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  E  by  the  fquare  of  tire  line  F  G,\vhich 
let  be  incomen  furable  in  length  vn¬ 
to  the  line  CD  the  greater  part  of  p  _ 

the  binomiall  line .  And  let  the  line  - - - - — ' - '  - - *  4 

D  E  the  fecond  part  of  the  binpmi- 

all  line  be  commenfurable  in  length  « - - “ — *  0 

vnto  the  rationall  line  AB  .  So  is  the 
line  C  E  by  this  definition  a  fift  bi- 
nomiallline. 

A flxt  binomiall  line  is, ^hen  the  fquare  of  the  greater  part  exceedeth 
the  fquare  of  the  lefle,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  Smh  ^ 
^nto  it .  And  neither  part  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  * 
line  nuen, 

V-  o  *  .  v  , 


As  lettheline  C  E  be  a  binomiall  line,deuided  into  his  names  in  the  point  D. The  fquare  of  whofe 
’eater  part  CD  let  exceede  the  fquare of  the  leffe  part  DE  by  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G,and  let  the 
oc  FG  be  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  CD  the  greater  part  of  the  binomiall  line. Let  alfo 

II.  iiij,  ueithet 


V 


7b?  third  Se¬ 
nary  by  com - 
pofimru 

CentfruHion, 


'Dmwf.ra- 

tian. 


>a 


neither  CD  the  greater  part,  nor  DE  '  .  .  -.p 

the  lefle  part  be  commensurable  in  c  " 1  '  ■  — 

length  to  the  rationall  line  A  B .  And  F  >-■■■;■  r  i  <j 

fo  by  this  definition  the  line  C  E  is  a 

fixt  binomiall line.  So  ye  fee  that  by  thefe  definitions,  &:  their  exaraples^nd  declaration s,all  the  kindes 
6r  binomiall lines  are  made  very  playne. 

This  is  to  be  noted  that  here  is  nothing.fpoken  of  thofelxnesJboth  whofe  portions 
are  commenfurable  inlength  vnto  the  rational!  line  hrft  fet3  for  that  fiich  lines  cannot 
be  binomiall  lines. For  binomiall  line  s  are  compofed  oftwo  rationall  lines  commenfu- 
rablc  in  Power  onely  (by  the  36.  of  this  booke) .  But  linesboth  whofe  portions  arc 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall.line  firft  fet  are  not  binomiall  lines  .  For  that 
the  partes  of  fuch  lines  ihouid  by  the  12  .of  this  booke  be  commenfurable  in.  length  the 
one  to  theother.And  fo  fhould  they  not  bc  fuch  lines  as  are  required  to  the  compofid- 
on  pfa  binomiall  line.Moreouer  fuch  lines  fhould  not  be  irrationall  but  rationall ,  for 
thatthey-are  commenfurable  to  ech  of  the  parts  whereof  they  are  copofed  (by  the  1 5 . 
of  this  booke).  And  therefore  they  Ihouid  be  radonallfor  that  the  lines  which  compofe 
them  are  rationall.  1 


f  The  13.  Trobleme . 

T  0  finds  out  a  fir  ft  binomiall  line. 


The  48. proportion. 


CM 


Yd^^nAmd^vnto  BC  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 
( number. But  vnto  the  other, namely, vnto  C  A  let  it  not  haue  that  proportion 
iJjjt  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number  ( fuch  as  is  euery  fquare  num¬ 
ber  which  maybe  deuided  into  a  fquare  number  and  into  a  number  not  fquare)  .  T akealfba 
certayne  rationall  line ,  and  let  the 


fame  be  D .  And  vnto  the  line  D  let 
the  line  E  F  be  commenfurable  in 
length.  Wherefore  the  line  E  E  is  fa 
tionall .  And  as  the  number  A  B  is 
to  the  nuber  A  C  ,fo  let  the  fquare 
of  the  line  E  F  be  to  the  fquare  of an 
other  line, namely  F  G(by  the  co¬ 
rollary  of the  fixt  off  teth )  Wher- 
fore  the fquare  of  the  line  E  F  hath 


tax 


H 


Be  a, 


C  ....S 


to  the  fquare  oft  he  line  F  G  that  proportion  that  number  hath  to  number .  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  E  F  is  commenfurable  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G(by  the  6. of this  booke) 
And  the  line  E  F  is  rationall  Wherefore  the  line  F  G  alfo  is  rationall. And forafmuch  as  the 
number  A  B  hath  not  to  the  number  A  C,  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a 
jquare  number, neither  foal  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  haue  to  the fquare  of the  line  F  G  that 
proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  afquare  number.  Wherefore  the  line  EF/V  incom- 
’ men  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  F  G  ( by  the  9  .of this  booke  )  .  Wherefore  the  lines  E  F  and 
F  &  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  Wherefore  the  whole  line  E  G  is  a  binomi- 
all  line  ( by  the  3  6, of  the  tenth )  .  I  fay  alfo  that  it  is  afirfl  binomiall  line .  For for  that  as  the 
number  B  A  is  to  the  number  A  C  ,fo  is  the  fquare  of the  line  E  F  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
F  G  :but  the  number  B  A  is  greater  then  the  number  A  C:  wherefore  the  fquare  of the  line 
E  F  is  alfo  greater  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G .  Vnto  the  fquare  of  the  HneRV  let  the 
jquares  of  the  lines  V  G  and  H  be  eqmll (which  how  to finds  out  is  taught  in  the  ajfumpt  put 

'  after 


ofSuclides  Ekntenteu  FoLi66» 

after  tbe\$  .of  the  tenth  )  .  And forthat  as  the  number  B  A  is  to  the  number  A  C ,  fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  EE  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  .*  therefore  (  by  conuerfion  or  euerfion  of 
proportion(by  the  corollary  of  the  i  g  .of the fift)as  the  number  A  B  is  to  the  number  B  C  fo 
is  the fquare  of the  line  E  F  to  the fquare  oft  he  line  H  .But  the  number  A  B  hath  to  the  mm 
her  B  C  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  alfothe 
fquare  of  the  lineE  F  hath  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  Wt  hat  proportion  that  a  fquare  number 
hath  to  a fquare  number .  Wherefore  the  line  E  F  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  UneW. 

( by  the  p.of this  booke  .  Wherefore  the  line  E  F  is  in  power  more  then  the  line'E  G  [by  the 
fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  F .  And  the  lines  E  F  and  F  G  are  ra¬ 
tion  all  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  And  the  line  E  F  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
rationall  line  D  Wherefore  the  line  EG  is  a  firfi  binomiall  line .  which  was  required  to  be 
doone. 

The  ijJProhleme.  T he  4p.(PropoJttion. 

T o i  fin de  out  a  fecund  binomiall  line. 

fffrfffAke  two  numbers  A  C  and  C  B ,  and  let  them  be  fuch  that  the  number  made  of 
0§ji|  them  both  added  together, namely,  A  B  haue  vnto  B  C  that proportio  that  a  fquarc 
HP*  \dAnumber  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,  and  vnto  the  number  C  A  let  it  not  haue  that 
proportion  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,  as  it  was  declared  in  the  former 
propofition.T  akc  alfo  a  rationall  line, and  let  the fame  be  D ,  and  vnto  the  line  D  let  the  line 
F  G  be  commenfurable  in  length .  Wherefore  F  G  is  a  rationall  line .  ^sfnd  as  the  number 
C  A  is  to  the  number  ABfo  let  the  fquare  of the  line  G  F  be  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  E 
(by  the  6.  of  the  tenth), wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  F  is  commenfurable  to  the  fquare 
of  the  line  F  E  .Wherfore  alfo  F  E  is  a  rationall  line.  And forafmuch  astheniiber  C  A  hath 
not 'unto  the  number  A  B  that  proportio  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  nuber,  ther - 
fore  neither  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  HneG  F 
hath  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  E  that  propor -  T> 

■lion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 

number .  Wherefore  the  line  G  F  is  in  com-  E  _  F  t  9 

menfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  F  E  (by 
the  p .  of  the  tenth  ) :  wherefore  the  lines  F  G  P  f 

and  F  E  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  po¬ 
wer  onely. Wherefore  the  whole  line  EG  is  a 

binomiall  line .  I  fay  moreouer  that  the  line  A  .........  €  ...  M 

•  EG  is  a fecond  binomiall  line .  For  for  that 
by  contrary  proportion  as  the  number  B  A  is 
to  the  number  A  C  ,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line 

EE  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  .  But  the  number  E  A  is  greater  then  the  number  A  C, 
wherefore  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  is  greater  then  the  fquare  of the  line  F  G  .  Vnto  the 
fquare  ofthe  lincEE, let  the fquares  of  the  lines  GE  andH  beequall.  Now  by  conuerfion 
( by  the  corollary  ofthe  ip  .of of  the fft)as  the  number  A  B  is  to  the  number  BC,fois  the 
fquare  ofthe  line  E  F  to  the  fquare  ofthe  UncH  .  But  the  number  A  B  hath  to  the  number 
B  C  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  the  fquare 
of  the  line  EF  hath  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  H ,  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber  hath  to  a  fquare  number  Where fore(by  the  p.of  the  tenth)  the  lineEE  is  commenfu¬ 
rable  in  length  vnto  the  line  H .  Wherefore  the  line  EF  is  in  power  more  then  the  line 
F  G  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  E  F  .•  and  the  lines 

EF 


Conffruftion, 


Vemonfr*-' 
tkn » 


Conjlrutfton. 


Vemttftr#- 

tkn. 


X'/  •  ^Tbetenth^ooke 

flndE  Gdrt  rationall comtnenfurable in  fewer cnely,and  F  G  being  the lefename is 
eommenfurable in  length  vnto  the rationallline geuen3mmely,  toD.WhereforcE  Gisafe* 
tend  binomiall  line ;  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


m* 


Ki  t 


*  * 


¥uo 


fThe  is.Trobleme,  The  so.Tropofition . 

To  finde  out  a  third  binomiall  line. 

tnafjfy-dhe  two  numbers  A  C  and  C  B,and  let  them  be fuch  that  the  number  made  of them 
HH  a^ded  together, namely,  A  B,  haue  to  the  number  B  C  that  Proportion  that  & 

EilLfsU fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number. But  to  the  number  A  C  let  it  not  haue  that 
proportion  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,  as  it  was  declared  in  the  two  for- 
mer.^And  take  alfo  fome  other  number  that  is  not  a  fquare  number, and  let  the fame  be  D, 
and  let  not  the  number  D  haue  either  to  the  number  B  A, or  to  the  number  A  C  that  propor¬ 
tion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber.  And  take  a  rational  line  and  let  the  the  fame  be 
El  And  as  the  number  T>  is  to  the  number  AB,fo  let  E 
the fquare  of  the  line  E  be  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
E  G.  Wherfore  the fquare  of  the  line  E  is  comenfu-  j? 
rable  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G,  but  the  line  E  is 
rational, wherfore  the  line  F  G  alfo  is  rational.And  K 
for  that  the  nil  her  D  hath  not  to  the  nuber  A  B  that 
proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 

■number,  neither  alfo  jhall  the fquare  of  the  line  E  A  . .  C  ... .  B 

haue  to  the fquare  of the  line  EG  that,  proportion 

that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  nuber  Wher  D .......... . 

fore  the  line  E  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the 

line  F  G  (by  the  p. of  the  tenth).)  Now  againe as  the  nuber  A  B  is  to  the  nuber  AC,fo  let  the 
fquare  of  the  line  F  G  be  to  the fquare  of the  line  G  H.  Wherfore  the fquare  of the  line  F  G  is 
co’mmen fur  able  to  the fquare  oft  he  line  G  Ff.^And  the  line  F  G  is  rationall.  Wherfore  alfo 
the  line  G  H  is  rationall.  And  for  that  the  number  B  A  hath  not  to  the  nuber  A  C,  that  pro¬ 
portion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,  therefore  neither  alfo  hath  the 
fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  H  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number 
hath  to  a  fquare  number. Wherfore  the  line  F  G  is  incomen fur  able  in  legth  to  the  line  G  Ft. 
Wherfore  the  lines  F  Gfy  G  H  are  rational  comenfirable  in  power  only  .Wherfore  the  whole 
line  F  FI  is  a  binomial  line  J  fa y  moreouer  that  it  is  a  third  binomial  line. For  for  that  as  the 
nuber  D  is  to  the  nuber  A  Bfo  is  the fquare  of the  line  E  to  the fquare  of  the  line  FG  .but  as 
the  nuber  A  B  is  to  the  number  A  C,fo  is  the fquare  of the  line  F  G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G 
Hit  her  fore  ofequaliti'e(  by  the  2  2. o f the  f ft)  as  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  A  C,fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  E  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  H.But  the  nuber  D  hath  not  to  the  nuber  A- 
Cthat  proportio  that  a  fquare  nuber  hath  to  a  fquare  nuber.  Wherfore  neither  alfo  hath  the 
fquare  of  the  line  E  to  the fquare  oft  he  line  GH  that  proportio  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to 
a  fquare  number. Wherfore  the  line  E  is  incommenfurable  in  legth  to  the  line  G  H.And  for 
that  as  the  number  A  B  is  to  the  number  0/  C,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the  fquare 
of  the  line  G  B,therfore  the fquare  of the  line  F  G  is  greater  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  H. 
Vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G ,  let  thefquares  of  the  lines  G  H  and  K  be  equal.  Wherfore(by 
euerfe  proportio  by  the  corollary  of  the  1  p .  of  the f ft )  as  the.  nuber  A  B  is  to  the  number  B  C, 
fo  is  the  fquare  off  line  EG  to  the fquare  of the  line  K.But  the  nuber  A  B  hath  to  the  nuber 
":-X  .  '  "  BC 


of Suclides  Elementes, 


Fo/.zffj. 


frC  that propcrtio  that  afquare  number  hath  to  afquare  number.  Wherfore  alfo  the /quart 
of the  line  F  G  hath  fat  he fquare  oft  he  line  K  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  ter 
a  fquare  number. Wherfore  the  line  F  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  K.  Wherfore 
the  line  F  G  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  G  H  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in 
length  vnto  it.  And  the  lines  F  G  and  G  B  are  rationall commenfurable  in  power  onely, and 
neither  of  them  is  commenfurable  in  length  unto  the  rationall  line  E:  wherfore  the  lyne  F~ 
B  is  a  third  binomiall  line ;  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


ffTbe  16.  Trobleme. 

T  o  finde  out  a  fourth  binomiall  line . 


The  si.  Tropoftion. 


75!  ' 


vouj  ymrfmj jSJ.  ^  j/v***»w  ris  rn,t*rj\,r  vj  fkWUi,f  J  ujl  UfftA/  Vs  AJ 

that prpportio  that  a  fquare  nmuber  hath  to  a  fquare  nuber  (fuch  as  is  euery 

wia  Upv*  +r\  fmn  wfheve  C/i/itAy'P  inhfrh  avd  1p(Tp  +ldp  it  +h»n 


( fquare  nuber  to  two  nuber s  not  fqnarcgwhich  are  leffe  the  it  &  make  the  faid 
'  fquare  nuber )  .And  take  a  rationall  line, and  let  the fame  be  D  .And  vnto  the 
line  Jj  let  the  line  EFbe  c  omen  fur  able  in  length. 

Wherfore  E  F  is  a  rationall  line ,  and  as  the  num-  B 

her  B  A  is  to  the  number  AC,  fo  let  the  fquare  of  '  * 

the  line  EF  be  to  the  fquare  ofy  line  F  G.  Where -  E  P/  xC 

fore  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  is  comrnenfura -  '  *  *  ' 

hie  to  the  fquare  of the  line  F  G,  and  the  line  EF  h  ju  r 
is  a  rationall  line.  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  F  G  is  a  '  ~  p 

rationall  line.  And for  that  the  number  B  A  hath 
not  to  the  number  cWC  that  proportion  that  a 
fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number,  neither 


SSL  10 


»  O  9  •  * 


B 


j  j  J  1  /  ’  —  ” 

alfo fall  the  fquare  of  the  line  EF  haueto  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G  that proportion  that  a 
fquare  number  hath  to  a fquare  number. Wherfore  the  line  EF  is  incommensurable  in  legth 
to  the  line  F  G.  Wherfore  the  lines  E  F  and  F  G  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely. 
Wherefore  the  whole  line  EG  is  a  binomiall  line  .  I fay  moreouer  that  it  is  a  fourth 
binomiall  lyne .  For  for  that  as  the  number  BA  is  to  the  number  A  Cfo  is  the  fquare 
of  the  line  EF  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  FG.  But  the  number  BA  is  greater  then  the 
number  C .  Wherefore  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  line  EF  is  greater  then  the  fquare 
of  the  line  FG.Vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  EF  let  the fquares  of the  lines F  G  and  B 
be  equall. Wherfore  by  conuerfion  ( by  the  corollary  oft  he  1 9  .of the  fft )  as  the  number  A  B 
is  to  the  number  B  Cfo  is  the  fquare  of  the  lirieEF  to  the fquare  of  the  line  H.  But  the  mm 
her  A  B  hath  not  to  the  number  BC  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  toa  fquare 
number  :ther fore  neither  alfo  hath  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  to  the fquare  of  the  lineH  that 
proport  io  that  a  fquare  nuber  hath  iff  afquare  nuber  Wherfore  {by  the  9. of  the  teth)  the  line 
E  F  is  incomenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  B. Wherfore  the  line  E  F  is  in  power  more  the 
the  line  FG  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  it.  And  the  lynes  E  F 
and  F  G  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely,  and  the  line  E  F  is  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  rationall  line  D  Wherfore  the  line  EG  is  a  fourth  binomiall  line :  which  was 

required  to  be found  out. 


f  The  17.  Trohleme. 

Ti 0 finde  out  afift  binomiall  lyne. 


The  si.  ^ropofition. 


T ah 


ConUrntthn* 


VemnEra- 

mu 


CutftruRm. 


Vemorf ra¬ 
tion . 


Conjlrkftiw* 


*1  he  tenth ‘Bookg 


&(<?■ 


H  Bi  4 


If 


/jrtf  numbers  A  C  and  C  B,  and  let  them  he  fuch,  that  the  number  A  B 
haue  to  neither  of  the  numbers  ACorCB  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,as  in  the former propofi tion.  <^And  take  a  ratio- 
nail  line  and  let  the  fame  be  D . And  vnto  the  line  D  let  the  line  F  G  be  com- 
menfurable  in  length.  Wherf  ore  the  line  F  G  is  rationall.  And  as  the  number 
C  A  is  to  the  number  A  Bfo  let  the fquare 
of  the  line  G  F  be  to  the fquare  of  the  line  f  ,  ,  t 

E  F  Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  G  F 
is  epmmcn fur able  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
F  E.  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  F  E  is  ratio¬ 
nall.  And  for  that  the  number  C  A  hath 
not  to  the  number  A  B  that  proportio  that 
a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  num¬ 
ber ,  therfore  neither  alfo  hath  the  fquare 

of the  line  G  F  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  E  that  proportion  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a 
fqnare  number.  Wherf ore  (by  the  9  .of the  tenth)  the  line  G  F  is  incommen fur able  in  length 
to  the  line  F  E.  Wherf ore  the  lines  E  F  and  F  G  are  rationall  commen fur able  in  potver  only, 
wherf  ore  the  whole  line  EG  is  a  binomiallline.I fay  moreouer  that  it  is  a  fift  binomiall  line . 
For for  that  as  the  number  C  A  is  to  the  number  A  Bfo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  G  F  to  the 
fquare  of the  line  F  Esther  fore  contrariwife,as  the  number  B  A  is  to  the  number  AC,  fo  is 
the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  to  the fquare  of the  line  F  G .  but  the  number  B  A  is  greater  then 
the  number  C.  Wherf  ore  alfo  the  fquare  of the  line  E  F  is  greater  then  the fquare  of  the 
line  F  G.  Vnto  the fquare  of  the  line  E  F,  let  thefquares  of  the  lines  F  G  and  H  be  e  quail. 
Wherf  ore  by  corner  fo  {by  the  corollary  of  the  19  .of thefft )  as  the  nnber  A  B  is  to  the  num¬ 
ber  BCfo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B.But  the  nnber  AB  hath  not 
to  the  number  B  C  that  proportio  that  a  fquare  number  hath  tea  fquare  number. Where  fore 
neither  alfo  hath  the fquare  of the  line  EE  to  the fquare  of  the  line  H  that  proportion  that  a 
fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number. Wherf  ore  ( by  the  9. of the  tenth)  the  line  EF  is  in¬ 
commen  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  H  Wherforethe  line  E  F  is  in  power  more  then  the  line 
F  G  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  it.  And  the  lines  E  F  and  F  G 
are  rationall  commenfurable  in power  onely  .And  the  line  F  G  being  the  lefe  name,  is  com- 
menfuralle  in  length  to  the  rationall  line geuen, namely, to  D .  Wherf  ore  the  whole  line  E  G 
is  a  f ft  binomiall  line:  which  was  required  to  be  found  out. 


tfThe  18.  Trobleme. 

T 0  fbide  out  a  Jixt  binomiall  line . 


The  S3.  Tropojition. 


Ake  two  numbers  AC  &C  B,and  let  the  be fuch  that  the  number  which  is  madt 
of  them  both  added  together, namely,  A  B, haue  to  neither  of  the  numbers  AC  or 


\\CB  that  proportion  that  a 
fquare  nuberhath  to  a  fquare 
number  .  T ake  alfo  any  other  number 
which  is  not  a  fquare  number ,  and  let 
the  fame  be  D  .  And  let  not  the  num¬ 
ber  D  haue  to  any  one  of  thefe  num¬ 
bers  JB  and  A  C  that  proportion  that 
a fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  nuber. 
Let  there  be  put  moreouer  a  rationall  line , 


E 

7/-i  0 

T 

Vtlf  c  SUi 

H 

K 

T14 

A  . 
D  . 

and 


ofSuclides  Ekmentes,  Foh%6%* 

m nd  let  the  fame  be  E. And as  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  A  E,fo  let  the  fquare  of  the  lint 
E  be  to  the  fquare  of  FG.  Wherefore  ( by  the  6. of  'the  tenth)  the  line  E  is  commenfurable  in 
power  to  the  line  F  G,&  the  line  E  is  rationall.Wherfore  alfo  the  line  F  G  is  rationall .  And 
forthat  the  number  D  hath  not  to  the  number  A  B  that  proportion  that  a fquare  nuber  hath 
to  a  fquare  number ,  therefore  neither  alfo jhall  the f square  of  the  line  E  haue  to  the fquare  of 
the  line  F  G  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  the 
line  FG  is  incommenfur able  in  length  to  the  line  E  .  Againe^as  the  number  BA  is  to  the 
number  A  C,fo  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G  be  to  the fquare  of  the  line  G  H .  Wherefore  ( by 
the  6.0 f the  tenth )  the fquare  of the  line  F  G  is  commenfurable  to  the fquare  of  the  line  G  H. 
And  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  is  rationall .  Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  G  His  alfo  ra - 
iionall .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  G  H  is  rationall.  And  for  that  the  number  A  B  hath  not  to 
the  number  A  C,  that  proportion  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a fquare  number :  therefore 
neither  alfo  hath  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  H, that  proportion  that 
a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  the  line  F  G  is  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  G  H .  Wherefore  the  lines  F  G  and  G  H  are  rationall  commenfurable  in 
power  onely  .Wherefore  the  whole  line  F  H  is  a  binomiall  line .  1 fay  more  oner,  that  it  is  a 
fxt  binomiall  line .  For  for  that  as  the  number  X>  is  to  the  number  A  B,fo  is  the  fquare  of 
the  line  E  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G .  And  as  the  number  B  A  is  to  the  number  A  C,fo  is 
the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  H .  Wherefore  iof equalitie  {  by  the  22. 
of  the f ft )  as  the  number  D  is  to  the  number  A  C,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  E  to  the fquare 
of the  line  GH  .But  the  number  D  hath  not  to  the  nuber  A  C  that  proportion  that  a  fquare 
number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  neither  alfo  hath  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  G  H  that  proportion  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number  Wher- 
fore  the  line  E  is  incommenfur  able  in  length  to  the  line  G  H .  And  it  is  already  proued,  that 
the  line  F  G  is  alfo  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E .  Wherefore  either  of  thefe  lines 
F  G  and  G  Bis  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E .  And  for  that  as  the  number  B  A 
is  to  the  number  A  C,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  EG  to  the fquare  of the  line  G  H :  therfore 
the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  is  greater  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  H .  Vnto  the fquare  of  the 
line  F  G,  let  thefquares  of  the  lines  G  H  and  K  be  equall .  Wherefore  by  euerfion  ofpropor- 
tion,  as  the  number  A  Bis  to  the  number  B  C,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  FG  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  K .  But  the  number  A  B  hath  not  to  the  number  B  C  that  proportion  that  &  fquare 
number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  neither  alfo  hath  the fquare  of the  line  FG  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  K  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number. 
Wherefore  the  line  F  G  is  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  K  .  Wherefore  the  line 
F  G  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  G  H ,  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length 
to  it .  And  the  lines  F  G  and  G  H  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  And  neither 
of  the  lines  FG&GHis  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  lmegeuen3namely}to  E. 
Wherefore  the  line  F  His  a fxt  binomiall  line :  which  was  required  to  be  found  out . 

A  Corollary  added  out  of  Flufates. 

By  the  6.  former  ^Proportions  it  is  manifest,  how  to  deride  any  right  line geuen  into  the  names 
of  eucry  one  of  t  he  fixe  forefay  d  binomiall  lines .  For  if  it  be  required  to  deuide  a  right  line  ge¬ 
uen  into  a  firfl  binomiall  line, then  by  the  48.  of  this  booke  finde  out  a  firft  binomiall 
line.  And  this  right  line  being  fo found  out  deuidedinto  his  names, you  may  by  the  10, 
of  the  fixtjdeuide  the  rightline  geuen  in  like  fort.  Andfo  in  the  other  fiue  following. 

Although  I  here  note  vnto  you  this  Corollary  out  of  Flujfa,yet,in  very  conference  and  of  grateful! 
niinde,I  am  enforced  to  certifie  you,that,many  yeares,before  the  trauailes  of  Flujfas(y po  Entities  Geo- 
tnetricallxilementes)  were  publilhed,  the  order  how  to  deuide,  not  onely  the  ^.Binomiall  lines  into 
their  names, but  alfo  to  adde  to  the  tf.Reiiduals  their  due  partes:  and  farthertnore  to  deuide  ail  the  o- 

KK.j.  dies 


Dmonilrth 

non. 


*4  Corollary 
added  by 
Flufates. 


M.Dee  hh 
booke  Called 
Tyroanvm 
Matbematt- 
mm. 


\ 


71m  Ajfumyt 
as  w&s  before 
rated,  foll<n&~ 
etb  snoft  brief¬ 
ly  imhout 
farther  demon 
Jiration  of  the 
2f.  of iha 
hook?, 
Demsnfra- 
Sion, 


7  he  tenth  Tloofg 

ther  irrational/ lines  (of  this  tenth  booke)  into  the  partes  diilindt,  ofwhich  they  are  cotnpofed  •  with 
many  other  ftraunge  conclufions  Mathematicall,to  the  better  vnderitanding  of  this  tenth  booke  and  o- 
ther  Mathematical!  bookes,moft  neceflary,  were  by  M.icbn  Dee  inuented  and  demonilrated  :  as  in  his 
booke,  whofe  title  is  Tjrocinium  MAthsm.it  tcum  (dedicated  to  Petrus  Nennius,  An .  iff?.)  may  at  large 
appearc .  Where  alfoisone  new  arte,  with  fundry  particular  pointes,whereby  the  Mathematicall  Sci¬ 
ences,  greatly  may  be  enriched .  Which  his  booke,  I  hope,  G  od  will  one  day  allowe  him  opportunity 
to  pubiilhe  :  withdiuers  other  his  Mathematicall  and  Metaphyficall  labours  and  inuentions. 


An  Aflumpt. 

If  a  right  line  he  deuickd  into  two  partes  how foeuer :  the  reflangte  par  at* 
lelogramme  contajned  'Vnder  both  the  partes ,  is  the  means  proportionall 
betwene  the  fquares  of the fame  parts.  And  the  reef  angle  parallelogramme 
contained  lender  the  "whole  line  and  one  of  the  partes,  is  the  meane  pro* 
portionall  betwene  the  fquare  of  the  1 X>hole  line  and  the  fquare  of  the 
fayd  part. 


E 


Suppofe  that  then  be  two fquares  A  B  and  B  C,  and  let  the  lines  P  B  and  BEfo  be  put 
that  they  both  make  one  right  line .  Wherefore  (by  the  14. of  thefrfl)  the  lines  F  B  and  B  G 
make  alfo  both  one  right  line .  And  make  perfect  the  parallelogramme  AC.  T  hen  1 Jay ,  that 
the  r ebi angle  parallelogramme  D  G  is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  thefquares  A  B  and 
BC :  and  moreouer,  that  the  parallelogramme  D  C  is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the 
fquares  A  C  and  C  B  .  Fir  si  the  parallelogramme  A  C  is  afquare.  Forforafnuch  as  the  line 
D  Bis  equall  to  the  line  B  F,and  the  line  B  F  vnto  the  line  B  G,  therfore  the  whole  line  D  F 
is  equall  to  the  whole  line  F  G.But  the  line  P  E  is  equall  to  either  ofthefe  lines  A  B  &  KCy 
and  the  line  F  G  is  equall  to  either  of thefe  lines  A  K  and  H  C  (by  the  34.0fthefrfy.Wher- 
fore  theparallelograme  A  C  isequilaterjt  is  alfo  reffan- 
gle  (by  the  2 y  .ofthefrft ) .  Wherefore  ( by  the  46.  of  the 
frf )  theparallelograme  AC  is  afquare.  xpowfor  that 
as  the  Urn  F  B  is  to  the  line  B  G,fo  is  the  line  D  B  to  the 
line  BE  .But  as y  line  F  Bis  to  the  line  B  G,fo(  by  thei. 
of  the  fixt )is  theparallelograme  A B, which  is  the  fquare 
of the  line  D  B ,  to  the  parallelogramme  D  G,  and  as  the 
tine  P  Bis  to  the  line  B  E,fo  is  the  fame  par allelograme 
PG  to  the  parallelogramme  B  C,  which  is  the fquare  of 
the  line  B  E  .Wherefore  as  the  fquare  AB  is  to  thepa- 
rdlelo gramme  P  G,fo  is  the  fame  parallelogramme  P  G 
to  the fquare  B  C  .Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  P  G 
is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the fquares  A  B  and  BC  .1 fay  moreouer,  that  the  paraU 
lelogranme  DC  is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the  fquares  AC  and  CB.  For  for  that 
as  the  line  A  D  is  to  the  line  D  K,fo  is  the  line  K  G  to  the  line  GC  ( for  they  are  ech  equall 
to  eche  )  .  Wherefore  by  compoftion  ( by  the  1 8. of  the f ft)  as  the  line  A  K  is  to  the  line  K  P, 
fo  is  the  line  KC  to  the  line  C  G  .But  as  the  line  A  Ids  to  the  line  K  D,fois  the  fquareof 
the  hne  A  K,  which  is  the  fquare  A  C ,  to  the  parallelogramme  cotayned  under  the  lines  A  K 
and  K  P,  which  is  the  parallelogramme  CP:  and  as  the  line  K  C  is  to  the  line  CG,fo  alfo 
is  the  parallelogramme  D  C  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C,  which  is  the fquare  B  C.  Wherefore 
as  the  fquare  A  C  is  to  the  parallelogramme  D  C,fo  is  theparallelograme  D  C  to  the fquare 
B  C .  Wherefore  the parallelogramme  P  C  is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the  fquares 
A  CandB  C :  which  was  required  to  be  demon fr at  ed. 


B 

j 

.4 


H 


ofSuclides  Elemented*  Foh%6 

^[AnAffumpt. 

Magnitudes  that  are  meane  proportionalls  betivene  the  felfe  fame  or  e • 
quail  magnitudes  fire  alfo  equail  the  one  to  the  other. 

Suppofie  that  there  he  three  magnitudes  A,B  5C. 

i^And  as  A  is  to  B  ,fo  letJh  he  to  C .  And  likewife  as  ^  , _ , _ _ _ f 

the  fame  magnitude  A  is  to  D  ,fo  let  D  he  to  the  fame 

magnitude  C  .  T hen  I  fay  that  B  and  D  are  equail  6  *  “  {  * 

the  one  the  other .  For  the  proportion  of  A  vnto  C  c  - - - 

is  double  to  that  proportion  which  A  hath  to  B  (  by 

the  lo  .  definition  of  the  f ft )  and  likervife  the  felfe  ^  _ _ .  ,  .  .  t 

fame  proportion  of  A  to  C  is  (by  the fame  defnition ) 

double  to  that  proportion  which  A  hath  to  D  .  But  0  ' - ' - 1 

magnitudes  whofe  equemultiplices  are  either  equail  q  _ _ t 

or  the  felfe fame,  are  alfo  equail.  Wherefore  as  A  is  to 
Bfois  A  to  D .Wherefore  ( by  the p.ofthefft )  B  and 

.  D  are  equail  the  one  to  the  other .  So  (hall  it  alfo  be  if  E  1 - ’ — - - 

there  he  other  magnitudes  equal  to  A  and  C, namely,  _ _ = . , 

E  and  V,betwene  which  let  the  magnitude  D  be  the  g 
meane  proportionall.  '  * 

f}  The  36.  T heoreme.  T he  h.  <P ropofition . 

If  4  fuperficies  be  contained  lander  a  rationaU  line  &  afirfi  binomiaU  line : 
the  line  lohicb  containeth  in  poster  that  fuperficies  is  an  irrationall  lineup 
a  binomiaU  line. 

Vppofe  that  the fuperficies  A  B  CD,  be  contained  vnder  the  rational  line  A  B, 
and  vnder  a first  binomial  line  A  D.T hen  l fay  that  the  line  which  containeth 
in  power  the  fuperficies  AC, is  an  irrational  line3and  a  binomial  line. For forafi 
much  as  the  line  AD  is  a firfi  binomial  line,it  is  in  one  only  point  deuided  inti 


V  _  K.  .  P 


N 

_ 1 

his  names  ( by  the  42. of  this  tenth )  :let  it  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  the  point  E.  And  let 
A  E  be  the  greater  name .  Now  it  is  manifefi  that  the  lines  A  E  and  E  D  are  rationaU  cm- 

KKfi .  nm* 


*4n  AjfumpU 


The  fourth  Si 
nary  by  cm- 
pofitktu 


ConJlruHivsl 


Tfemnjlri- 

tkuu 


menfurable  in  power  onely, and  that  the  line  A  E  ism  power  more  then  the  line  E  D,  by  the 
fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  E,and  moreouer  that  the  line  A  E  is 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rational!  line  gotten  A  B  by  the  definition  of  a,  first  Binomi - 
all  line fet  before  the  48  .propofition  of this  tenth.Beuide  ( by  the  to. of the firfiythe  line  E  It 
into  two  equal!  partes  in  the  point  F  .^And for afmuch  as  the  line  A  E  is  in  power  more  then 
the  line  E  D  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A  E  therefore  if 
vpon  the  greater  line ,  namely,  vpon  the  line  AE  be  applied  aparallelogramme  equal l 
to  the  fourth  part  of  the fquare  of  the  lefie  line, that  is, to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F,  &  wan¬ 
ting  in  forme  by  a  fquare, it  fhall  deuide  the  greater  line,  namely,  A  E  into  two  partes  com¬ 
menfurable  in  length  the  one  to  the  other  (by  thefecond part  of  the  tj.  of the  tenth.)  Apply 
iherfore  vpon  the  line  A  E  aparallelogramme  equa.il  to  the fquare  of  the  line  E  F,and  wan.  - 
ting  in  forme  by  a fquare  by  the  28  .of the fixt,  and  let  the  fame  be  that  which  is  contained 
vnder  the  lines  A  G  and G  E  Wherf  ore  the  line  AG  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  lym 


Q  E.  Draw  by  the. pointes  G,E,andF,to  either  of  thefe  lines  A  B  and  D  C  thefe parallel  lines 
G  It,E  K,and  F  L  (by  the  31.  of the firfi)  And  (by  the  14.  of  the fecond)  vnto  the paralle- 
logramme  A  H  defcribe  an  e quail  fquare  S  N.  And  vnto  the parallelogramme  G  K  aefcribe 
( by  the  fame)  an  equal  fquare  N  P.  And  let  thefe  lines  MN&  2\Qf  he fo  put, that  they  both 
make  one  right  line. Wherf  ore  ( by  the  14.  oftfefirH )the  lines  R  N  and  N  0  make  alfa  both 
one  right  line.,  c JWake  per  fed  the  parallelogramme  S  P .  Wherf  ore  theparallelogrammeSP 
is  a  fquare  by  thofe  thinges  which  were  demonfir ated  after  the  determination  in  the fir (l  af~ 
fimptgoin?  before.^And  forafnuch  as  that  which  is  contained vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G 
E  is  equal l  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  F (by  conftruclion)  :  therfore  as  the  line  A  G  is  to  the 
E  F,fo  is  the  line.  EF  to  the  line  F  G  (by  the  14 .  or  17.  of  the fixt )  Wherf  ore  alfio  ( by  the  i. 
of the fixt )  as  the  parallelogramme  AH  is  to  the  parallelogramme  E  L,  fo  is  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  E  L  to  the  parallelogramme  G  K.  Wherf  ore  the  parallelogramme  E  L  is  the  meant 
proportionall  betWene  the  parallelo grammes  A  H  and  G  K.  But  the  parallelogramme  A  H  is 
equal  to  the  fquare  S  Hytnd  tbeparallelograme  G  K  is  equal  to  the  fquare  N  P  by  coslrucH- 
on  Wherf  ore  the  parallelogramme  E  L  is  the  meant  proportionall  betwene  the  fquares  S  N 
and  N  P  (by  the  7.  of the fifth )  But  (by  the firfi  affumpt  going  before )  the  parallelogramme 
M  R  is  the  meane proportionall  betwene  the fquares  S  N  and  N  P .  Wherefore  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  M  R  is  equal!  to  the  parallelogramme  EL  (by  the  lafi  affumpt  going  before )  But  the 
parallelogramme  M  Risequalto  the parallelogramme  O  X(by  the  43  .of the  firfi)  and  the  pa- 
rallelogramme  E  Lis  equallto  theparallelograme  F  C  by  contlr.uciion,and  by  the  firfi  of  the 
fixtWherfore  the  whole  parallelogramme  E  Cis  equallto  the  two  parallelogrammes  M  R  & 
O  Ea^Aud  the  parallelogrammes  A  H  and  G  K  are  equal-1  to  the  fquares  S  N  and  by 
confiruciionJYherfare  the  whole  parallelogramme  A  C  is  equal  to  the  whole. fquare  $  P,that 


ofSuclides  Elettoenteh 


Fol.iyo. 


isfto  thefifuare  of  thelint  M  X.  Wherefore  the  line  M  X  containeth  in  power  theparallelo- 
gramme  AC.  I  jay  moreouer  that  the  line  MX  is  a  binomiall  line.  For forafmuch  as  (by  the 
1 7  >of the  tenth)  the  Line  AG  is  commensurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  G .  Therefore  (by 
the  i$.  of  the  tcnthjthe  whole  line  A  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  either  of  thefe  lines 
A  G  and  G  E .  But  by  fuppoftion  the  line  A  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  xJAB, 
Wherfore(by  thei2.ofthetenth)either  of  the  lines  AG  &  GE  are  commenfurable  in  legth 
to  the  line  A  B.But  the  line  A  B  is  rationall.  Wherefore  either  of  thefe  lines  AG  and  G  E  is 
rationalLWherfore  (by  the  19  .of  the  tenth )  either  of  thefe  parallelogramrnes  AH  and  GK 
is  r ationall.Wherfore(by  thefirjl  ofthefixt.and  to. of  the  tenth )  the  parallelogram  me  A  H 
is c*mmenfurableto  the parallel ogramme G K.But  theparallelogramme  A  His equallto  the 


if  The  37-Theoreme.  The  ss.Tropofition. 

If  a  fuperficies  he  comprehended  Crider  a  rationall  line  and  a fecond  binomfa 
all  line:  the  line  that  coritayneth  inpo^er  that  fuperficies  is  irrationally  and 
isafirUbimediallline. 

j  ■ 

Vppofe  that  the  fuperfcies  A  BCD  bccontayned  under  a  rationall  line  A  Bt 
\and  under  a  fecond  binomiall  line  A  D. Then  1  fay  thaithe  line  that  containeth 
in  power  the  fuperfcies  A  Cisafrf  bimediallline .  For forafmuch  as  AD  is  a 
fecond  binotniall line3it  can  in  one  onely  point  be  deuided into  his  names ,  by  the 

KK.iij.  45*  of 


The  firfl  part 
of  this  demon « 
firntim  con*' 
eluded. 


The  feted  part 
of  the  demon* 
ft  ration  con* 
(faded* 


The  third 
part  cos  faded. 


The  total!  con 
(fafwnt 


Vtmontfnt- 
tio  «» 


The  fitfl  part 
e  f  this  demon • 
f return  cm- 
duded. 


The  third 


43.  of tbisien:  thlet  it therefore  by  fuppoftionbt  deuidedinto  hisnames  inthepoyntEdfd' 
that  let,  A  E  be  the  greater  name.  Wherefore  the  lines  A  E.and  E  D  arerationallcommenfu- 
rablc  in  power  dnely,md  the  line  A  E  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  ED  by  idle  fquare  of  A 
line  commenfurable  in  length to  A  E,  and  the  lejfe  name, namely >  E  D  is  common  fur  able  irr 
length  to  the  line  A  B  by  the  def nitron  of  a  fecond  binomiali  line, ft  before  the  48  .propofitio. 
of  this  tenth.  Demdetheline  E  D  (by  the  teth  ofthefrftyinto  two  equail  partes  in,  the poynt, 
F.  And  (by  the  2  8. of  the fixt)vpon  the  line  A  E  apply  aparallelogramme  equal  tot  he  fquare. 
of  the  line  E  F , and  Wanting  infgure  by  a  (quart.  And  let  the  fame  par allelogr amme  be  that 
which  is  contayned  vn-der  the  lines  A  G  andG  E.  Wherefore  (by  the fecond  part  of the  if.  of 
this  tenth  )  the  line  A  G'it"pommenfarabk  in  Ungtkto  thg line-G  E And(&y  the  3  1  ^of  tbe-- 
frfi)by  thepoyntes  G,E}  F,  draw  vnto  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D  thefe  parallel  lines  fG  H,EK , 
dr  F  L.And(by  the  14.0 f the fecond )vnto  t  he  parallelograme  A  H  defcribe  an  equail  fquare 
S  And  to  the  paralldograme-GK- defcribe  an  e  quail fquare  N  P,  and  let  the  lines  M  N  dr 
FIX  be  fi  put  that  they  both  make  onSfight  line  .-wherefore  ( by  the  i4.ofthefrjl)the  lines  al- 
fo  R  N>andN  O  make  both  one  right  line.  Make perfili  theparallelogrammeS  P.  How  it  is 
manifef  (by  that  whichhathhemdemoHrated  in  the  propofitio  next  going  before )  that  the 
parallelograme  M\R  is  the  medne pr  opprtionalhbetwene'the  Jquares  S  N  and  N  P ,  and  is  e- 
quall  to  the  par allplogr amme  E  L ,  and  that  the  line  M‘X  contayneth  in  power  the  fuperf  ties 

j  •  I  I  T  ]  i  '  ^  1 


G 

i  ^ 


K. 


F 


H 

V- 

' 

H  K 


AC ,  2 ¥gw  refieth  to  pr  due  that  the  line  MX  is  a  frfi  bimediall  line .  Forafmuch  as  the  line 
A  E  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  D ,  and  the  tine  ED  is  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  A  B, therefore  (by  the  /  3 .  ofthetenth)thelineA  E  is  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  A  B .  ^And  forafmuch  astheline  AG  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  G  E  therefore  the  whole  line  A  E  is  (by  the  t$.  of  the  tenth )  commenfurable  in  length 
to  either  of  thefe  lines  A  G  and  G  E  t  But  the  line  A  E  is  rationall :  wherefore  either  of 
thefe  lines  A  Gand  G  E  is  rationall-.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  E  is  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  ABfbut  the  line,  A  E  is  commenfurable  in  lenth  to  either  of  the fe  lines  A  G 
and  G  E:  wherefore  either  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  E  are  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  A  B (by  the  13  .of  t he  tenth ) .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  B,  A  G,  and  G  E  are  rationall  com¬ 
menfurable  in  power  onely.  Wherefore(  by  the  21. of the  tenth)  either  of  thefe  par  allelogr ames 
A  H  and  G  K  is  a  mediall fuperf  cies .  Wherefore  alfo  either  of  thefe  fquaresS  Ffand  NP  is 
a  mediall fuperfcies  by  the  corollary  of  the  23  .ofy  tenth. Wher fore  the  lines  M  N  d?  Fi  X  are 
mediall  lines  by  the  2 1.0ft his  teth.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  G  is  comenfurable  in  legth 
to  the  line  G  Ejherefore  ( by  the  1  .of  thefixt  and  it. of  the  tenth)the parallelograme  A  Hit 
Comenfurable  to  the  par  allelogr  amme  GK  that  is  ,the fquare  S  N  to  the fquare  NP ,  that  is, 
the  fquare  of  the  line  M  N  to  the fquare  of  the  line  N  X .  Wherefore  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X 
m  medialls  commenfurable  in  power .  And forafmuch  as  the  line  AE  is  incommenfurable 

‘  in 


of  Sue  tides  Elemmti*  FoLiyi. 

ftr'kngth'to  the  line  £p>  but  the  Um  A:E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the- line  A  G ,  and 
the  line  E  D  is  commenfurable  in-length  to  the  line  E,  F ,  therefore  (  by  the  13. of  the  tenth ) 
the  line  A  G  is  incommen fur  able-  in  length  to  the  line  F.  F .  Whereforefby  the  1. of  the fixt 
and  11. of  the  tenth  )the  parallelogram?  A  His  incomenfurable  to  the parallelogramme  E  L , 
that  is,  the  fquare  S  N  to  the parallelogramme  M  R,that  is, the  line  O  N  is  incommenfurable 
to  the  line  Ft  R,that  is  the  line  M  FT  to  the  line  N  X.And  it  is  proued  that  the  lines  M  N  and 
VKX  are  medial!  lines  commenfurable.  in  power  Wherefore  the  lines  M  F(jnd  N  X  are  medi - 
all  lines  commenfurable  in  power  onely. Flow  1 pfmoreoue'r  that  they  comprehend  a  rational 
fuperfcies.Fbrfbrafmuch  as  byjufpofition  the  line  D  E  is  conmeftrable  in  length  to  either 
of  theft  lines  A  R  and  E  F, therefore  the  line  F  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  K 
which  is  equall  to  the  line  AB  (by  the,  1 2. of  the  tenth  )  .  <J End  either  of thefe  lines  E  F  and 
EK  is  a  rationall  line  Wherefore  theparallelograme  E  L,that  is  the parallelograme  M  R,  is 
a  rational!  fuperficies  ( by  the  1 0  .of  the  tenth ) .  But  the parallelogramme  M  R  is  that  which  is 
contayned  ynder  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X .  But  iftwomedialllines  commenfurable  in  power 
onely  and  comprehending  a  rati  on  all  fuperfeies  be  added  together, the  whole  line  is  irrational 
and  is  called  a firfi  bimediall(by  the  37 -of the  tenth)  .  Wherefore  the  line  M  X  is  a frf  bime ~ 
dial!  U^e:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 

f  The  38.  Theoreme.  The  s6.  (Profofition, 

If  d  fuperficies  he  contayned  louder  d  rationall  line  and  a  third  hinomiall 
line :  the  line  that  contayneth  in  power  that  fuperficies  is  irrationally  and 
isafecondhimediallline. 

Vppofe  that  the fuperfeies  A  BCD  be  comprehended  kinder  the  rationall Jin  f 
AB  and  a  third  hinomiall  line  A  D ,  and  let  the  line  A  Dhefuppofed  to  bede- 
uidedinto  his  names  inthepoint  E,  of  which  let  AEbe  the  greater  name.  T hen 
1 fay,  that  the  line  that  containeth  in  power  the fuperfeies  A  C  is  irrationall,and 
is  a fecond  bimediall  line .  Let  the  fame  confiruflion  of  the  figures  be  in  this, that  was  in  the 
two  Propbfitions  next  going  before .  And  now for afmuch  as  the  line  A  D  is  a  third  binomu 
all  line,  tbereforethefe  lines.  A  E  and  E  Dart  rationallcommenfurable  in  power  onely .  And 


h 

« 

¥~- 

F  ' 

s 

•■'■4 

;  { 

.  v  V 

,  '  >; 

A 


R- _ f 


B 


H  3C 


N 

'  - ;  ■ 

$ 


the  tine  A  E  is  in  power  more  the  the  line  ED  by  the fquare  of  a  line  comenfurable  in  length 
to  the  line  A  E,  and  neither  of  the  lines  A  E  nor  E  D  is  commenfurable  in  length  tothelint 
AB  by the  definition  of a  third  hinomiall  line fet before  the  48.Propofition.As  in  the for¬ 
mer  Propofitions  it  wasdmonfirated, fo  alfo  may  it  in  this  Proposition  be  proued,  that  the 

KK.iifi  line 


Ibefourth 
part  cocluded* 


Theflftpan 
concluded > 

Th  e  total!  con 
ciujicn , 


DmonSira* 

tion. 


Thetenth'Booke 

Unt  M  X  c&ntamtth  in  power  the fuperfeies  A  C?and  that  the  lines  M  N  and  til  X  are  medi '* 
all  lines  commenfurable  inpower  onely .  Wherefore  the  line  MX  is  a  bimediallline .  New  re* 
Jleth  to f row  that  it  is  a fecond  bimedialllme.  Forafmuch  as  the  line  D  E  is  ( by  fuppoftion ) 


mcommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  B,  that  is,  to  the  line  E  K.  But  the  line  E  D  is  com- 
men  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  E  F .  Wherefore  ( by  the  1 3  .of the  tenth )  the  line  E  F  is  in- 
commenfurable  inlength  to  theiint  E  K .  And  the  lines  FE  and  E  K  arerationall .  For  by 
fuppoftion  the  line  E  D  is  rationall ,  vnto  which  the  line  F  E  is  commenfurable.  Wherefore 
the  lines  F  £  andEK are  rationall  lines  commenfurable in  power  onely  .  Wherefore  (by  the 
21. of the  tenth  )  she  parallelogramme  EL  ghat  is,  the  parallelogramme  MR  which  is  con- 
taynea  vnder  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X  is  a  mediall fuperfeies .  Wherefore  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  M  N  and  NX  is  a  mediall fuperfeies.  Wherefore  the  line  MX  is  a 
fecond  bimediallline  (by  the  3d.  Propoftion  and  definition  annexed  thereto ) :  which  was  re- 
tyuirtdto  beproued. 

.  ;  '•  v  ■  -  t,  '  *  •  X-.  '•  ^  V»5.  ;  '  f  v.  ;  .  '  ■■  ‘  -  •-  >*'•  : 


r>V* 


"  *  •  ■a  •  .  -■ *  _  -•  v-  -  ?  ... 

flTbe  3p.Theoreme,  The  sy Propofition. 

If  a fuperficies  he  contained  ytndera  rationall  line}and  a  fourth  binomial! 
line  :  the  line  lohich  contayneth  in power  that  fuperficies  is  irrationalfand 
is  a  greater  line. 


BVppofe  that  the  fuperfeies  A  C  be  comprehended  vnder  a  rationall  line  A  B  and  a 
fourth  binomiallline  A  D,  &  let  the  binomiallline  A  D  befuppofed  to  be  deuided 
into  his  names  in  the  point  E,  fo  that  let  the  line  A  E  be  the  greater  name .  T hen 
1  fay,  that  the  line  which  contaynethiri  power  the  fuperfeies  Apis  irrationall,and  is  agrea- 
Coftf ruction*  ter  line .  For, forafmuch  as  the  line  AD  is  a fourth  binomiallline,  therefore  the  lines  0/  E 
and  E  D  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  And  the  line  A  E  is  in  power  more 
then  the  line  ED  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommensurable  in  length  to  A  E . \j4nd  the  line 
A  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  B .  Deutde  ( by  the  1  o.oft he  frfi )  the  line  D  E 
into  twoequallpartes  in  the  point  F .  And  vpon  the  line  A  E  apply  a  parallelogramme  equall 
to  the  fquare  of EE  and  wanting  inf gure  by  a  fquare  : and  let  the  fame  parallelogramme 
be  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  AG &G  E .  Wherefore  ( by  the  fecond part  of  the 
j  S. of  the  tenth  )  the  line  A  G  is  incommenfurfble  in  length  to  the  line  E  G.  Draw  vnto  the 
lineABjby the.po.mtes  G, E, F, par allell  tines  GH,EK, and  F '  L,  and  let  the  ref  of  the  con- 
ThmonBra*  Ityu&im  beds  it  was  in  the  three  former  Propoftions  .  ti(ow  it  is  manifef,  that  the  line 
M  X.  cpntayneth  in  p  meg  t  he  fuperfeies  AC f  titow  refeth  to  prone  that  the  line  MX  is  an 

irrationdll 

A  &  .  3a* 


cf-£uclides  Elementes.  Fol.iyi * 

irrationall  lint, and  a  greater  line.  Forafmuch  as  the  line  A  G  isincommenfurablein  length 
to  the  line  E  G,  therefore  ( by  the  i.  ofthefxt,  and  1 1  .of  the  tenth)  the  parallelogramme 
A  His  incommenfurable  to  the  farallelogramme  G  K ,  that  is,  the  fquare  S  N  to  the  fquare 
N  P .  Wherefore  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X  are  incommenfurable  in  power.  And  forafmuch  as  %  . 

the  line  AE  is  commenfur  able  in  length  to  the  rationallline  AM,  therefore  the  parallel#- 


<r. 

>j*: 

■t 

; 

i 

-  f 

_ , _ j 

B  H  K  i-  C 


r  r.  ? 


. 

K 

I 

*  S'  o 


gramme  A  K  is  rationall .  And  it  is  equatl  to  the  fquare  s  of the  lines  M  N  and  N(X.  Wher- 
fore  that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X  added  together  is  rati¬ 
onall  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  E  D  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  B,that  is, 
to  the  line  E  K,  but  the  line  EH  is  commenfur  able  in  length  to  the  line  E  F,  therefore  the 
line  E  F  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  K .  Wherefore  the  lines  E  K  and  E  F  are 
rationall  commenfur  able  in  power  onely .  Wherefore  ( by  the  2 1 .  of  the  tenth )  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  L  E,  that  is,  the farallelogramme  M  R  is  mediall .  isfnd  the  parallelograme  M  R 
is  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  M  N,ahd N  X  .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contay- 
ned  under  the  lines  M  N  and  TfX  is  mediall.  And  that  which  is  compofed  of the fquares  of 
the  lines  M  N  fr  NJC  is  pruned  to  be  rationall,  dr  the  line  M  N  is  demonfrafed  to  be  incom¬ 
menfurable  m  power  to  the  line  NfX .  But  if  two  lines  incommenfurable  inpower  be  added 
together,  hading  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  them  added  together  rationall, &  that 
which  is  under  them  mediall,  the  whole  line  is  irrational! ,  and  is  called  a  greater  line  ( by  the 
3  9  .of the  tenth )  .Wherefore  the  line  M  X  is  irrationall,  and  is  a  greater  line ,  and  it  contab 
neth  in  power  the  fuperfeies  AC :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf rated. 

y  T he  46.  Theorems.  T he  s8.  Tropofition . 


If  a  fuperfeies  be  contained  Wilder  a  rationall  tine  and  a  fft  hinomiall  line: 
the  tineiohich  contayneth  in  power  that  fuperfeies  is  irrationally  and  is  a 
line  contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall fuperfeies. 

F'ppofe  that  the  fuperfeies  AC  be  contayned  under  the  rationall  line  A  B, 
and  under  a  fft  binomial!  line  A  D  :  and  let  the  fame  line  AD  be fuppofed  to 
be  deuided.  into,  his  names  in  the  poynt  E,fo  that  let  the  line  A  E  be  the  greater 
name .  Fhen  I fay,  that  the  line  which  contayneth  in  power  the  fuperfeies  A  C 
is  dr  ration  all,  'and  is  a  Urn,  contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall fuperfeies .  Let  the  Hem  onffta- 
felfe fame  confruclions  be  in  this,  that  were  in  the foure  Propoftion  next  going  before.  And  tm. 
if  is  mahifef, that  the  lypg  M  X  contayneth  in  power  the fuperfeies  i_AC  .  Now  ref eth  to 
pro  ue  thpt  the  tine  M  X  is  a  line  Contayning  in  power  a  rational!  <f  a  mediall fuperfeies.  For¬ 
afmuch 


afmuch  as  the line  A  G  is incotitmcnfttrablc  in  length  tothelineG  E,  therefore  (  by  the  i.of 
thefxt,  and  io. of  the  tenth  )  the  parallelogramme  A  H  is  incommenfurable  to  the  parade-, 
logramme  H  E,that  is,  the fquare  of  the  hne  M  N  to  the fquare  of the  line  NX .  Wherefore 
the  lines  M  N  and  N  X  are  incommenfurable  in  power .  Cdnd forafmuch  as  the  line  AD  is 
afft  hinomiall  line, and  his  lejfename  or  part  is  the  line  E  D,  therefore  the  line  ED  is  com* 


men  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  A  B .  But  the  line  A  E  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  E  D  .  Wherefore  ( by  the  1 3  .of the  tenth )  the  line  kA  B  is  incommen fur  able  in  length 
to  the  line  kA  E  Wherefore  the  lines  ^A  B  and  A  E  are  rationall  cowmen  fur  able  in  power’ 
onely  .  Wherefore  ( by  the  21. of  the  tenth)the  parallelogramme  A  K  is  medlall,  that  is  Ma  t 
which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  MN  dr  NX  added  together .  And forafmuch 
as  the  line  D  E  is  commensurable  in  length  to  the  line  A B,that  is,  to  the  line  E  K,  but  the 
line  D  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  E ,  wherefore  ( by  the  12. of  the  tenth)  the 
line  EF  is  alfo  commenfurablc  in  length  to  the  line  E  K .  And  the  line  E  K  is  rationall. 
Wherefore  (by  the  1  p. of  the  tenth)  the  parallelogramme  E  L,  that  is,  the  parallelogramme 
M  R,  which  is  contayned under  the  lines  lM N  and  N  X  is  rationall.  Wherefore  the  lines 
M  N and  NJC  are  incommenfurable  in  power,  hauing  that  which  is  compofed  of  the fquares 
of  them  added  together,  CMediall,  ana  that  which  is  ^contayned  under  them,  Rationall. 
Wherefore  (by  the  40.  of  the  tenth)  the  whole  line  MX  is  a  line  contayning  in  power  a  ra¬ 
tionall  and  a  mediall fuperfcies ,  and  it  contayneth  in  power  the fuperfcies  AC ;  which  was 
required  to  be proued. 


fThe  41.  Tbeoreme.  The  sp.TropoJitm. 

If a fuperficies  be  contayned  hnder  a  rationall  line,  and  a  fixt  binotnlall 
line /he  lyne  "Which  contayneth  in  power  that fuperficies /$  irrational /sr is 
called  a  line  contayning  in  power  two  me  dials. 


TSemonttra- 
tie  a. 

1. 

2. 


I  Vppofe  that  the fuperfcies  ABC  Die  contained  under  the  rationall  line  A  B,and 
f  under  a fxt  binomidllline  A  D,and  let  the  line  AD  be fuppofed  to  be  deuided  in - 
i-*^1  to  his  names  in  the  point  E,fo  that  let  the  line  A  E  be  the  greater  name.  T hen  I fay 
that  the  Hne  that  containeth  in  power  the fuperfcies  AC  is  irrationall,  and  is  a  line  contay¬ 
ning  in  power  two  medials.  Let  the  felfe  fame  conflruffios  be  in  this, that  were  in  the  former 
propofitions.  Now  it  is  manifefi  that  the  line  M  X  containeth  in  power  the fuperfcies  A  C, 
and  that  the  line  MN  is  incommenfurable  in  power  to  the  line  N  X.  And  forafmuch  as  the 
line  A  E  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  B,therfore  the  lines  A  E  and  A  B  are 

'  3  .  rationall 


:  -  *" 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


Fol.zy\. 


ratienall  commen fur  able  inpower  only  Wherfore(hy  the  21.  of the  tenth)  the  parallelograms 
A  K  that  is,  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  M  N  and  T(X  added  together 
is  mediall.Againe forafmuch  as  the  line  E  D  is  incommen fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  A  B, 
therefore  alfo  the  line  EF  is  income  fur  able  in  legth  to  the  Urn  E  K.  Wherfore  the  lines  E  F 
andE  K  are  rationall  commen  fur  able  in  power  onely.  Wherfore  the par allelogramme  E  L, 
that  is jthe parallelogramme  M  B.  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  MNand  'HJC  is  me¬ 


dial!  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  E  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  F,  therfore 
the  parallelogramme  A  K  is  alfo  incommenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  E  L  ( by  the frjl 
of the fxt,and  10. of the  tenth.)  But  the  parallelogramme  A  K  is  equal  to  that  which  is  com - 
pofed  of the fquares  of  the  lines  CM  N  andTgX  added  together.  And  the  parallelogramme 
E  Lis  equall  to  that  which  is  cotained  vnder  the  lines  M  N  and  FIJI  Wherfore  that  which 
is  compofed  of the fquares  oft  he  lines  CM  N  and  N  X  added  together ,  is  incommenfurable 
to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X:  and  either  oft  hem,  namely,  that 
which  is  compofed  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X  added  together,  and  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X,is  proued  mediall,  and  the  lines  M  N  and  N  X 
areproued  incommenfurable  in power  Wherfore  ( by  the  41.  of the  tenth )  the  whole  line  M  X 
is  a  line  containing  in  power  two  medials,  and  it  containeth  in  power  the fuperf ties  AC ; 
which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 

^  An  Aflumpt. 

If  a  right  line  he  deuided  into  two  lonequall partes,  the  fquares  lohich  are 
made  of the  Tmequali partes ,are greater  then  the  re  Bangle  parallelogramme  co* 
tayned  louder  the  Tmequall partes, twife. 

Suppofethat  A  B  be  a  right  line,  and  let  it  be  deuided  into  twovnequall  partes  in  the 
point C.  And  let  the  line  A  C  be  the  greater  part. Then  I  fay, that  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  C 
and  C  B, are  greater  the  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  end  C  B, twife.  Deuide 
(by  the  10.  ofthefirfi )  the  line  A  B  into  two  e- 

quail  partes, in  the  point  D  .Now  forafmuch  as  ^  v>  c  b 

the  right  line  A  B  is  deuided  into  two  equall  - - - - - * - — *— » 

partes  in  the  point  D ,  and  into  two  vnequall 
partes  in  the  point  C,  therfore  (by  the  s-  of  the 

fecond )  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B, together  with  the  fquare  of  the 
line  CD, is  equall  to  the fquare  of the  line  AD .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder 

the 


4 


-* 

Loo^e  after 
the  slffumpt 
concluded  at 

this  mark*: for 
plainer  ope¬ 
ning  of  this 
place. 


The  yfe  of 
this  Afkmpt 
tun  the  next 
fropQfilienjdr 
ether  follow* 

tng. 


The  fift  St' 
nary  by  com- 
portion. 


Conffruftitni' 


the  lines  o A  C  and  C  B, (omitting  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  D)  is  lejfe  then  the  fquare  of  the 
A  D  (by  the 9. common fcntence,and the feuenth  oftheffth.)Whereforethatvc>hich is  con¬ 
tained  'under  the  lines  A  CandC  B,twife,is  kjfe  then  the  double  of  the fquare  of  the  line  A 
D  (that  is, the  twife  the  fquare  of the  line  AD) 
by  *  alternate  proportio,and  the  14.  of  the fft. 

Hut  the  f quarts  of  the  lines  A  C  and  CB  are  £ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

double  to  the  f quarts  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  C 
( by  the  9.  of ’the ft  cod)  .T  her  fore  thejquares  of 

A  C  and  CB  aremorethen  double  to  the fquare  of  A  D  alone ,  ( leaning  out  the fquare  of  D 
C)  by  the  8. of  the  fft. But  the  para  lido  gramme  contained  'under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  trvife, 
is  proued  kffe  the  the  double  of  the  fquare  of the  line  A  D.T  herfore  the fame  parallelograms 
contained  'under  the  lines  AC  andC  B  twife, is  much  lefe  then  thefqmres  of  the  lines  k.A  C 
and  CB.  if  a  right  line  t herfore  be  deuided  into  two  vne  quail partes ,  the f quarts  which  are 
made  of  the  vnequallpartcs, are  greater  the  the  reft  angle  parallelogramme  contained  vnder 
the  vnequall partes, twife :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 

*  In  nun)  bers  I  neede  not  to  haue  fo  alleaged,for  the  17  .of  the  feuenth  had  confirmed  the  doubles 
to  be  one  to  the  ocher,as  their  Angles  were,but  in  our  magnitudes,  it  likewifeis  true  and  euident  by 
alternate  proportion,thus.As  the  parallelogramtne;ofthe  lines  a  c  and  c  b  is  to  his  double,  fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  a  d  to  his  double  (eche  being  halfe).  Wherfore,  alternately,  as  the  parallelogram  me 
is  to  the  fquare, fo  is  the  parallelograme  his  double  to  the  double  of  the  fquarc.But  the  parallelogram  e 
was  proued  kffe  then  the  fquare ;  wherfore  his  double  is  leffe  then  the  fquare  his  double,by  the  14.  of 
the  fifth. 


This  Affumptisinfomebookes  notread,forthatinmaneritfemeth  tobeall  one 
with  that  ivhich  was  put  after  the  3 p.of  this  booke:butfor  thediuers  maner  of  dempn- 
ftrating,itis  necellary.Forthe  feate  ofinuen  tipis  therby  furthered. And  though  Zam- 
bert  did  in  the  demonftration  hereofjomitte  that  which  P.  Montaureus  could  not  fnp- 
ply,but  plainly  doubted  of  the  fuffrciencic  of  this  proofe ,  yet  M.Dce,by  onely  allega¬ 
tion  of  thedue  places  of  credite,whofe  pithe  &  force,  Theon  his  wordes  do  containe, 
hath  reflated!  to  the  demonftration  fufficiently,both  light  and  authorise,  as  you  may 
perceiue,and  chiefly  fuch  may  iudge,  who  can  compare  this  demonftration  here  (thus 
furnilhcd)  with  the  Grccke  of Theon,oi:  Iatine  tranflation  of  Zambert. 

f  The  42.  T heoreme .  T he  CodPropofition. 

The  fquare  of  a  binomiall  line  appljed  Imto  a  rationall  line>  mafath  the 
breadth  or  other  fide  a  firji  binomiall  line . 


Vppofe  that  the  line  A  B  be  a 
binomiall  line,  and  let  it  be 
fuppofed  to  be  deuided  into  his 
names  in  the poynt  Q,fo  that 
let  A  C  be  the greater  name .  And  take  a 
rationall  line  D  E.  And  (  by  the  44.pf the 
frfl)  'unto  the  line  D  E  apply  a  rebian¬ 
gle  parallelograme  DEFG  cqualltothe 
Jquare  of  the  line  A  B  and  making  in 
breadth  the  line  D  G .  T hen  1 fay  that  the 
line DGw4 frjl  binomiall line.Vnto the 
line  D  E  apply  the  parallelograme  DHe- 
quallto  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C >  and 
'unto  the  line  K  H  which  is  cquallto  the 


N 

K 

,, 

x 

h 


Mm 


vfSudides  Elentmteu  Boh  1 74,* 

line  D  E  apply  the  parallelograme  K  L  equall  to  the fquare  of tbelme  BC.  Wherefore  the 
ref  due  namely, that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  fr  C  B  twife  is  equall  to  the  re- 
f due, namely \to  thepdraltetigtairie  M  7, by  then.oflhefecnid.Fieuidelby  the  io'.oftkefrft ) 
the  line  M  G  into  tivo  equall  partes  in  the  poynt  N  .  And  (  by  the  3 1  .ofthefrf  fWdpJ  the  Demnttu* 
line  N  X parallel  to  cither  of  theje  lines  M  L  and  G  F .  Wherefore  either  of  thefe  parallels -  tion, 
grammes  M  X  and- N  F l si  qu dll  to  that  which  is  contaynedv'nder  the  lines  A  C  and C  B 
once,  by  the  x 3. of  the  fifth.  And forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  a  binamiallline ,  and  it  deuided 
into  hinidmis  in-the  'poynt  C  therefore  ihelinwAC  and GA  are  ration  all  commenjura*. 
ble  in  power  onely -Wherefore  the fqmres  of the  dines  A  G,md  CB  are  rational, andihsre - 
fore  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  (  by  the  1$, of  the  tenth  )  that  which  is 
made  of  thefquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  C  L  added  together  is  commenfurable  to  either  of 
thefquares  of  the  lines  A  C  or  C  B.-i therefore,  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines 
A  Gand  G  B  Addediogether  isrationall.Andit  isequalltotheparallelograme  D  L  by  con - 
f  ru  ffion  Wherefore  the  pa?f JJAlcgram'eL)Ais  rationall.  Aind  it  is  applyedvnto  the  rational 

length  to  the  lineD  E.  Agay. nt forafmuch  as  ihe-lmes A  G  and  C  B  are  rationali  commen¬ 
furable  in  power  onely,  therefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and.  C  lb  I* 

twife, that  is;the  parallelograme  M  F  is  mediallhyjffyi  of  the  tenth,  and  it  is  applyedvnto 
the  rattonall  kne-M  L.Wketefore  the  line  M  G  is  rationall  and incommen fur  able in  length 
to  the  line  M  L  (by  the  22 .  of  this  tenth )  that  is,  to  the  line  DE.  Bui  the  line  M  D  is f  railed 
rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  D  E  Wherefore  (by  the  1 3 .  of  the  tenth)the 
line  D  M  is  incommen fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  M  G.  Wherefore  the  lines  D  M  ^ilG 
are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely. Wherefore  (by  the  3  6. of  the  tenth )  the  whole  line 
D  G  is  a  binomiall line.  Now  refe  'th  to proue  that  it  is  a firsl  binomiall line .  Forafmuch  as  ihatDG  is 
( by  the  the  affumpt  going  before  the  sj.ofthe  tenth )  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  ^binomiall 
A  C  and  C  B  is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the  fquares,  of  the  lines  A  C  andG  B,  line* 
therefore  the  parallelograme  M  X  is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the  parallelogrammes 
D  H  and  K  L.  Wherefore  as  the  parallelogame  DH  is  to  the  parallelograme  MX,  fo  is  the 
parallelograme  MXffi  the  parallelograme  K  L ,  that  is, as  the  line  D  K  is  to  the  UneM  N, 
fo  is  the  line  M  N  to  the  line  M  K .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  D  K 
and  K  M  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  M  N  .  And  forafmuch  as  the fqaare  of  the  line 
AG  is  commenfurable  to  the fquare  of  the  line  G  B  ,the  parallelograme  F)  IF  is  commenju- 
rabkto  the  pr ar allelograme  %  L.Wherefore(by  the  toff  he fixt  andi  0 .  of  the  tenth )  the  line 
D  K  is  cmefurabkin  legth  to  the  line  K  M  .And forafmuch  as  the fquares  of  the  lines  AG  •  3  ‘ 

and  C.B  are  greater  then  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  AC  andG  B  twife  by  the 
afumpt  going  before  this propoftion,  or  by  the  afinmpt  after  this  30 .  of  the  tenth ,  therefore 
the  parallelograme  D  L  is  greater  then  the  parallelograme  M  F  .Wherefore  (by  the  first  of  the 
fxt)the  line  DM  is  greater  then  the  line  M  G. And  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
D  K  and  K  M  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  M  N  ,thatis  to  the  fourth  part  of  the fquare  4, 

vfthe  UneM  G,But(  by  the  17. of  the  tenth), if there  be  two  vnsquall  right  lines, and  if  vp- 
fon  the  greater  be  applied  a  parallelograme  equall  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  nude  of 
thelejfe  line  and, wanting  in  figure  by  affare ,  if  alfo  the parallelograme  thus  applied  de¬ 
cide  the  line  whereupon  it  is  apply  ed  into  parts  commenfurable  in  length,  then  fall,  the  grea¬ 
ter  line  be  in  power  more  then  the  lefie  by  the fquare  of  aline  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
greater. Wherefore  the  line  D  M  is  in  power  more  then  the  UneM  G  * by  the  fquare  of  a  line 
commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  D  M.  vA'nd  the  lines  D  M  and  M  G  are  primed  ra¬ 
tional!  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  And  the  line  D  M  is  protied  the  greater  name  and 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  genenD  E .  Wherefore  by  the  definition  of  a 
firji  binomiall  line fet  before  the  4.8  gropoftion  of this  bode, the  line  D  G  is  afrfc  binomiall 

LI  2.  Unc 


Con  fl ruction « 

Demon  Hr  a- 
ikn. 


I. 


v  2. 

3* 

Concluded 
that  D  G  is 
a  binomiall 
IkH 

4- 

5* 


The  tenth  ISooke 

line  which  ms  required  to  beproued. 

This  propofition  and  the  Hue  following  are  the  conuerfcs  of  the  fixe  former  pro¬ 
positions. 


f  The  43 .  T heoreme. 


The  6i.  Propofition. 


The  fijuare  of  afirfl  bimediall  line  applied  to  a  rationall  line 3  maketh  the 
breadth  or  other  fide  afecond  binomiall  line. 


Fppofe  that  the  fine  A  S  he  afrfbimediall  line,  and  let  it  he  fuppofed  to  be  de¬ 
luded  into  his  partes  in,  the  point  C;of which  let  A  C  be  the  greater  part .  T ake 
alfo  a  rationall  line  B  Ef and  (bythg  44.0/ the jirft)  apply  to  the  line  B  E  the 


mparallcldgramc  V  F  equal!  to  the  fquare  of the  line  A  B,  &  making  in  breadth 

/■"?  <T  T  T <.1  J-  f-  -  4  n  1  f  >!'*/»  yd  /,  *  ft/lfiA  4 rl  //  / -f  -M  ft  Tv)f-  f /»/?  /*/»>// 


:  ’3-vUa£!’ 

K 

n 

•'*  N 

f 

.  '  ... 

A  . 

M 

i-  36.  F 

e  b 

the  line  D  G .  Then  I fay,  that  the  line  E  G  :isafecond binomial! line  .  Eet  the fame  con- 
flrublionsbeinthis,  ihatwir'eih  the  Preffilfon  going  before .  And  forafmuch  as;  the  line 

the  point  C,  therefore  (  by  the 

dyfifthetekth)^. h^lh^S'^pandC^dre  A 
mediall  cowmen  fur  able  fit 'power  onelyf 
reprehending  a  rationall  fiperfcies.Wher-: 
fore  alfo  the ppuaresef  the  lines  AC'Un.d 
C  B  arejnediall .  Wherefore  the  paralldo- 
gratrtwe  B  L  is  mediall  (  by  the  Corollary 
of  the  2 3  .Of  the  tenth)md'it  is  applied  vp- 
pon  the  rationall  line  B  E .  Wherefore  (by 
the  2  2. of  the  tenth)  the  line  M  B  is  rati¬ 
onall  and  rncommcnf arable  in  length  to 
the  line  WE .  Againe  forafmuch  as  that 
which  is  cotayned  vnder  the  lines  A  C and 
'CBtwifeisrationdll,thereforealfothepa- 
rallelogramme  M  F  is  rationall,  and  it  is 

applied  unto  the  rationall  line  M  L  .  Wherefore  the  line  MG  is  rationall  and  commenfnra- 
ble  in  length  to  the  line  CM  L,  that  is,  to  the  line  B  E  (by  the  20.  of  the  tenth )  .  Wherefore 
the  line  D  M  is  incommenfirahle  in.  length  to  the  Urn  CM  G,  and  they  are  both  rationall. 
Wherefore  the  lines  D  M  and  M  G  are  rationall  commen fur  able  in  power  onely  .■  Wherefore 
the  whole  line  T>  G  is  a  binorniall  line. Now  resleth  to proue  that  it  is  a  fecond  binomiall line. 
Forafmuch  as  the fquares  of the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  greater  then  that  which  is  contayned 
vnder  the lines  AC  and  C  B  twife  (by  the  Afiumpt  before  the  6 0  .of this  booke)  :  therefore 
the parallelogramme  B  L  is  greater  then  theparallelogrrmme  M  F .  Wherefore  alfo  (by  the 
,  f.rfl  of  the fixt)  the  line  T>  M  is  greater  then  the  lineMG .  And forafmuch  as  the fquare  of 
the  lineA  Cis  cohimenfurabk  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  CB,  therefore  the  parallelogramme 
~B  H  is  commen  furable  to.  tbe parallelogramme  K  L  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  D  K  is  com- 
"menfurable  in  length  to  the  line  K  M~And  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  K  and 
"K  M  is  equal!,  to  the fquare of 'the  line  M  N,  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the 
line  MG .  Wherefore  (by  the  17  .of the  tenth  )  the  line  B  M  is  in  power  more  then  the  line 
(J7A  G,  bythefquareof aline  commenfurahle  in  length  vnto  the  line  D  CM  :  and  the  line 
CM  G  is  commenfurahle  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  put, namely,  to  BE.  Wherefore  the 
line  BG  is  a fecond  binomiall  line :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

tfThe 


ofBudicies  Elements* . 


Foil  75. 


f ' The  44.  Theoreme.  The  62.  Tropojttion. 

The fquare  of  a fecond  bimedi  all  line applied  Tmto  a  rationall  line:  maketh 
the  breadth  or  other fide  therofa  third  binomiall  lyne. 

Fppofi  that  A  B  be  a  fecond  bimediall  line, and  let  A  B  be fuppofd  to  be  deuided 
into  his  partes  in  the  point  C,fo  that  let  A  C  be  the  greater  p'artx_And  take  a  ra- 
^  |  tiona.ll  line  D  E.Andfiby  the  44.0/ the  fir  ft  )vnio  the  line  D  E  apply  the  parade - 

_ Jig  logramme  D  F  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B,  and  making  in  breadth  the 

line  D  G.Then  I fay  that  the  line  D.  G  is  a  third  binomiall  line .  Let  the fife  fame  confirm:  - 
tions  be  in  this  that  were  in  the profofitions  next  going  before.  And forafmuch  as  the  line  A 
B  is  a  fecond  bimediall  line ,  and  is  deuided 
into  his  partes  in  the  point  C,  th  erf  ore  ( by 
the  3  8. of  the  tenth )  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B 
aremedials  commenfurable  in  power  only, 
compreheding  a  mediall fnperficies. Wher¬ 
fore  t  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of 
the  lines  ACandGB  added  together,  is 
medidl,  and  it  is  equall  to  the  parallels- 
gramme  D  L  by  confirucUon.  Wherefore 
theparallelogramme  D  L  is  mediall,  and 
is  applied  vnto  the  rationall  line  D  E, 
wherfore(by  the  22 of  the  tenth )  the  line 
M  D  is  rationall  and  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  X)  E.  And  by  the  lyke 
reafon  alfo  *  the  line  MG  is  rationall  and 

incommenfurable  in  length  ter  the  line  M  L,thai  is,  to  the  line  T>  EJYherfore  either  of  thef 
lines  D  M  and  M  G  is  rational,  and incommen fur able  in  length  ta  the  line  D  E.  And  foraf 
much  as  the  line  A  C  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  C  B,  but  as  the  line  A  C  is  to 
the i  line  C  Bfo  (by  the  afifumpt  going  before  the  22  .of the  tenth)  is  4  he fquare  of the  line  AC 
tothat  which  is  contained  sender  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  Wherfete  the  fquare  of the  line  AC 


N. 

:  K 

/>1 

,  * 

SO.  x.  F 

■  B 


fuhribkto  thatwhich  is  contained  vrfider  the  lines  AC  and  CBtwif,  thrifts,  the  parallelo- 
gramme  D  L  to  theparallelogramme  CM  F  Wherforefiby  the  frit  of thef xt, and  10. of  the 
tenth  )the  line  D  M  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  M  G.  And  they  areproued  both 
rationall, wherfore  the  whole  line  D  G  is  a  binomiall  line  by  the  definition  in  the  36.  of  the 
tenth  JHow  refieth  to prone  that  it  is  a  third  binomiall  line.  As  in  the former proportions, fo 
alfo  in  this  may  we  conclude  that  the  line  D  M  is  greater  then  the  line  M  G,and  that  the  lint 
T>  K  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  IX  M.  And  that  that  which  is  contained  sonder 
the  lines  D  K  and  K  M  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  M  N. Wherfore  the  line  D  M  is  in 
power  more  then  the  line  M  G  by  the fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  <vnto  the  line 
E>  M,and  neither  of  the  lines  D  M  nor  M  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rational! ine 
D  EJYherfore  (by  the  definition  of  a  third  binomiall  line)  the  line  D  G  is  a  third  binomiall 
line :  which  was  required  to  beproued . 

ff  Here follow  cert  dine  annotations  by  M/Dee  ynade  J>pon  three  places  in  the 
demonfoation5  which  were  nor  very  euident  to  yong  beginners. 

f  -(The  fquares  pf  enclitics  a  c  and  c  s  .arc  medials  (as  is  taught  after  the  a  i  .of  this  tenth)  and  ther- 
foreforafnntch  as  they  ate  (by  fuppofltton)  commefurable  th'oae  to  the  other:  (by  the  ry.of  the  tech) 

LL.ij.  the 


ConAruction* 

VewotiHru- 

non. 

f 


% 

It 

D  G, conclu¬ 
ded  a  binomi¬ 
al l  line. 


1.  hetentbTSookg 

the  compound  of  them  both  is  commenfurable  to  ech  part.But  the  partes  are  medials,  thcrfore(by  the 
corollary  of  the  23  .of  the  tenth )  the  compound  (hall  be  mediall. 

'  For  that  m  x  is  equall  (by  conftru&ion)  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  a  c  and  c  b, 
which  is  proued  mediall  :  therforefby  the  corollary  of  the  23  .of  this  tenth)  m  xismediall,  andther- 
fore  fby the  fame  corollary)  his  double  M  F  is  mediall.And  itis  applied  to  a  rationall  line3M  t  (beyng 
equall  to  d  e)  therfore  by  the  2. a. of  the  tenth,the  line  m  g  is  rationall  and  incommenfurable  in  length 
to  m  ijthatis,to  d  e. 

ft  Becaufe  the  compound  of  the  two  fquares  ( of  the  lines  a  c  and  cj)  beyng  commenfurable  one 
to  the  other,isalfo  to  eyther  fquare(by  the  iy.)  commenfurable,  therfore  to  the  fquare  of  a  c :  But  the 
fquare  of  a  c  is  proued  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  a  c  &  c  b  once.  Wherfore 
f  by  the  13 .  of  the  tenthjthe  compound  of  the  two  fquares  (of  the  lines  a  c  and  c  b  )  is  incommenfu- 
rable,to  that  which  is  cotained  vnder  the  lines  a  c  and  c  b  once.  But  to  that  which  is  twife  contained 
vnder  the  fame  lines  a  c  and  c  b, the  parallelogarme  once  contayned,is  commenfurableffor  it  is  as  1. 
is  to  2 therfore  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  a  c  and  c  b  is  incommenfurable  to  the 
parallelogramme  contained  vnder  a  c  and  c  b  twife,by  the  fayd  ij.of  this  tenth. 

__  ^yA Corollary. 


<A  toroltary  Hereby  it  is  euidentfhat  the fqttares  made  of  the  two  partes  of  a fecond  hi* 

mediall  line  ,com pofedys  a  compound  mediall ^and  that  the  fame  compound  is  in* 
&ee*  commenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  contayned  Tender  the  two  partes  of  the 

Jecond  bimediall  lyne.  ' 

The  proofe  hereof, is  in  the  firft  and  third  annotations  here  before  annexed. 

*‘‘w  .  ;  1  r,  _  *»  _  •  .  lv  »  r 

f  The  -4 s.  Theoreme.  The  63.  Tropoftion. 

V  '  '•*  ‘  .  V  *•  '  ■  ■■  •*  ’  •;  fvO 

fT  he  fquare  of  a  greater- line  applied  lento  a  rationall  line 3  maketh  the 
breadth  or  other fide  a  fourth  binomiall  line. 

^i^^Tppofe  that  the  line  A  B  be  a  greater  line ,  and  let  it  be fuppofed  to  be  derided  into 
w-thX  point  C,fo  that  let  AC  be  the  greater  part.  ^Atnd  take  a  rationall 
llfill  line  D  E.  And  (by  the  44. of thefr(l)vnto  the  line  D  E, apply  the  parallelogramme. 
D  e'  equall  to  the fquare  of the  line  A  By  and  making  in  breadth  the  line  D  G .  Then  I  fay, 
that  the  line  D  Gisafourth  binomiall  line .  Let  the  felfe  fame  conflruttion  bein  this ,  that 
ConEruHion .  was  in  the.  former  Tropofitions.  i^And for- 
afmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  a  greater  line, & 

Demon  Era'  is  derided  into  his  partes  in  the  point C : 

therefore  the  lines  A  C  andC  B  are  incom- 
men  fur able  in  power ,  haring  that  which  is 
made  of  the  fquares  of  them  added  toge¬ 
ther  rationally  and  the  parallelogramme 
which  is  contayned  vnder  them ,  mediall. 

Egow  for afmuch  as  that  which  is  made  of 
the fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  CB  added 
together  is  rationally  therefore  the  paralle¬ 
logramme  D  L  is  rationall .  Wherefore  al-  A  c  3 

fo  the  line  M  D  is  rationall  and  commen- 
furable  in  legth  to  the  line  D  E  (by  the  20. 
of  this  tenth)  .  Againe for afmuch  as  that 

which  is  cotained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  G  B  tmfe  is  mediall,  that  is,  the  parallelogram e 


non 


K 

M 

K 

H 

L.  3c 

F 

•5. 


cfSuclides  Elementes .  FoLtjS* 

M  F ,and  it  is  applied  vnto  the  rationallline  ML,  therefore  (  by  the  21.  of  the  tenth)  the 
lim  M  G  is  rationall  and  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  BE.  Therefore  (' by  the  1 3. 
of  the  tenth)  the  line  D  M  is  incommen fur able  in  length  to  the  line  CM  G .  Wherefore  the 
lines  D  M  and  MG  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely  .  Wherfore  the  whole 
line  B  G  is  a  binomiall  line  .  Now  refeth  to  prone,  that  it  is  alfo  a  fourth  bi7forma.il 
line  .  Euen  as  in  the  former  Propofitions,fo  alfo  in  this  may  we  conclude,  that  the  line 
B  CM  is  greater  then  the  line  (JMG .  And  that  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
B  K  and  K  M  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  CM  Now  for af much  as  the 
fquare  of  the  line  ^yiC  is  incommen  fur  able  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  CB ,  therefore 
the  para llelogramn? e  B  H  is  incommenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  K  L  .  Wherefore 
(by  the  1. of  the fixt,  and  10. of  the  tenth )  the  line  B  K  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  K  M .  Bui  if there  be  two  acne  quail  right  lines,  and  ifvpon  the  greater  be  applied  a  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  equall  to  the fourth  part  of  the fquare  made  of  the  lefe,and  warding  in  figure 
by  a  fquare,  and  if  alfo  the  parallelogramme  thus  applied  deuide  the  line  wherupon  it  is  ap¬ 
plied  into  partes  incommenfurable  in  length,  the  greater  line jhall  be  in  power  more  then  the 
lefe,by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incomenfur  able  in  length  to  the  greater  (by  the  18.  of the  tenth). 
Wherefore  the  line  B  CM  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  M  G,  by  the fquare  of  a  line  ince- 
men fur  able  in  length  to  B  M  .  And  the  lines  B  M  and  CM  G  areproued  to  be  rationall  co - 
merfurable  in  power  onely .  And  the  line  B  M  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall 
Unegeuen  BE.  Wherefore  the  line  D  G  is  a  fourth  binomiall  line :  whi  ch  was  required  to 
be  Vro tied.  v  . 

f  The  46.  Theorems  The  64.  Tropofition. 

T he  fquare  of a  tine  contayning  hi  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall  fuper '» 
fries  applied  to  a  rationall  line3  maketh  the  breadth  or  other  fide  a  fift  hi * 
mmialltine.  Sr,  •/ 

yppofe  that  the  line  ABbea  line  contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall 
!  fuperfeies,  and  let  it  be  fuppofed  to  be  deuided into  his  partes  in  the  point  C,  fo 
\that  let  AC  be  the  greater  part,  and  take,  a  rationallline  B  E .  And  (by  the  44 . 

1  of  the  firjl)  vnto  the  line  BE  apply  the  parallelogramme  B  F  equall  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  AB,and  making  in  breadth 
the  line  B  G  .  T hen  I  fay,  that  the  line  B  G  is 
afft  binomiall  line. Let  the felfe fame  cojlrucli- 
on  be  in  this,  that  was  in  the former .  And  for- u 
afmucb  as  A  B  is  a  line  contayning  in  power  a 
rationall  and  a  mediall fuperfeies,  and  is  deui¬ 
ded  into  his  partes  in  the  poynt  C,  therefore  the 
lines  A  C&CB  are  incomenfur  able  in  power, 
hauing  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the 
added  together  mediall,  and  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  •vnder  them  rationall  .  Now forafmuch 


K 

/?l 

39 

> 

1 

I 

t 

£  t 

i 

c 

t-  X  F 

-tB 

& 


A  C  and  C  B  added  together  is  mediall  where¬ 
fore  alfo  the  parallelogramme  B  L  is  mediall.  Wherefore  (by  the  22.  of  the  tenth)  the  line 
B  M  is  ration  all- 'and  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  BE  .  ^Againe  forafmuch  as 
that  which  is  contayned  'under  the  lines  ^A  C  and  C  B  twife,  that  is,  the  parallelogramme 
ME,  is  rationall ,  therefore  by  the  20 .  the  line  M  G  is  rationall  fy  comenfurable  in  length 

LL.iq,  to  the 


2  • 


4" 


Conjlniffioui 

Timonflr&* 

tiotit 


2. 


The  tenth  ^Booke 

id  the  line  D  E .  Wherefore  (  by  the  zj .  of  the  tenth )  the  line  DM  is  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  MG .  Wherefore  the  lines  D  M  and  MG  are  rationall  commenfurable 
in  power  onely .  Wherefore  the  whole  line  DG  is  a  binomiall  line  .  I  fay  moreouer ,  that  it 
ts  afi ft  binomiall .  Formas  in  the  former,  fo  al- 
fo  in  this  may  it  be  proued,  that  that  which  is 
contayned'vnder  the  lines  D  K  and  KM  is  e- 
quall  to  the  Square  of  M  N  the  halfe  of  the  lejfe: 
and  that  the  line  D  K  is  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  K  M .  Wherefore  (by  the  zS. 
of  the  tenth )  the  line  D  M  is  in  power  more  the 
the  line  M  G  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommen¬ 
furable  in  length  to  the  line  D  M.And  the  lines 
D  M  and  M  G  are  rationall  commenfurable  in 
power  onely,  and  the  lefe  line,  namely,  M  G  is 

commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  _ . _ . _ 2 - -  B 

geuen  D  E  .  Wherefore  the  line  DG  is  a  fft 
binomiall  line :  which  was  requiredto  be  demonf  rated, 

f  The  47.  Theoreme.  T he  6 Vropofitim. 


VcmonHra 

tim. 


The  fquare  of  a  line  containing  in  poster  two  mediaUs  apply  edhmto  a  ra* 
ttonall  Imepnaketh  the  breadth  or  other  fide  a Jixt  binomiall  line. 

g'ppofe  that  the  line  AB  be  a  line  contayning  in  power  twomcdialls  ,  and  let  it  be 
r fuppofedto  bedeuided  into  his  partes  in  thepoynt  C ,  And  take  a  rationall  line  D  E. 

_ i  And  (ff  the  44 .  ofthefrf )  vnto  the  rationall  lirteDE  apply  the  paralldograme 

D  F  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B  and  making  in  breadth  the  ImeX)  G .  Then  l  fay 
Cmflmmn .  that  the  line  D  G  is  a  fixt  binomiall  line. 

Let  fhe  felfe  fame  confhuclion  be  in  thys 
that  was  in  the  former.  And forafmuch  as 
the  line  A  B  is  a  line  contayning  in  power 
two  medialls, and  is  deuided  into  his  partes 
in  thepoynt  C,  therefore  the  lines  AC  dr 
C  B  are  incommenfurable  in  power  ha¬ 
iling  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquare s  of 
them  added  together  mediall ,  and  that 
which  is  .contained  vnder  them ,  mediall, 
and  moreouer  incommenfurable  to  that 
which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  them  ad- 
ded  together  .  Wherefore  by  thofe  thinges 
which  haue  bene  before  proued, either  of 

thefe  parallelograms  D  L  and  M  F  is  mediall ,  and  either  of  them  is  apply  ed  vpon  thcratie* 
nalliwEb  EJ¥herefore( by  the  2 2. of  the  tenth ) either  of  thefe lines  D  M  and M  G  is  ratio¬ 
nall  and  incommenfurable  in  length  to  thclincTk  E .  Andforafmuch  as  that  which  is  made 
of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B ,  added  together  is  incommenfurable  to  that  which 
is  'ccyAayned  'virdsr  the  lines  A  Cdnd  C  B  twife  ,  therefore  the  parallelograme  D  L  isiri*. 
'tdmhtenfhrdbllhtdfhepardllelogr^elM  V  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  1.  of  the  fxt  and  10. of  the 
tenth)  the  line  DM;/;  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  MG.  Wherefore  the  lines 
D  M  and  hi  G  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely.  Wherefore  the  whole  line  D  G 


K 

M 

.n 

• 

.H 

h  3S  F 

A 

e  ' 

B 

ofSuclides  Elements  FoLzyy . 

is  a  binomiall  line. I  jay  alfo  that  is  a fixt  binomiall  Iwe .  For  euen  os  in  the  other  prop  of tions 
it  hath  bene prouedfo  alfo  in  this  may  it  be proued ,  that  that  which  is  eontayned  wider  the 
lines  D  K  and  K  M  is  e  quail  to  the fquare  of  the  line  M  N ,  and  that  the  line  D  K  is  in  cow* 
menfurable  in  length  to  the  line  K  M  ,and  therfore  ( by  the  i  S.  of  the  tenth )  the  line  D  M  is 
in  power  more  then  the  line  MG  by  the  fquare  ofalineincommenfurablein  length  to  the 
It  neD  M  .And  neither  of  theft  lines  D  M  nor  M  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rdtih- 
nall  line  geuenD  E.Wheref ore  the  line  D  G  is  a  fixt  binomialllim .•  which  was  required  to 
be  demonfir ated. 

f  The  48. T beoreme.  The  66.  (PropoJttion. 

A  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  a  binomiall  line  fis  alfo  a  binomiall  line 
of  the  felfe Janie  order . 


Fppofe  that  the  line  ABbea  hinomiall  line ,  andamtoiht  line  A  B  let  the  line 
CD  be  commenfurable  in  length  .  T hen  I fay  that  the  line  CD  is  a  binomiall 
line  and  of the felfe fame  order  that  the.line  AB  is  .For for afmuch  as  AB  is  a 
^§§1  binomiall  lint  let  it  be  deuided  into  his  names  in  the  poyntE,and  let  AE  be  the 
greater  name .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  are 
rationall  commenfurable  in power  onely .And as  the 

line  A  B  is  to  the  line  C  D,  (fo  by  the  12. of  the fixt )  f —  _ s _ -f  -> 

let  the  line  A  E  be  to  the  line  C  F.  Wherefore ( by  the 

ip.  of the f ft)  the  ref  due,  namely,  the  line  E  B  is  tf  ..  .  f  f 

the  refidue, namely,. to  the  line  FD,  as  the  line  A  B  is  , 

to  the  line  CD.  But  (by  fuppofition  )  the  line  A  B  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line 
C  D.Whereforc(  by  the  10. of  the  tenth)thclinc  A  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to,  the  line 
C  E,and  the  line  EB  to  the  line  F  D  -And  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  are  rationall .  Wherefore 
the  lines  C  F  andY  D  are  a/fo  rationall.  And  for  that  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  C  F  ,fo 
is  thelineE  B  to  the  line  F  D ,  therefore  alternately  (by  the  16. of the f ft )as  the  line  AE  is  to 
the  line  E  Bfo  is  the  line  C  F  to.the  line  F  E>  .  But  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  are  commenfura¬ 
ble  C  F  and  F  D .  are  alfo  commenfurable  in  power  onely , 

and  they  are  ration  all  Wherefore  the  whole  line  C  Dis  a  binomiall  line .  I  fay  alfo  that  it  is 
of  the  felfe fame  order  of  binomiall  lines  that  the  line  AB  is.  For  the  line  AE  is  in  power  more 
then  the  lineE  B  either  by  the  fquare  of  a  line,  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  E,or 
by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommtnfur able  in  length  to  the  line  A  Eilf  the  line  A  E  be  in  Power 
more  then  the  line  E  B  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  E ,  the 
line  alfo  CF  (  by  the  14.  of  the  tenth  )  fhalbe, in power  more  then  the  UneED  by  the  fquare 
of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  C  F .  And  if  the  line  A  E  he.  commenfurable  in  length 
to  a  rationall  line geuen,  the line  CF  alfo  fhalbe  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame  f, by 
the  1 2 iof  the  tenth)  .^Atid fo  either  qfihefielmsA  B  and  C  D  is) a firfi  binomia!lline,that 
is,  they  are  both  of  one  anddhe  felfe  fame  order  <  But  if  the  line  E  B  be  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the.  rationall  line  ptfifihp  lineE  D  alfi fib  Abe  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame. 
And  by  that  meqnes  agayne  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D  are  both  of  one  and  the  felfe fame  order, 
for  either  of  them  is  a  fecond  binomiall line.  But  if  neither  of  the  lines  A  E  nor  E  B  be  com- 
menfii fable  inlength  to  the  rationall  line  put ,  neither  alfo  of thefe  lines  C  F  nor  F  D  fhalbe 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame.  And  fo  either,  of the  lines  A  B  and  CD  is  a  third  bi- 
nomiallline.  But  if  the  line  AJL  be  in  power  more  then  the  lineELB  by  the  fquare  of  aline 
me ommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  AE,  the  tine  alfo  C  F  fiialbe  in  power  more  then  the 
line  F  D  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  inlength  to  the  line  C  F,  (by  the  14.  of 

LL.iiij.  the 


The  fxt  Se» 
ttary* 

CenBrulHott, 

,  ;A>  * 

Vmwflrfa 

tun. 


lo 

2, 

3* 


The  tenths ookf 

the  tenth  ) .  And  then  if  the  line  A  E  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rational!  line  pit 
the  line  G  F  alfo  Jhalbe  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame,  and  fo  either  of  the  lines  A  B» 
4*  and  C  D  Jhalbe  a  fourth  binomiall  line .  And  if  the  line  E  B  be  commenfurable  in  length  to 
therationall  line  geuen, the  line  F  D  alfo  jhalbe  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame .  And 
5*  fo  either  of  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D  jhalbe  a  fft  binomiall  line .  But  if  neither  of  the  lines 
A  E  nor  E  B  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line geuen, neither  alfo  of  the  lints 
C  F  nor  F  D  Jhalbe  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame, and  fo  either  of  the  lines  A  B  and 
4-  CD  jhalbe  a  fixt  binomiall  line.  A  line ,  therefore  commenfurable  in  length  to  a  binomiall 
line, is  alfo  a  binomiall  line  of  the felfe fame  order  which  voas  required  to  be fretted . 


ff  The  49.  Tbeoreme. 


The  67.  Tropofition. 


CanErutHon. 


Ttemnfra- 

turn, 


A  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  a  bimediall  line>  is  alfo  a  bimediall  lyne 
and  of  the  felfe  fame  order. 

|  Fffeft  that  the  line  A  B  be,  a  bimediall  line.  And  vnto  the  line  A  B,  let  the  lyne 
I C 1)  be  commenfurable  in  length.  Thenlfiy  that  the  line  CD  is  a  bimediall 
i'  y  •  |  hnc, and  of  the  (elf  order  that  the  line  A  B  is.Deuidethe  line  A  B  into  his  faries 

ll ffTftffAsin  the  feint  E.  And forafmucb  as  the  line  A  Bis  a  bimediall  line, and  is  deuided 
into  his  f  antes  in  the goint  E,  t her  fore  (by  the  3  7  .and  3  S .  oft  he  tenth )  the  lines  A  E  and  E 
B  are  medtals  commenf  urable  in  fower  onely  .And(by  the  12. of  the fixt )  as  the  line  A  B  is  to 
the  line  C  bfo  1st  the  line  A  E  be  to  the  line  C  E . 

Wherfore(  by  the  1 9. of  the  fft )  the  ref  due, name  A  _ E  3 

ly,the  line  E  B  is  to  the  ref  due, namely, to  the  line 

F  D  ,as  the  line  i^iB  is  to  the  line  C  Z> .  But  the  C _ f _ p . 

line  A  B  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  lyne  V 

C  b. Wherj'ore  the  line  A  E  is  commenfurable  in 

length  to  the  line  C  E ,and  the  line  E  B  to  the  line  F  D .  Now  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  are  me- 
didl,wherfore  (by  the  23  .of  the  tenth )  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  are  alfo  mediall.Andfor  that 
as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  Bfo  is  the  lineC  F  to  the  line  F  b.  But  the  lines  A  E  and  E 
Bare  commenfurable  in  fewer  onelyywherfore  the  lines  C  F and  F  Dare  alfo  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  fewer  onely.And  it  isfroued  that  they  are  mediall.Whcrf ore  the  lyne  C  D  is  a  bimedi¬ 
all  line.  I fay  alfo  that  it  is  of  the fife fame  order  that  the  line  A  Bis. For, for  that  as  the  lint 
A  Eis  to  the  line  EBfto  is  the  line  C  Fid  the  line  F  D,but  as  the  line  C  F  is  to  F  Dfo  is  the. 
fquare  of  the  lyne  C  F  to  the  farallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lynes  C  F  and  F D  ,by 
the  frft  of  the  flxt.T herforeas  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  lineE  Bfo  (by  the  11.  of the fft )  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  C  F  to  the  farallelogramme contained  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D :  but 
as  A  E  is  to  E  Bfo  by  the  r. of  the fxt,is  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E,  to  the  farallelogramme 
contained  Hinder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B,therfore  ( by  the  11.  of the  fft)  as  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  E  is  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B,  ft  is  the  fquare  of  the 
line  C  F  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D .  Wherfore  alternately  (by 
the  1 6.  of the fft  )as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  Eis  to  the fquare  of the  line  C  Ffo  is  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  F  (ft 
F  D  .Buy  the J quare  of  the  line  A  E  is  commenfurable  to  the fquare  of the  line  CF,becauft  A 
E  and  C  F  are  commenfurable  in  length.  Wherfore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  E  andE  B  is  commenfurable  to  that  which  is  containedvnder  the  lines  C  F  and  FD.  If 
therfon  that  which  is  containedvnder  the  lines  A  E  and  EB  be  rationall,  that  is, if  the  line 
;  ;  ■  '  *  AM 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


Fol  278. 


A  B  be  afirft  bimediall  line ,  that  alfo  which  is  contained  'under  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  is  ra~ 
tionall-Wherfore  alfo  the  line  CD  isafrjl  bimediall  line, But  if  that  which  is  contained  '■ un¬ 
der  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  be  medially  hat  is, if the  line  A  B  be  a  fee  on  d  bimediall  line,  that 
alfo  which  is  contajned  under  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  is  mediall :  wherfore  alfo  the  line  C  D 
is  a fecond  bimedia  ll  line. Wherfore  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D  are  both  of  one  and  the fe/fe  fame 
order :  which  was  required  to  be  froued. 


6  v- 


A 


B 


A  Corollary  added  by  Flufates:  but  firft  noted  by 
P.  CMont aureus. 

A  line  common  fur  able  in  power  onely  to  a  bimediall  line ?  is  alfo  a  bimediall 
.  line^and  of  the felfefame  order. 

Suppofe  that  A  B  be  a  bimediall  line,  either  a  firft  or  a  fecond, wherun to  let  the  line  G  D  be  comcn- 
furable  in  power  onely.  Take  alfo  a  rationallline  E  Z,vpcn  which  (by  the  4?.  of  the  firft)  apply  a  redan-  A  Corollary 
gle  parallelogramme  equal!  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B,  which  let  be  EZFC,and  let  the  redangle  add'd  by 
parallelogram  me  C  FIH  be  equal!  to  the  square  of  the  line  GD  .And  forafmuch  asvpoa  therationall  FiufjaUSt, 
line  E  Z  is  applyed 'a  redangle  p&ralldogramme  E  F  u 

equal!  to  the  fquare  ofa firft  bimediall  line,  therefore 
the  other  fide  therof,nameiy,  E  C,  is  a  fecond  bino- 
miail  line, by  the  61  .of  this  books  .  And  forafmuch 
as  by  fuppofition  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  &  G  D 
are  commetlfurable,therefore  the  paralleiogrammes 
E  F  and  C I  (  which  are  equall,  vnto  them  )  are  alfo 
commenfurable  .  And  therefore  by  the  r. of  the  fixt, 
thelines  E  C  and  C  H  are  commenfurablein  length. 

But  the  line  EC  is  a  fecond  binomiallline .  Where¬ 
fore  the  line  CH  is  alfo  a  fecond  binomiall  line,  by 
the  <?6.of this  booke .  And  foraftnuch  as  the  fuper-  . 
ficies  CJ  is  contayned  vnder  a  rational!  line  E  Z  or 
C  F,  and  a  fecond  binomiallline  C  H,  therefore  the 
line  which  contayneth  it  in  power,  namely,  the  line 
GD  is  a  firft  bimediall  line,  by  the ’5  of  this  booke. 

And  fo  is  the- line  GD  in  the  felfefame  order  of  bi¬ 
mediall  lines  that  the  line  A  B  is  .  The  like  aemonftration  alio  will  ferue  if  the  line  A  B  be  fiippofed  to 
be  a  fecond  bimediall  line  .  For  fo  {hall  it  make  the  breadth  EC  athird  binomiall  line  whereunto  the 
line  CH  (hall  be  commenfurable  in  length,  and  therefore  CH  alio  {hall  be  a  third  binomiall  line,by 
m  canes  whereof  the  line  which  contayneth  in  power  the  fiiperficies  C  I,  namely,  the  line  GD  fhall 
alfo  be  a  fecond  bimediall  line-.  Wherefore  a  line  comxrtenfurable  either  in  length,  or  in  power  onely 
to  a  bimediall  line,  is  alfo  a  bimediallline  of  the  felfe  fame  order. 

But  lois  it  not  of  neceflitie  in  binomiall  lines,  for  if  their  powers  onely  be  commenfurable,  it  fol- 
loweth  not  of  neceflitie  that  they  are  binomialls  of  one  and  the  felfe  fame  order,  but  they  are  eche  bi- 
nomiallseytherof  the  three  firft  kindes,  or  of  the  three  laft  .  As  for  example .  Suppofe  that  AB  be  a 
firft  binomiall  line,whofe  greater  name  let  be  A  G,and  vnto  A  B  let  the  line  D  Z  be  comefurable  in  po¬ 
wer  onely.  Then  I  fay,that  the  line  D  Z  is  not  of  the  felfe 
Game  order  that  the  tine  A  B  is .  For  if  it  be  polfible ,  let  5| 
the  line  D  Z  be  of  the  felfe  lame  order  that  the  line  A  B  is. 

Wherefore  the  line  D  Z  may  in  like  fort  be  deuided as  the 
line  A  B  is,  by  that  which  hath  bene  demonftrated  in  the 
66.  Proppflti^n  of  this  booke  1  let  it  be  fo  deuided  in  the 
pOyntE.  Wherefore  it  can  not  be  lb  deuided  in  any  other 
jp*6ynt,  by-  the  41 .  of  this  booke .  And  for  that  the  line  A  B 
is  to  the  line  D  Z ,  as  the  line  A  G  is  to  the  line  D  E^  but 
thelines  A  G  &D  E,namely,the  greater  narnes,are  com¬ 
menfurable  in  length  the  one  to  the  other  (by  the  io.of 
this  booke )  for  that  they  are  commenfurable  in  length  to  . 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  rationallline,  by  the  firft  definition 
of  binomiall  lines  .  Wherefore  the  lines  ABandDZ  are 
commenfurable  in  length,  by  the  13.  of  this  booke.  But 
by  fuppofition  they  are  commenfurable  in  power  onely  :  which  is  impoflible. 

The 


E 


G 


5 


*1  he  tenth  eBoofy  w 

Hie  felfe  fame  deni  onft  ration  alfo  will  ferue,if  we  fuppofe  the  line  A  B  to  be  a  Tecond  binomial 
line  :  for  the  lefle  names  G  B  and  EZ  being  commenfurable  in  length  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  ratior 
nail  line, {hall  alfo  be  commenfurablc  in  length  the  one  to  the  o'ther  .  And  therefore  the  lines  AB  and 
DZ  which  are  in  the  felfe  fame  proportion  With  them,  {hall  alfo  be  commenfurable  in  length  the  one 
to  the  other :  which  is  contrary  to  the  luppclition  .  Farther,  if  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  D  Z  be 
applyedvnto  the  rationall  line  C  F,namely,  the  parallelogrammcs  CTand  HL,  they  fliall  make  the 
breadthes  C  H  and  H  K  full  binomiall  lines,  of  what  order  foeuer  the  lines  A  B  2c  DZ  (whofe  fquares 
were  applyed  vnto  the  rational  line)are, (by  the  Co.of  this  y  : 

booke) .  Wherefore  it  is  manifert,  that  vnder  a  rationall  -p  ( _ _ g  t 

line  and  a  firfl  binomiall  line,  are  confufedly  contayned  all 
the  powers  of  binomiall  lines  (by  the  j4.  of  this  booke),  A  O  K 

Wherfore  the  onely  com  menfitration  of  the  powers  doth  ^  Z  *  ~ '  ,, 

not  of  neceflitie  bryng  forth  one  and  the  fejfe  fame  order 

of  binomiall  lines  .  The  felfe  fame  thyng  alfo  may  be  pro-  f _ H-  ,  K 

ued,if  the  lines  A  B  and  D  Z  be  fuppofed  to  be  a  fourth  or 

fifth  binomiall  line,  whofe  powers  onely  are  commenfu-  I 

rable , namely, that  they  Hull  as  the  firlt  bring  forth  bino¬ 
miall  lines  of  diuers  orders  .  Now  foraftnuch  as  the  pow¬ 
ers  of  the  lines  AGandGB,  andfDE  andEZ  are  com¬ 
menfurable  tk  proportionall,  it  is  manifeft,  that  if  the  line 

A  G  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  G  B  by  the  fquare  of  _ _ _ _  i 

aline  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  AG,  the  line  DE  p  T  I 

alfo  fhall  be  in  power  more  then  theline  E  Z  by  the  fquare 

of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  theline  D  E  ( by  the  itf.  of  this -booke).  And  fo  fhall  the  two 
lines  A  Band  D  Z  be  eche,ofthe  three  fird  binomiall  lines .  But  if  theline  A  G  be  in  power  more  then 
the  line  G  B  by  the  fquare  ofa  line  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  A  G,the  line  D  E  (hall  alfo 
be  in  power  more  then  the  line  E  Z  by  the  Iquare  ot  a  line  incomenfurable in  length  vnto  the  line  DE, 
by  the  lelfe  fame  Propofifion  „  And  fo  {hall  eche  of  the  lines  A  B  and  D  Z  be  of  the  three  tail  binomiall 
lines .  But  why  it  is  not  fo  in  the  third  and  fixt  binomiall  lines ,  the  reafon  is  :  Forthatinthem  neither 
■of  the  names  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  put  FC  . 


CenttntBhn* 


Dem  a'iUw- 
UQ(i% 


fTbe  so.  Theorems.  The6s.  Tropofuion. 

I  ;  vcj  *Ui.&uncm<J  ■  •  or..-  *i  ' 

jiline  commenfurable  to  a  greater  linefs  alfo  a  greater  line. 

1  v:.'.  ;  !  t: :  0  anil  IP:  ok' m  ,w  :  -  ' 

Pfpoft  that  the  line  A  B  he  a  greater  line.  And  -vnto  the  line  A  B  let  the  line  C  D 
be  commenfurable. Then  I  fay  that  the  line  C  D  alfo  is  a  greater  line.Deuide  the 
line  B  into  his partes  in  the 'point  E.  Wherfore  ( by  the  39. of  the  tenth)  the 

_ _  lines  A  E  andE  B  are  incommenfurable  in  power,  halting  that  which  is  made 

of  the fquares  of them  added  together  rationalfand  that  which  is  contained  -vnder :  theme- 
diall.fAnd  let  the  re  si  of the  consiruchon  be  in  this, as  it  was  in.  the former.  And for  that  as. 
theline  A  Bis  to  the  line  C  D,fo 
is  the  line  A  E  to  the  line  C  F,& 

the  line  £  B  to  the  line  F  D,  but  .  - - - — - ? — 

the  line  A  B  is  commenfurable  to 

the  line  C  D  by  fuppofitio.  Wher -  f  .  _ _ _ £ - J? 

fore  the  line  A  E  is  commenfura -  '  )  ,  - 

Ue  to  the  line  C  F,and the  line  EB  to  the  line  F  D .  ^Andfor  that  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  thi 
line  C  E  fo  is  the  line  EB  to  the  line  F  D  .T her  fore  alternately  ( by  the  1 6. of  the  fft )  as  the 
line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  B,fo  is  the  line  C.  F  to  the  line  F  D  .Wherfore  by  compoftion  alfo( by 
the  1 8.0 ft  he  fft  )as  the  line  A  Bis  to  the  line  E  B,fo  is  theline  CD  to  theline  ED.  Where¬ 
fore  (by  the  2  2.  of  the fixt )  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  is  to  the fquare  of the  line  EB,  fo  is 
the fquare  of  the  line  C  D  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  D  .^And  in  like fort  may  we  prone  that 
as  the  fquare  of the  line  A  B  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  Efo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  D, 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  F.  Wherfore  (by  the  11. of  the  fft)  as  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  A  B 
is  to  the 'fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  CD  to  the fquares  of the 
lines  C  F  and  F  D  .Wherfore  alternately  (by  the  1 6.  of the fft)  as  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B 


ofEuclrdesElementeh  ■'  Fol.ijp . 

is  to  the fquare  pf the  line  Cl D,  fo  ate  the fquares  of  the  lines  AE  and  EB  to  the fquar.es-  of 

the: lines  C  F  andF  DBut. the  fquare  of  the  line  A. Bis  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the 

line  C  D  (for  the  line  A  B  is  commenfurable  toth'Uni<iB:bjfii^ofiiiff^Bherfotk:ulfo  the  ■  Wr 

fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  are  commenfurable  to  the fquares  of  the  lines  C'F  and  F 

I). But  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and-E  B  are  incommep fur  able  y  and  being  added  together 

are  ratiomll-Wherfore  the  fquaresifthe  line s  C  P  dhdF'D  ire  /nc'om^furablfdr  being 

added  together, are  alfo  rationall.  And  in  like  fort  mag  we  j>rou.e  that  that  which  is  contained 

'under  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  tivife,is  commenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained,  vnder  thp 

lines  C  F  and  F  D  tivife.  But  that  which  is  contained'vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  twife,  is  . 

medialfwjqerfore  alfo  that  which  iscontkined'vM'er'  the  lines  CP  und'F  D  twife  is  medial. 

Wherfore  the  lines  C  F  and F  mads, 

of  the fquares  oft  hem  added  together  rational f  and  that  which  is  contained  s under  the  me - ' 
diallWherfore(  by  the  39 .  of  the  tenth)  the  whole  line  CD  is  irrdtionall,(h  is  called  a  grea¬ 
ter  line.  A  line  tberf ore  commenfurable  to g greater linef  s '  alfo  agreater  line* 


Suppofe  that  the  line  A  B  be  a  greater  line,and  vnto  it  let  the  line  C  D  be  coriimenfurable  any  way, 
that  is,either  both  in  length  and  in  power ,or  els  in  power  onely.Then  I  fay  that  the  line  C  D  alfo  is  a 
greater  line.Deuide  the  line  A  B  into  his  partes  in  the  point  E.and  let  the  reitof  the  conftrudtion  be  in 
this  as  it  was  in  the  former  .And  for  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  C  D,fo  is  the  line  A  E  to  the  lyne 
C  F,and  the  line  E  B  to  the  line  F  D, 
therfore  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  lyne 

C  F,fo  is  the  line  E.B  to,  the  lined?  D,  f  ^ _ _ _ 3 

butthelineABis'co'mmenfurableto' 
the  line  C  D.  Wherfore  alfo  the  lyne  c 

A  E  iscommenfurabletothe  lyne  C  < — - — - i - — — . — £ - - - Z 

F,ahd  likewife  rheiine  E  B  to  the  line 

F  D.  And  for  that  as  the  line  A  Eisto  the  line  C  F,fois  the  line  EB  to  the  line  FiD,therfore  alternately 
as  the  lyne  A  E  is  to  the  line  EB,fo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  Ivne  F  D.  Wherfore  (by  the  xx  .of  the  fixt)  as 
the  fquare  of  the  lyne  A  E  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  B,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  F  to  the  fquare 
of  the  line  F  D.  Wherfore  by  compofition(by  the  i8.of  the  fift)as  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of 
the  iynes  A  E  and  E  B  added  together  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  Ivue  E  B ,  fo  is  that  which  is  made  of  the 
fquarfes  of  theiynes  C  F  and  F  D  added  together  to  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  F  D  .Wherefore  by  contrary 
proportion  as  the  fquare  oftheline  E  B  is  to  that  w’hich  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AEand  E 
B  added  together,fp  is  thefcjUait  of  the  lyne  F  D  to  that  which  is  made  of  the  fqUares  of  the  lynes  C  F 
and  F  D  added  together.  W  herfore  alternately  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  B  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  lyne 
F  D,fo  is  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lynes  A  E  and  E  B  added  together  to  that  whiche  is 
made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lynes  C  F  and  F  D  added  together  .But  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  E  B  is  comen- 
fnrableto  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  ED,for  it  hath  already bene  proued  that  the  lines  E  B  and  F  Dare  co- 
m  e  unable .  Wh  erfore  thatwhich  is  made  of  the  fquares  oFthelinesA  E  &E  B  added  togetheris  com- 
mefurable  to  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  C  F.&  1;  D  .added  together.  But  that  which  is  made 
of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  EB  added  together  is  rationall  by  fuppofitio.  Wherfore  thatwhich 
is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lynes  C  F  and  F  D  added  together  is  alfo  rationall.  And  as  the  lyne  A  E  is 
to  the  lyne  E  B,fo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  lyne  F  D.  But  as  the  lyne  A  E  is  to  the  lyne  E  B ,  fo  is  the  fq  uare 
of  the  line  A  E  to  the  parallelogrammecontayned  vnder  the  lynes  A  E  and  EB:  therfore  as  the  lyne  C 
F  is  to  the  lyne  F  D,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  A  E  to  the  parallelogram  me  coiitayned  vnder  the  lines 
A  E  and  E  Br  &  as  the  lyne  C  Fis  to  the  lyne  F  D,fo  is  thefquare  of  the  lyne  C  F  to  the  parallelogram  e 
ccntayned  vnder  the  lynes  C  F  &  FD.  Wherfore  as  the  fquare  of  the  lyneA  E  is  to  the  paralleloerame 
containedvrider  ihe  lines  A  E  and  E  B/o  is  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  C  F  to  the  parallelogramme  cotay- 
ned  vnder  the  lynes  C  F  and  F  D,  Wherfore  alternately  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  fquare  of 
the  lytte  c^F.fo  is  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lynes  A  E  and  E  B  to  the  parallelogramme 
tontayned  vnder  the  lines  c  f  arid  f  d  .  But  the  iquare  df  the  lyne  A  E  is  coriimenfurable  to  the  fquare 
or  the  lyne  c  F,for  it  is  already  proued  that  the  lynes  A  E  and  C  F  are  commefurable.  Wherefore  the 
parallelogrammecontayned  vnder  the  lynes  AEand  EB  is  commenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme 
con  tayried  vnder  the  lynes  c  f  and  f  d  .  B  ut  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  E 
B  is  meciiall  by  lisppofition.Wherfore  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lynes  c  Fand  f  d  al- 
ioismediaL.And(as  it  hath  already  bene  proued)  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  lyne  EB,  fo  is  the  lyne  c  f 

to  tiie.IypftEdEIiut  the  lyne  A  E  was  by  fuppofition  incommenfurablein  power  to  the  line  EB.Wher- 
for^by  cif^io.of  the  tenth)  the  lyne  c  f  is  incommenfurable  in  power  to  the  lyne  F  D.  Wherfore  the 

lynes. 


tAn  other  He¬ 
mofiltration 
after  P.  Men* 
taureus. 


e/f «  other  de- 
tnanftratiort 
after  (am- 
fame. 


Conftmtkn • 


Vemonttra- 

t'm « 


Jlynes  C  Pand  F  D  arelccommenfurable  in  power, hauingnha.t  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  them 
added  together  rationall, and  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  them  mediall.  Wherfore  the  whole  lyne 
C'  D  is  (by  the  39.of  the  tenth)a  greater  lyne.  Wherfore  alyne  eommenfurable  to  a  greater  lyne  is  allb 
a  greater  lyne  :  which  was  required  to  be  denionihated. 


1 

W 


An  other  more  briefe  demondration  of  the  fame  after  Campane. 


Suppofechat  a  he  a  greater  line,  vnto  which  let  the  line  a  he 
commefurable,  either  inlength  and  power,or  in  power  onely.  And 
take  a  rational  line  c  d  .  And  vpon  it  apply  the  fuperficies  e  e  equall 
to  the  fquare  of  theline  a  :and  alfo  vpo  the  line  f  e  (which  is  equall 
totherationallline  c  d  )  apply  the  parallelogramme  f  g  equall  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  b  .  Andforafmuch  as  the  fquares  of  the  two 
lines  a  and  b  are  eommenfurable  by  fuppofition,the  fuperficies  c  e, 
fiulbe  eommenfurable  vnto  the  fuperficies  re  :  and  therefore  by 
thefirftof  the  fixtand  tenth  efthisbooke ,  the  linen  e  is  comtnen- 
furable  in  length  to  the  line  g  e  .  And  forafmuch  as  (by  the  fq  .  of 
this  bo  oke)  the  line  d  e  is  a  fourth  binomiall  line,  therefore  by  the 
OO.of  this  bo  oke  the  line  g  e  is  alfo  a  fourth  binomiall  line  :  where¬ 
fore  by  the  57.  of  this  booke  the  line  s  which  contaynech  in  power 
the  fuperficies  f  g  is  a  greater  line. 


B 


The  u.  Theoreme. 


The  6 p.  fropofition. 


A  line  eommenfurable  to  a  line  contayning  in  poloer  a  rationall  and  a  me* 
dialLis  alfo  a  hm  contayning  in  poloer  a  rationall  and  a  medialL 

Fppofe  that  Ah  he  a  line  contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall .  And 
vnto  the  line  A  B  let  the  line  C  D  be  eommenfurable,  whether  in  length  and 
power, or  in  power  onely. T  he  I fay  that  the  line  CD  is  a  line  cotayning  in  power 
a  rationall  &  a  mediall.Duide  the  line  A  B  into  his  parts  in  the  poynt  E. Wher¬ 
fore  (  by  the  40  of  the  tenth  )  the  lines' A  E  and  E  B 

are  incommenfurable  in  power ,  hauing  that  which  is  4 _ E  _  B 

made  of  the  fquares  of  them  added  together  medi¬ 
al,  and  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  rationall.  C _ F _ 0 

Let  the  fame  con  fruition  be  in  this  that  was  in  the 
former.  And  in  like fort  ii>e  may  proue  that  the  lines 

C  F  and  F  D  are  incommenfurable  in  power ,  and  that  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of 
the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  is  eommenfurable  to  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines 
C  F  and F  D,and that  that  alfo  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  E  andE  B  is  comme¬ 
furable  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  .  Wherefore  that  which  is 
made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  is  mediall, and  that  which  is  contayned  vnder 

line  contayning  in 

An  other  demonfrration  of  the  fame  after  Campam, 

Suppofe 


the  lines  C  F  and  FDh  rational  •  Vf  herefore  the  whole  line  C’  D  is  < 
power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfrated . 


ofEuclides  Elementeu 


FoLiSo . 


Supofe  that  A  B  be  a  line  contayning  in  pow¬ 
er  a  rationall  and  a  mediall :  whereunto  let  the  line 
C  ©  be  commenfurable  either  in  length  and  pow* 
er3or  in  power  onely.  Then  1  fay  that  the  line  G  D 
is  a  line  contayninginpowerarationallanda  me* 
diall.Take  a  rational  line  £  Z,\p6  which  by  the  45-. 
of  the  firft  apply  a  redhngie  parallelogram  e  EZF  C 
equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B :  and  vpon  the 
line  C  F  ( which  is  equall  to  the  line  £  z)  applye 
the  parallelogram  me  FC  Hi  equall  to  the  fquare 
ofthelineCD  :  and  let  the  breadths  of  thefayd 
parallelcgrammes  be  the  lines  ECzndCH.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  \sr\tAB  is  commenfurable  to  the 
line  G  D  at  the  leallin  power  onely,  therefore  the 
parallelogram m es  E  F  and  F  H  (  which  are  equall 
toirheir  iquates )  lhalbe  commenfurable.  Where¬ 
fore  by  the  r.ofthefixt  the  right  lines  £  Cand  C.  Hare  comefurablein  legth.  And  forafmuch  as  the  pa¬ 
rallelogram  me  £  F  (  which  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  which  contayneth  in  power  a  ratio- 
nail  and  a  mediahjisapplyed  vpon  the  rationall  £  z, making  in  breadth  theline  £  C ,  therefore  the  line 
£  C  is  a  fifth  binomiail  linefby  the  64. of  this  booke J  vnto  which  line  £  C  the  line  C  H  is  comefurable  in 
length, wherefore  by  the  66. of  this  booke  the  line  C  H  is  alio  a  fifth  binomial!  line .  And  forafmuch  as 
the  fuperflcies  C  /  is  contayned  vnder  the  rationall  line  E  z(  that  is  CF  )  and  a  fifth  binomall  line  C  H, 
therefore  the  line  which  contayneth  in  power  the  fuperflcies  C  1 ,  which  by  fuppofition  is  the  line  G  D 
is  a  line  contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall  by  the  j8.  of  this  booke  .Aline  therefore  com- 
menfurable  to  a  line  contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall. -See. 

fj  The  52.  Theoreme.  The  yoAropofition.  . 

A  line  commenfurable  to  a  line  contayning  in  power  two  medialls  3  is  alfo  a 
line  contayning  in  power  two  medialls . 

1  Fppofe  that  A  B  he  a  line  containing  in  power  two  medialls.  And  vnto  the  line 
\  AB  let  the  line  C  D  be  c  ommen fur  able,  whether  in  length  &  power , or  in  power 
onely  .  'Then  J Jay,  that  the  line  C  D  is  a  line  contayning  w power  two  medialls. 
Forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  a  line  Contayning  in  power  two  medialls, let  it  be 
deuided  into  his  partes  in  the  point  E .  Wherefore  ( by  the  4.1. of  the  tenth  )  the  lines  A  E  and 
E  B  are  incommen  fur  able  in  power, hailing  that  which  is  made  of the  fquares  of them  added 
together  mediall,  and  that  alfo  which  is  contained  vnder  them  mediall,  and  that  which  k 
made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  &  ,  ^ 

E  B  is  incommen f nr  a  ble  to  that  which  - - - — - - -  — - >’ 

is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and 

"  'q 

E  B  .  Let  the  felfe  fame  ccnfrutticn  1  p — : - : — — - 'r  —  -  1> 

be  in  this, that  was  in  the  former.  And 

in  like fort  may  we  prone,  that  the  lines  C  F &F  D  are  incommen fur  able  in  power, and  that 
that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  added  together, is  commenfurable 
to  that  which  is  made  of  the  j  Squares  of  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  added  together,  and  that  that 
alfo  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  is  commenfurable  to  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  %wder  the  lines  CF  and  F  D  .Wherefore  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  C  F  and  F  D  is  mediall  ( by  the  Corollary  of  the  23.  of  the  tenth ) :  and  that  which  is 
contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  is  mediall  ( by  the  fame  Corollary  )  .*  andmoreouer , 
that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  G  F  fr  F  D  is  incommen  fur  able  to  that  which 
is  contained vnder  the  lines  CF and  F  D  .Wherefore  the  line  CD  is  a  line  containing  in 
power  two  medialls :  which' mas-required  to  beproued. 

MMX  A  n 


G  - — t- 

A.  i - 1 


“f  IP 
— 1  3 


An  ether  de* 
mwftraiioufi* 
ter  t  ampans. 


Cenfimtdm* 


Dmo'J 'ra¬ 
tion , 


iAbts  Affmpt, 


;.y 


•Another  de¬ 
monstration 
after  Cam- 
pane. 


5[  An  AfFumpt  added  by  CMontaureus. 

T  hat  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  CF  and  F  B  added  together,  is  in- 
commenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  is  thus  proued.For , 
becauf ?  as  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  added  together  is  to  the 
fquare  of the  line  A  E,fo  is  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  ad¬ 
ded  together,  to  the fquare  of the  line  C  F,  as  it  was proued  in  the  Prof  of tions  going  before . 
therefore  alternately,  as  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  A  E  and  E  B  added  together  is 
to  that  which  is  made  of the  fquares  of  C  F  and  F  D  added  together ,  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  E  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  F  .But  before, namely,  in  the  62.  Propofition,it  was  pro¬ 
ued, that  as  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  F,fo  is  the  parallelograms 
contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  EB  to  the parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines 
C  F  and  F  D  .  Wherefore  as  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AE  andEB  is 
to  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of the  lines  C  F  and  F  D,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  EB  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  F 
and  F  D  .  Wherefore  alternately ,  as  that  which  is  made  of the fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and 
EB  is  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  AE  and  EB,fo  is  that  which  is 
made  of  the fquares  of the  lines  CF  and  F  D  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the 
lines  CF  and  F  D  .  But  by  ftppofition  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  ^AE 
and  E  B,  is  incommenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  AE&  EB. 
Wherefore  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  added  together, is  in¬ 
commenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  F  andF  D :  which  was 
required  to  beproued. 

ty  An  other  demonftration  after  Campane. 

Suppofe  that  A  B  be  a  line  contayning  in  power  two  mediaUs  :  wherunto  let  the  line  G  B  be  com¬ 
menfurable  either  in  length,and  in  power,or  in  power  onely .  Then  I  lay,  that  the  line  G  D  is  a  line  co» 
tayning  in  power  two  medialls .  Let  the  fame  confirudtion  be  in  this,  that  was  in  the  former .  And  for** 
afmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  EF  is  equall  to  the 

fquare  of  the  line  AB,  and ’is  japplyed  vpon  a  ratio-  g  ,  ,  t  -p. 

nail  line  E  Z,  it  maketh  the  breadth  E  C  a  fixt  bino- 

miallline,  by  the  <Sj.ofthis  booke .  Andforafmuch  ^  . _ _  -g 

as  the  parallelogrammes  E  F  &  C  I(which  are  equall  '  1 

vnto  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AB  and  G  D, which  are 
fuppofed  to  be  commenfurable)are  commenfurable, 
therefore  the  lines  E  C  and  C  H  are  commenfurable 
in  length,  by  the  firit  of  the  fixt .  But  E  C  is  a  fixt  bi- 
no  miall  line  :  Wherefore  C  H  alfo  is  a  fixt  binomiall 
line, by  the  <S6.  of  this  booke  .  And  forafmuchas  the 
fuperficies  C I  is  contayned  vnder  the  rationall  line 
C  Fand  a  fixt  binomiallhne  C  H,  therefore  the  line 
which  cotayneth  in  power  the  fuperficies  C  I,narne- 
ly,  the  line  GD  is  a  line  contayning  in  power  two 
medialls, by  they?,  of  this  booke .  Wherefore  aline 
commenfurable  to  a  line  contayning  in  power  two 
medialls.  &c„ 

#  An  Annotation, 

B ethert  o  hath  bene fioken  of fixe  S  enarys,  of  which  the fir  ft  Senary  contayneth  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  irr ationall  lines  by  compofition :  thefecond,the  diuifion  of  them,  namely,  that 
thofe  lines  are  in  one  point  onely.  deuided :  the  third,the finding  out  of  binomiall  lines, of  the 
fir  ft,  I fay,  the fecond,  the  third,  the fourth,  thefift,  and  the  fixt :  after  that  beginneth  the 
fourth  Senary,  containing  the  difference  of  irr  ationall  lines  hetwene  them felues .  For  by  the 

'  '  *  nature 


t 


0. 


mantes,  Fo/.zSt. 

■■  nature  ofeuefy  one  oft  he  binomiall  lines  are  demanf rated  the  differences  ofirr&thnd  lines i 
7 he  fueih  entreateth  of the  applications  of  the fcptar.es  of every  irrational  line, namely, what 
irrdtionall  lines  are  the  breadihes  of  every fuperfeies fo  applied.  .In  the fxt  Senary  is  proved, 
that  any  line  commenfurableto  any  ir ration  all  line,  is'aifo  an  irraticnall  line iofi the  fame  na¬ 
ture  .  And  now  fall  befpoken  of the feuenth  Senary, whereinagaine  are  plainly fet forth  the 
ref  of  the  differences  of  the  f aid  lints -betwene  them  felaes. 

And  there  is  euen  in  thofe  irratidnall  fines  an  arithmctitall  propcrtionalitie .  And  that 


weticall  proportion  betwene  thofe  paries ,  Ecrfuggofe  that  the  line  A  B  be  any  of  the  f ore f aid 
irraticnall  lines,  as for  example,  lefif  be  absnomullline ffr  let  it  he  denided  into  his  names 
■  in  the  point  C .  And  let  A  C  be  the  greater  name,  from  which  .take  away  the  line  A  D  equall 
to  the  lefe  name, namely ,to  C  B  .  And deuide  the line  C  D  intotwo  equall  partes  in  the  point 
E-. It  is  manif eft  that  the  line  AEis  'equall  to  the  ...  V  \ 

line  E  B  .  Let  the  line  F  G  be  e qualify  either  of  f _ g  f- ■  1  f  .  . _ ff 

them  At  is  glaini  that  how  much  the  tine  AG  dif 

fgreth fro.  the  Unit. F-  G, fodnuch  the  fame  line-F  (7  ?  ■  -  --y  - :  ? 

'.dffereth  from  the  Une.C-B:  for  in  echehsthedffe-  ^  >  r- 

rence  of  the  line  D  E  or  E  C,  which  is  theprbpertie  of arithmeticall proportionality .  And  it 
is  man/ fed,  that  the  line  F  G  is  commenftrablein  length  to  the  line  A  B, for  it  is  the  half 
thereof  .Wherefore  ( ly  the  66.  of 'the  tenth)  the  line  E  G  is \a  binomiall  line .  And  after  the 
fdfe fame  maner  may  it  be  proved  touching  the  ref  of  the  irraAomLl  lines. 


The  S3.  Theorems.  The  i  ifPropojition. 

Iftwofuperficiecesyamedy.a  rational 1  and  q  mediall fuperficies  he  copofed 
together  y  he  line  is ohich  contayneth  in  power  the  & holefup'erfidesf  s  one  of 
theje  foure  irrational!  lines  yither  a  binomial  line  fir  afirfi  bimedidll  lym , 
or  a  greater  lyneyr  a  lyne  containing  in  powera  rationail  and  cl  media'll 
■Ax  nrafitper fries.  x'  ' 


( ninginpgivmfwho!fffpeffcifiAb,is  eifher2)htno}nidllme,br.afrfhmeah 
,  AfWfy'fall  line  .or  a  greater  line  .or  a  tine  cat aynin?  ingewefa  fationallff  amedidll  fit - 
f  erf cies. For  the figerf cits f  Bjs  either  grefer  or  ca  by 

.g^mdqiKSshejfytalljdwhe.aspheonefsratfonaillyndthe  cihirmedfl).Fi/ftepii  be  greater , 
'and  tyke  a,  rationail  line-E  F,  And  ( by  the  yy.  of  the frH)yhtoihe  line  EF  apply  the  gar al- 
jflwramrne  EG  equal tot  he ffper fcicjjBlWma-  ,  -...V.. 

JW'WV!"./  ..•'jViAli'Ai!  -  '  J  *.  ..  v  y. .  ...  :  .j.  .• 

fing  tn  vreadth  the  lyne  E  H,and  to  the  fame  line  E 
JF'ythf  isyptheline  ty'MfagflyghfgdrffleUgrqwtnc 
Iff  .equal!  to  the  fupeffciesfDC,  ajtdmakyng  m 
breadth  the  line  H  IC.And fqrdfmf$.asftbe fuger- 
j fcics  A  Bis  rationadffandis  equall  to  theg  arallelo- 
■■  gramme  E  G,  tiff  ore  fjegarallelogramrhiEG  is 
qlfo  Rational ynd it  is  dfgJied.  vrAdtheyationfline 
ff  .  E, making  in  breadth the  line  EH.  Wherfpre  the 

7*  Jdf  1  (  V/lil  nvi/tU  *4,1  fwisrfh 


H  K 


- 

A  ..  ..  P 

y  v. 

‘  • 

_ 

fo  r.  ■ 

•’i. ? 

1 

i 

s.  ‘t>\>  -V 

a 

t «>  U  \.i'4  "• 

,  v.  1 

;a 

^  r a  «• 

■ 

- 

• ,  j 

i  D 

?  c 

?  t 

A  \  vy  1  y  ?  >  j 

A  ’*  •  - 

afmuch  as  the  fugerfeies  C  D  is  medndl,  -and  is  t 


-  mff: 


Note* 


fhefehenW 

Senary. 

Conftt  ail ion. 

Two  cafes  in 
this  propobti* 
cuffivMcJf 
ech  alfo  haw 
his  two  cafes » 
Fir  ft  cafe, 

'  •"  ->■"!:  itfl* 

VemmfttJA 


FkU  part  of 
thefirU  cafe. 


Secand  part  Qj 
$lte  f  rtf  cafe. 


’Ihefecsnd 

e* fa  ; 


Tirtfpartof 

sbvfmdcafe* 


Second  part  gj 
the  fend  cafe. 


E  H  K 


qua!  to  the  pardklograme  H  I,therfore  theparallelograme  HI  is  alfo  medially  and  is  applH 
ed  vnto  the  rationall  lineE  F,  that  is,  unto  the  lyne  H  G  making  in  breadth  the  line  H  K. 
Wherfore  the  lyne  H  K  is  rationall  and  incommenfur able  in  length  to  the  line  E  F  {by  the  22 
of  the  tenth.)  Andforafmuch  as  the  fuperfcies  CD  is  mediall,and  the fuperfcies  A  B  is  ra¬ 
tional!, therfore-the  fuperfcies  AB  is  incommenfur  able  to  the fuperfcies  C  D. Wherfore  alfo 
the  pardfelogramme  E  G  is  incommenfur  able  to  the  par allelogr ammo  HI.  But  as  the  paral- 
lelogrdmmeG  E  is  to  the  parallelogramme  H  I,fo(  by  the  1  .of the fixt)  is  the  line  EH  to  the 
lyne  H  K  .Wherfore  (by  the  10.  of  the  tenth)  the  line  EH  is  incommenfur  able  in  length  to 
the  line  H  K, and  they  are  both  rationall.Wher fore  the  lines  E  H  and  H  K  are  rationall  com 
menfurable  in  ■power  onely  Wherfore  the  whole  line  E  K  is  a  binomiall  line,'  and  is  deuided 
into  his  names  in  the  foynt  H.  Andforafmuch  as  the fuperfcies  A  B  is  greater  then  the fa - 
per  fetes  CD, but  the  fuperfcies  A  B  is  equal!  to  the  parallelogramme  E  G, and  the  faperf  cies 
C  D  to  thepar allelogr  arnmeH  DWherfore  the parallelogramme  EG  is  greater  then  the  pa- 
ralkloqramme  H I. Wherfore  the  line  E  His  greater  then  the  line  H  K.  Wherfore  the  line  E 
II  is  inpower  more  then  the  line  H  K  either  by  thefquare  of  a  line  common  far  able  in  length 
to  the  lyne  E  H,or  by  the  fquare  of  a  lyne  incommenfur  able  in  length  to  the  lyne  E  H.  First 
let  it  be  inpower  more  by  thefquare  of  a  lyne. come 'fur able  in  legth  vnto  the  line  E  H.  3&ow 
the  greater  name, namely, E  H  is  commenfarabk  in  length  to  the  rational  line  gcuen  E  E ,  as 
it  hath  already  bene proued Wherfore  the  whole  line 
E  K  is  a  f.rsl bmomiall lyne.  And  the  lyne  E  F  is  a 
rationall  lyne. But  if  a  fuperfcies  be  contayned  vn- 
der  a  rational! line,  and  a  frf  binomiall  lyne,  the 
lyne  that  contayneth  in  power  the fame fuperfcies, is 
(by  the  s^.cf the  tenth  )a  binomiall  line.  Wherefore 
the  line,  containing  inpower  the  parallelogramme  E 
I  is  a  binomiall  bpe  .  Whereforealfo  the  line  contai¬ 
ning  in  power  t%e  fuperfcies  A  D  is  a  binomiall 
line . 

Bdt  now- let  the  lyne  E II  be  inpower  more  then 
the  line  H  K  by  the  fquare  of a  line  incommenfur able  in  length  to  the  line  EH:  now  the 
greater  name  that  is,E  H  is  commenfarabk  in.  length  tothe  rationall  line  geuen  E  F.  When, 
fore  the  line  EK  is  afourth  binomiall  line. cAnd  the  line  E  F  is  rationall.  But  if  a  faperf- 
cies  be  contained  vndera  r  ationall  line  and  of Ourth  bwomidll  Wde!,  t he  line  that  containeth 
inpower  the fame  fuperfcies  is  (by  the.$j.  of thiUnth)irrational,andis  a  greater  line  Wher 
fore  the  line  which  containethin  power  the far  allelogr  amme  E 1  is  a  greater  line.Whercfore 
dlfo  the.  line  containing  in  power  the  faperf. 'cies  A  D  is  a  greater  lyne.  '* 

jfafanm  faffaft  faat  the  fuperfcies  A  B  rdMchis  fuperfciei  C. 

D  which  is  mediall  Wherfore  alfo  thepardlklogramme  E  G  is  lejfe  then  the  parallelogram t 
H I. Wherfore  alfo  the  line  E  H  is  leffe  then  the  imp  HK-.-jHow  the  line  HK  is  in  power  mote 
then  the  ly  ne  E II  either  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  comen  durable  in  length  to  the  line  II K ,  Or 
by  the  fquare  of  a  lyne  incommenfarable  in  length  vnto  the  lyne  H  K .  Fir.tf  let  it  be 
inpower  more  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfarabk  in  length  vnto  H  K :  now  the  leffe 
name,  - that  is  E  H  is  commenfarabk  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  geuen  E  F,  as  it  Whs 


A 

1 

rtf 

1 

}  1  X 

*  •-  G 

I 

f 


lyne, the  lyne  that  contayneth  inpower  the  fame  faperf  cies, is  ( bytfe  y$.  of  the  tenth)  a  frit 
fame  dial!  line  Wherfore  the  line  which  contayneth  in  power  the  par  allelogr ame  E 1  isdftfl 
bimediall  line. Wherfore  alfo  the  line  that  containeth  in  power  the faperf  cies  AD  is  afrit 
himedialllyne.  '/.''Tfa  "  .  ' 

But  now  let  the  line  H  K_  fa  in  power  niofi thin  the  line  EH, by  the  fquare  of  alitte  ift- 
^  cowmen* 


of Suclides  Elenientef* 


Fol.zZx. 


And  the  lyne  E  F  is  ratiena.ll.But  if  'a_  fuperfieies  he  contained  vnder  a  rationall  lyne,  and  a 
fft  bimmull  lyre, the  line  that  contayneth in  power  the funic fuperfcies, is  (by  the sS.  of  the  . 
tenth)#.  line  containing  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  mediall.  Wherefore  the  lyne  that  cbntay- 
mth  in  power  t  he  par  allelogramme  E 1  is  a  line  contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and a  medi- 
all  Wh  erf  ore  alj o,  the.  lyne  that  containeth in  power  the fuperfcies  A  D  is  a  lyne  contayning 
in  power  a  rat ionall  and  a  mediall. iftherf ore  a  rationall  and  a  mediall fuperfcies  be  added 
together, the  lyne  which  contayneth  in  power  the  whole fuperfcies, is  one  of  the  fe  four e  irrati¬ 
onal!  lines, namely, either  a  binomialUmefr  a frf  bimediall  line, or  a  greater  lyne, or  a  lyne 
contayning  in  power  a  rationall  and  a  medialltwhkhwasret 


ft  The  $4.  Theorems* 


The  7 2.  Tropojition » 


If  two  mediall fuperficieces  incommenfurahle  the  one  to  the  other  he  com* 
pofed  together ;  the  line  contayning  in  power  the  lohole fuperfcies  is  one  of 
the  two  irrational! lines  remayning^  namely >  either  a  fecond htmediall line:} 
ora  line  contayning  in  power  two  medialls. 

Et  thcfe  two  mediall  fuperficieces  A  Band  C  D  being  incommenf arable  the  one 
to  the  other  be  added  together .  Then  I fay,  that  the  line  which  contayneth  in 
power  t  he fiiperfcies  A  D  is  either  a  fecond  bimediall  line ,  or  a  line  contayning 
in  power  two  medialls. For  the fuperfcies  A  Bis  either  greater  or  lejfe  then  the 
,  fuperfcies CD  ( for  they  cah  by  no  meanes  be  e  quail,  when  as  they  are  incom- 
menfurable)  .  Firf.let  the  fuperfcies  A  B  be  greater  then 
the  fuperfcies  Cl)  .  Arid  take  a  rationall  line  EF .  And 
■{by  the  44.-of4h.eftf:)  vnfo  the  line  E  F  apply  theparalle- 
logr.amws  E  G  equalltothe fuperfcies  <^AB,  and  making 
in  br  ea  dth  the  line  EH  a  and  vnto  the  fame  line  E  F,that 
is,  to  the  line  II G,  apply  the  par  allelogramme  H  I  equall 
tothe fuperfcies C  making  in  breadth  the  line  H  K. 

.And for  a  [much  as  either. ofthefe fuperficieces  AB&CD 
\s:mditdk  therefore- Affp^itfer  ofthefe  parallekgrammes 
EG  fnf HI  is  mediall .  And  they  are  eche  applied  to  the 


he 


breadth the  lines  E  H  and  H  K\  Wherefore  {by  the  2  2. of F, 
tenth J:cMher  ofthefe  Jim  EH  and  H  K  is  rationall  and  incommenfur able  in  length  to  the 
IJppHF.  AndforafmMim  the  fuperfcies  A  Bis  incommenfurahle  to  the  fuperfieies  CD, 
df4iM^perfcim4oMm^lito  theparalklagframme  E  G,  andthifuperfcieFCD  to  the 
paralletogramme  H I  :  therefore  the  par allelogramme  E  G  is  incommenfurahle  to  thepa- 
rallelogramme  HI .  But  (by  the  1.  ofthefixt)  as  the  par  allelogramme  E  G  is  to  the  par  alle¬ 
logramme  HI  Jo  is  fe  line  E  H  to  the  line  7HK  .  Wherefore  (by  the  10,  of  the  tenth)  the 
line  E  H  di  incommenfumble  in  length  to  the  line  H  K .  Wherefore  the  lines  T  H  and  H  K 
are  rationall  commen fur  able  in  power  onely .  Wherfore  the  whole  line  EK  is  a  binomial!  Iwe . 
And  as  in  the  former  Eropoftionfdlfh  in  this  may  it  be  proued,  tfatshelwe  EH  is  mater 
then  the  line  H  K .  Wherefore  the  line  E  H  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  H  K,  either  by  the 

f\T  A  I11A.0  r cam flu >y  u  1 1  **  1  „  a.  1.  _  !•  t-i  r.  r  r*  ^  —  .  ..  ' 


•'  .  ,  .  .  f  v  n  ^  w  7  ^  -c'  11  hifklA  1 2  S\  i3\iU7rtY?tZY}jH~ 

rable  m  length  to  themhmu.lme.geuen  EF. .  Wherefore  the  wholeline  E  K  is  a  third  hi- 
' ' ' '  *  MM, if  nomiall 


ConUr  union. 

Two  cafes  in 
this  Propo/ia* 
ticti. 

The firfl  cafe. 


The  fir  fl pan 

cf  the  fit  it 
cafe. 


The  Second 
part  of  the 
frft  cafe. 


Theftcond 

Cdft, 


vi  Corollary, 


mtnUUUm .  And  the  line  EF  is  arationall  line .  But  if  a fuperfeies  be  contaymd  under  4 
rationall  line  &  a  third  binomiall  line,  the  line  that  cot aineth  in  power  the fame fuperfeies, 
is  ( by  the  $ 6.0ft he  tenth )  a  fecond  bimediall  line .  Wherefore  the  line  that  containeth  in 
power  the  fuperfeies  E  I, that  is, the fuperfeies  A  D,  is  a  fecond  bimediall  line . 

But  nowfuppofe  that  the  line  E  H  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  HK  by  the fquare  of 
a  line  incommenfur able  in  length  to  the  line  EH .  And  forafmuch  as  either  of  thefe  lines 
EH  and  H  K is  incommenfurablc  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  geuen  E  F,therfore  the  line 
EK  is  a fixt  binomiall  line.  But  if a  fuperfeies  be  contained  under  arationall  line  and  a 
fixt  binomiall  line,  the  line  that  containeth  inpower  the fame fuperfeies ,  is  (by  the  5#. of  the 
tenth  )  a  line  containing  in power  two  medialls. Where¬ 
fore  the  line  that  containeth  in  power  the fuperfciesA  E> , 
is  a  line  contayning  inpower  two  medialls .  And  after  the 
felfe fame  manor,  if  the  fuperfeies  A  B  be  lefe  then  the fu¬ 
perfeies  C  D;  may  we prone,  that  the  line  that  contayneth 
in  power  the  fuperfeies  A  D ,  is  either  a fecond  bimediall 
line,  or  aline  containing  in  power  two  medialls .  If  there¬ 
fore  two  mediall fuperfcieces  incommenfurablc  the  one  to 
the  other  be  added  together,  the  line  contayning  in  power 
the  whole fuperfeies  is  one  of  the  two  irrationall  lines  re- 

mayning,namely,  either  a  fecond  bimediall  line,  or  a  line  cotaining  in  power  two  medialls * 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

*  ■  '  •• 

A  Corollary  following  of  the  former  Proportions. 

binomiall  line  and  the  other  irrationall  lines  following  it,  are  neither  mediall  liner, 
nor  one  and  the fame  betwene  them  felues .  For  the  fquare  of a  mediall  line  applied  to  arati¬ 
onall  line,  maketh  the  breadth  rationalland  incommenfur  ale  in  length  to  the  rationall  line , 
wherunto  it  is  applied  (  by  the  2  2. of  the  tenth)  .The fquare  of  a  binomiall  line  apply ed to  4 
rationall\line, maketh  the  breadth  a firf  binomiall  line  ( by  the  60.  of  the  tenth).  The  fquare 
of afrf  bimediall  line  applied  unto  a  rationall  line ,  maketh  the  breadth  a  fecond  binomiall 
line  (by  the  6 1  .of the  tenth)  .  The fquare  of  a  fecond  bimediall  line  applied  unto  a  rationall 
line,maketh  the  breadth  a  third  binomiall  line  (by  the  62.  of the  tenth  )  ;  The  fquare  of  a 
greater  line  applied  to  a  rationall  line, maketh  the  breadth  a fourth  binomiall  Unc( by  the  6y. 
of the  tenth  )  .The  fquare  of  a  line  containing  in  power  a  rationall  &  a  mediall fuperfeies, 
maketh  the  breadth  afft  binomiall  line  (  by  the  6 4.  of the  tenth  )  .  And  the fquare  of  a  line 
containing  in  power  two  medialls,  applied  unto  a  rationall  line ,  maketh  the  breadth  a  fxi 
binomiall  line  (by  the  6$.  of the  tenth)  .Seing  therefore  that  thefe forefaid  breadthes  differ 
both  from  the frf  breadth',  for  that  it  is  rationall,  and  differ  alfothe  one from  the  other, for 
that  they  are  binomials  of  diners  orders :  it  is  manifef  that  tkofe  irrationall  lines  differ  al fa 
the  one  from  the  other. 

f&j  Here  beginneth  the  Senaries  byfubftraction. 

fThe  Theoreme.  The  js^ropofifton. 

If  from  a  rationall  line  he  taken  envoy  a  rationall  line  commenfurahle  in, 
power  onely  to  the  Dhole  line:the  refine  is  an  irrationall  line3andis  called 
4  refiduall  line, 

Suppofi 


Elemcntes 


Fol.  28J. 


Vppof  that  A  B  be  a  rationall  line, and from  AB  take  dry  ay  a  rationall  line  B  C 
cowmen fur able  in  power  onely  to  the  whole  line  A,  B.T  hen  /  fay  that  the  line  re - 
maynihg, namely  A  C  is  irrationallandis  called  a  ref duall. line. For forafmucb 
as  the  lane  A  Bis  incommen  fur  able  in  length  vnto  the  line  B  C  ,  and ( by  the  af- 
f.impt  going  before  the  22.  of  the  ten  th)as  the  line 
A  Bis  to  the.  line  B  C ,  fo  is  the  J fare  of  the  line 

AB  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  - gg—1 - — g 

A  B  and.  B  C:  wherefore  (  by  the  10.  of  the  tenth ) 

the fquare  of  the  line  A  Bis  incommen  far  able  to  that  which  is  contayned vnder  the  lines 
A  B  and  B  C.But  vnto  the fquare  of the  line  A  B  are  commenfurable  the fquares  of  the  lines 
A  B  and  B  C(by  the  is. of the  tenth  ) .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of the  lines  AB  and  B  C  are  in- 
commenfurable  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C.But  vnto  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and.  B  C  is  commenfurable  that  which  is  contayned  vnder 
the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife.  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines A  B  and  B  C  are  inc  erne  fur a- 
ble  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife.  But  the fquares  of  the  lines 
A  B  and  B  C  are  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  twife,  and  to 
the  fquare  of the  line  A  C(by  they. of  the fecond)  Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder 
the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  together  with  the fquare  of  the  line  AC  is  incommen  fur  able  to 
that  which  is  cotayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife. Wherefore  (by  the  2  part  of the  /  6 . 
of the  teth)that  which  is  cotayned. vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife,  is  incomefurable  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  C. Wherefore  (by  the frf  part  of  the  fame  )  that  which  is  contayned  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  line  AC,  that  is,  the fquares 
of the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  incommen  fur  able  to  the fquare  of  the  line  AC.  But  the fquares 
oft  he  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  rationall, for  the  lines  A  B  and  B  Careput  tobe  rationall.-wher- 
f ore  the  line  A  C  is  irrationallandis  called  a  refdiiall  line -which  was  required to  be proued. 

4  An  bdierdemonftration^ after Gampane, 


Camfutne demonftrateth  this  Propoficion  by  a  figure  more  briefly  after 
this  maner .  Letthe  fuperficies  EG  be  equal!  to  the  fquares  of the  lines 
A  B  and.  B  C  added  together  :  which  fhall.be  rational!  (for  that  the  lines 
AB  and  B  C  are  fupppfed  to  be  rationall  comen  finable  in  power  onely). 
Fiso  which  fuperficies  take  away  the  fuperficies  D  P  equal!  to  that  which 
i^contayned'vnderthedines  A  B&-B.G, twiCe,  which  ihall  be  mediall(by 
the  ar..ofthis,t>ooke)  .Now  by  the  7.  of  the  fecond,  the  fuperficies  F  G 
i$  equall  to  (he  fquare  of  the  line  AC  And  foufmuch  as  the  fuperficies 
E  G  is  incommenlurable  to  the  fuperficies  D  F  (  for  that  the  one  is  rati¬ 
onal!  and  the  other  medial! ) :  therefore  (  by  the  16.  of  this  booke  )  the 
fame  fuperficies.  E  Q  is ;  incommenfurable  to  thc  fupeificies  F  G .  Wher- 
fore  the  fuperficies  F  G  is  irrationall .  Arid  therefore  the  line  A  C  which 
contayneth  itin  power  is  irrationall :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


r  A!n‘ahnbtation ofP.LMdntaureus. 

,  .....  rv  !  •  .  .  ,  . , 

This  THeoretne  teacheth  rtbthing  els  but  that  that  portion  ofthe  greater  name  of  a 
binomiall  line  wftifeh  remay  neth  after  the  taking  away  of  the  lefle  name  from  the  grea¬ 
ter  name  is  irrationalljwhich  is  called  a  reliduall  line,  that  is  to  fay,  if  from  the  greater 
name  of  a  binomiall  line,which  greater  name  is  a  rationall  line  comenfurable  in  power 
onely  to  the  leffe  name, be  taken  away  the  leffe  name, which  felfe  leffe  name  is  alfo  com¬ 
menfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  greater  name  (which  greater  name  this  Theoreme 
.  ealleth  the  whole  line)the  reft  of  the  line  whiehremaineth  is  irrational,which  he  calleth 
"T  v  MM.iiii.  are- 


7  he  firti  St- 

nary  by  ftib - 

Jlraetm* 

Vernon  lira-* 
tisn. 


%An  ether  de* 
monftration 
after  Cam- 
pane, 


The  tenth ‘Booke 


a/refiduall  line .  Wherforc  all  the  lines  which  are  intreated  in  this  Theoreme^and  in  the 
fiue  other  wfcich  follow  are  the  portions  remay ning  of  the  greater  partes  of  the  whole 
lines  which  were  intreatedofin  the  3(5.37.3  8. 3£.4o. 41.  propofitios,  after  the  taking 
away  the  IclTe  part  from  the  greater. 

In  this  propofition  is  fet  forth  the  nature  of  the  eight  kinde  of  irrationall  lines 
which  is  called  a  refiduall  line,the  definition  whereof  by  this  propofition  is  thus. 

Diffimthn  of  ^  refiduall  line  is  an  irrationall  line  which  r entity nethjfrhenfrom  a  rationaU  line  geuenjs  taken 

the  eight  wa-  away  arationall  line  comtnenfiir able  to  the  whole  line  insower  onely, 

mn&Uhnt. 


tVM  . 


ej’The  sd.The’oreme.  The  7  4.  Propofition, 


If  from  d  mediall  line  he  taken  away  a  mediall  line  commemfurable  in 
foyer  ojieh  to  the  'ft  bo  le  line,  and  comprehending  together  with  they  hole 
line  afationall fuperficies:the  refidue  is  an  irrationall  line  fandh  called  a 
firjl  mediall  refiduall  line. 


'V 

vA.Vu”-: 


*1 Vppjfe-^atcAB  lea  mediall  line .  And 
mfrm.  tlfi- fine  A  B  1  tale  away  a  mediall 
Bif.  cerumen  fur  able  fin  power  onefij 
ter$&frkokfi#e  and  comprehending  toge- 


■  c  ' 

&W&kv 


ABa  rationaU  fuperficks  dhotis  fit  that  which  is  comprehended  under 
the  lines  A  B  and  B  Che  rationall. Then  l fay  that  the  line  remayning, namely  ,  A  C  is  irratio- 
Dmonffra-  nail  and  is  called  a  firjl  niedtaU  refiduall  line W or forafmuch  as  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  me- 
tion,  dull, therefore  alfio  the f quarts  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  mediall.But  that  which  is  con¬ 

tained  under  the  lines  A  B  and  B  Ctwife  is  rationaU.  Wherefore  that  which  is  comp  0 fed 
-  •’ ‘  -  *  -of  iUfquirtsjofjhe tines  AB andBTi^atds:,that:W.hid:fs^maynedu»derrA^mdAC 

twife  together  with the fquare  of  the  line  A  C  is  incommen fur  able  to  that  whichds  contained 
;  vnderthe  lines  A  Bands  Ctwifi.  Wherefore  ( 

4  which  is  contayned  under  the  lines  ABandBC  twife  is  incommenfurable  to  the  fquare  of 
the  Uni  A  C .  But  that  which  is  contayned  under  tbeUnis  A  Band  B  C  twifi  is  rationall, 
wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  ItneA^fiirrAimUiWherfbrefitp  the  line  A 
and  is  called  a fir {l  mediall  refiduall  line .  T his firjl  mediall rejiduaU  lineisaljo  that part  of 
the  greater  part  ofafrfil  him  edidlUncy  which  remayneth  after  the  taking  away  fif the  lejfe  • 
part  from  the  greater  fiber  of  it  hathalfo  hit  name,  andis failed  a  firjl  mediallrefiduallUneT 
which  ipas  required  to  be  proued.  ,Cv; -.Id  ww«.-;  ni  ?« i.-. .  -  ,0 


Out  of  this  propofition  is  taken  the  definition  of  the  ninth  kinde  of  irrationall 
lines,  which  is  called  a  firfiteddnalltnedialllinethetU^nition  whercofis  thus. 

TkffhtUion  of  Afirfk veffiu^.medutUlmei^-,an.  irrationall line  which  Qwgyn&k » when. fromy  mediall Utte. is 

the  ninth  irtir  taken  away  a  mediall  line,  commenfii rah  lets  the  whole. in  power  finely,  and  the  part  f  fig  f  fit  ay  and 
iionafttint^  the,  Whole  tineomtoyne  a  mediaUfuperfiiies.  ■  ;  _ 


U-lJU  i  ll  cl 


.  .  ..n 

TX’IT  lUtt* 


An  other  demotiftration  after  Campane. 


■  :  J  x;  iO  w .  v  .  . .  t 

dl.sl  sdl  03  V; 


iet  the  Sue  D  E  be  rationalh-vpon  which  apply  the  fuperficies  D  F  e<juall  to  chat  which  is  cones,- 


ofSaclides  Elementes. 


Foil  84. 


tied  vnder  the  lynes  A.BandB  Ctwife,  andletthe  fuperficies  G E be e~ 
qual  to  that  which  is  compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lynes  A  B  and  B  C : 
"wherfore  by  the /.of  the  fecond,the  fuperficies  FG  is  equal  to  the  fquare 
ofthe  lyne  A  C.  And  forafmuch  as  (by  fuppofi'tion)  the  fuperficies  E  G  is 
mediall,  therfore(by  the  21. of  the  tenth)thelyne  D  G  is  rationall  comen- 
furable  in  power  onely  to  the  rational  lyne  DE.And  forafmuch  as  by  fup- 
pofition  the  fuperficies  EH  is  rational,  therfore  by  the  zo.of  rhe  tenth,tne 
line  D  FI  is  rational  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  rationallline  DE. 
Wherfore  thelynesD  G  and  D  H  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power 
only  (by  the  aifumpt  put  before  the  13  .of  this  bokc).  Wherfore  by  the  73 
of  this  boke,the  lyne  G  H  is  a  refiduall  lytle,  and  is  therefore  irrationall. 
Wherfore  (by  the  corollary  of  the  21.  of’  this  boke )  the  fuperficies  F  G  is 
irrational.And  therfore  the  line  A  C  which  cotayneth  it  in  power  is  irra¬ 
tionall, and  is  called  a  firll  medial  refiduall  lyne. 


C  B 


f  The  $ 7 .  Theorems. 


The  7  s.  Tropoftion . 


If  from  a  medial!  lyne  he  taken  ay  ay  a  mediall  lyne  commenfurable  in 
palter  only  to  the  1th  ole  lyne, and  comprehending  together  'With  the  it  hole 
lyne  a  mediall fuperficies, the  ref  due  is  an  irrationall  lyne,  and  is  called  a 
fecond  mediall  refiduall  lyne. 

Fppofe  that  A  E  be  a  media!llme,andfrom  A  %  takeaway  a  medialllinc  CB 
commenfurable  in  power  .onely  to  the  whole  line  A  B,  and  comprehending  toge¬ 
ther  with  the  whole  line  A  B  a  mediall  fuperficies  ,, namely ,  the  par alldogr ammc 
contained vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C.  Then  l  . 

fay  that  the  ref  due, namely, the  line  A  C  is  irrationall ,and  is  A  c  3 

called  a  fecond  mediall  refiduall  lin.e-T ake  a  rationall  line  D 
J,and  (by  the^.ofthefirfi )  vnto  the  line  D  I  apply  the  pa- 
rallelogramme  D  E  equallto  the  fquares  ofthe  lines  A  B  fr 
B  C,and  makingin  bredth  the  line  D  G.  And. vnto  the  fame 
line  D  I  apply  theparallelogramme  D  H  equallto  that  which 
is  cotained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  &  B  Ctwife ,  and rnakyng  in 
breadth  the  line  D  F.  Now  the  parallelogramme  D  H  is  lefie 
then  the  parallelogramme  D  Efior  that  alfio  the fquare  ofthe  lines  A  B  and  BC  are  greater 
then  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  t  wife, by  the  fquare  ofthe  line  A 
C  by  the  7. of  the  fecond .  Wherfore  theparallelogramme  remayning, namely  ,F  E,is  equal  to 
,  the  fquare  of the  line  A  C. And forafmuch  as  the fquares  of the  lines  A  Band  B  C  qremedi - 

Eis  wedidll,andis  applied  to  the  rationall  line  D 
I',, making  if  bredth fhf line  D  G. Wherfore  (by  the  22.ofithetenth)tbeline  D  Gis  rational 
and  incommen  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  D  l.Againe forafmuch  as  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  Cis  mediall ,  therfore  alfo  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  is  mediall, hut  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the.  lines  A  B  andB  C 
(wife  is  equallto  the  parallelogramme  I>  Ft  .Wherfore  the parallelogramme  D  H  is  mediall 
arid  is  applied  to  therationall  line  D I  making  in  breadth  the  line  D  F. Wherfore  the  line  D 
F  is  rationall  and  incommen  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  D  I.Andforafmuch  as' the  lines  A 
B  and  B  C  are  comenfur able  in  power  Onely ,  therfore  the.  line  A  B  is  incomnefurablein  legth 
to. the  line  B  C  .Wherf ire  ( by  the  ajfumpt  going  before  the  22,.  \ ofthe  tenth,  and  by  the  to.  of 
, the  tenth)the fquare  of the  line  A  Bis  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder 
the  lines  A B  and  R  C.But  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  k_AI  B  are  commenfurable  the  fquares 
of  A  B  and.  B.  C.  (.by  the  1 $ .  ofthe  tynff^dnd  vnto  that  .which  is  contained  vnder.  the  lines 


An  other  He i 
monftratioaf 
ter  Campane? 


Con/Irtifiiott, 


Demonftra* 

thn« 


\An  ether  de- 
moniirdiion 
after  Cam- 

pane* 


of 

the  #-■'  stth  irra 
UsuaHline* 


7 he tenth  'Bco^e 

A  B  and  B  C  is  commefurahle  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife. 
Wherfore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  under  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife. But  unto  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  BCis  equal 
the  fafdllelograme  D  E-dpd  to  that  which  is  cotawed  under  the  lines  A  B  ana ^  B  C  twtje ,  is 
equall  the parallelogramme  D  H Wherefore  the  far allelograme  D  Ets  in  come  fur  able  Us  the 
parallelogramme  D  H.  But  as  the  parallelogr amine  D  Ets  to  the  paralldogr ammo  D  fffoit 
the  line  G  Z)  to  the  tine  D  F,  Wherfore  the  line  GD  is  incom- 
menfurablein  legth  to  the  line  D  F.  And  either  of  the  is  ra~ 
tionall.Wherfore  the  lines  G  D and  D  F  are  rationall  cow¬ 
men  fur  able  in  fewer  onef Wherfore  the  line  F  G  isarefidti- 
all  line  (by  the  73  .prof  oftion  of  the  tenth)  Andtheline  D 
E  is  a  rationall  line. But  a  fuperfeies  comprehended  under  a 
rationall  line, and  an  ir  rationall  line  is  inationall  ( by  the  2 1 
of  the  tenth  )aud  the  line which  contdineth  in  power  the  fame 
fuperfeies  is  inationall  ( by  the  afumpt  going  before  the 


3 


%ne )  Wherfore  th'epdr allelograme  F  E  isirrattonall.  But  the  line  A  C  contdineth  in  power 
'the  pafallelogrdmMe  F  E.  Wherfore  the  line  AC  is  an  inationall  line  and  is  called  a  fecond 
medially  efiludi  line -And  this  fecond  mediall  ref  dual l  line  is  that  part  of the  greater  part  oj 
a  bimediall  line  which  remay  net h  after  the  taking  away  of the  leffe  part  from  the  greater: 
which  was  required  to  beproued. 


Another  dcmomlrtion  more  briefe  after  Campane, 

Subpofe' a  mediall  line ,  from  which  take  away  the  me¬ 
dial!  lme  G B oohfftienfurable  -Ynto  the  whole  line  A  3  in  power  onely 
and  cents)  ning  with  it  a  mediall  fuperfkies,  namely,  that  which  is  cen- 
tayned  vnder  thehnes  a.  B  and  ®  t/.Then  I  fay  that  therefidue  A  G  is  an 
irrational!  lirie,andj:s  caHed'a$cobd  mediall  refiduaU  line .  Take.'*  ratio¬ 
nall  line  d  C  ,  vpon  which  apply  a  parallelogramme  equal!  to  that  which 
is  c&mpqfed  of  the  Iquares  of  the  lines  a  h  and  B  G, which  by  the.*?,  of 
the  fiflUetbe/>  C  £/,  Agay  he  !et  the  parallelogiamme  ZF  E  /  be  equall 
to  that  which  is  cojntayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  3  G  twife.  Wherfore  ' 
the  fuperncies  rerrtaining  D  F  is  equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  AG  by  the 
7  .of  the  fecond  .  fSForthac  which  is  coocayned  vnder  the  lines  a  B  and 
B  G  twife  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  line  a  G  is  equall  to  that  which 
is compofedofthe fquares ofthe finest 3 and B  C )  .  Andforafmuch  as 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  a  B  and  3  6' are  mediall ,  for  that  they  are  deferi- 
bed  of  p^rlielograme  D  E  which  is  equal  ynto  the,  ihall 

alfo  be  medial]  .'And  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  cotained  vnder  the  lines 
A  3  and A  6  iji  feyfiippofition  mediall,  therfore  the  fiiperfides  d '£ wliich 
ia 


<? 


©' 


C  '  i'  .  '  If 

"  ••  '  ■ 

1  ,>  4  v  , 

^  - 

.  ...  /u 
“  '  \ v  7  ‘ 

!-.  .  -•  X  A  A  •  '  . 

• 

«  4.'l  ‘ll 

■F; 


not  thS  mediall'fuij^^eies  2  £  by  ^rational  fuperficiesf  by  the  zdiof  this  bobke).Wherlqre  the  excel!?,’ 
namely, fhe'fuperficies  D  F  is  irratio.hail,yHto  which  the  fquare  of  the  line  AG-h  equall  :  wherefore, the 
fquare  bffhelihe  AG  is  irrationaH,and  therefore  the  line  A  G  which  contayneth  it  in  power  is  irratio¬ 
nal!  by. the  afiiffiipt.pur  before  the  £i  .of  this  booke,arid  is  called  a  fecond  mediall  refimiall  line. 


,which 


.  This  propofi.tion  fetreth 

is  called  i'iCCohdrefi(luallmediaIlIiiie,wIiich  is  thus  defined. 

*■  ■  ’y  ^  *-  */'. 'd  cl  f.  i  '  ,  ‘  v".  ^  v 4 '  *1  '  v  *  * 

%A  fecund  rcjidyall  mediall.  lyne.  csmitrxtwwlUyne'tohifhnmaynethjWbenfromumedUlline 
’  is  takgn  ftidyf  mediall  lyne  commenphrakle  to  the  Whole,  in  poVeer  onely, and  t  he  part  tafyn  ay/ay 
dntWhAf^hkYo'hidfne a 'meMuBfujerfcies.  • 

•  :S;  lfThe  i8.TJmrmti  The  f6.TropoJition. 

Jffrcm  a  right  line  he  taken  away  a  right  line  incommenfurahle  in  power 
todhz  ^bole,  and  if  that  t>bicb  is  made  of  the fquares  of the  lohole  line  and 
if i the  lme  taken  away  added  together  be  rationall;,  and  the  parallelograms 

com 


oj-Suclides  Elementes.  F0/.285* 

contained  lender  the  fame  lines  mediall:  the  line  remaining  is  irrationally 
and  is  called  a  lejfe  line . 

Vppofe  that  ABbea  right  line,  and  from  the  right  line  A  B  take  away  a  right 
•if*  line  B  C  incomm  enfura  lie  in  power  to  the  whole  line, namely, to  AB,and  let  that 
which  is  compofed  of  'the  fquares of  the  lines  AB  and  BC  he  rationall,  and  let 
the  parallelogrammecontayned  Tinder  the fame  lines  A  B  and  BC  be  mediall. 
Then  l fay, that  the  line  remaymng,  namely,  the 

line  A  C  is  irrationall ,  dr  is  called  a  lefe  line. For  . ...  _ . 

fir af much  as.  that  which  is  copofed  of  the fquares  A  .  c 

of  the  lines  AB  and  BC  is  rationall ,  and  that 

which  is  contayned  Tinder  the  lines  AB  and  BCtwife  is  mediall  therefore  that  which  is 
compofed  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  Band  BC  is  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  amder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C, 
are  incomen  fur  able  to  the  fquare  of  A  C  ,as  it  was  faid  in  the  73  .Propoftion .  But  that  which 
is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  is  rationall .  Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line 
A  C  is  ir  rafaomll -wherefore  alfo  the  line  A  C  is  irrationall :  and  is  called  a  leffe  line.  And  is 
therefore fo  called,  for  that  it  is  that-  portio  of  the  greater  part  of  a  greater  line, which  remai- 
neth  after  the  taking  away  of the  lefe  part fro  the  greater  .-which  was  required  to  beproued. 

In  thys  Proportion  is  contained  the  definition  of  the  eleuenth  kinde  of  irratio¬ 
nall  linesjwhich  is  called  a  leffe  line,  whofe  definition  is  thus . 

tA lege  line  is  an  irrationall  line  which  remayneth,  Whe  from  a  right  line  is  taken  away  a  right 
line  incommenfurable  in  power  to  the  whole,  and  the fquare  of  the  Whole  line,&  the fquare  of  the  part 
taken  away  added  together,  make  a  rationallfuperficies,  and  theparallelogramme  contayned  of  them 
is  mediall. 

This  Propofition  may  after  Campanes  way  be  detjionftrated*  if  you  remember  well  the  order  &  po- 
fitions  which  he  in  the  three  former  Propofitions  vfcd. 

ft  The  sp.T heoreme.  The  77.  Propofition. 


If  from  a  right  line  he  taken  away  a  right  line  incommenfurable  in  power 
to  the  mhole  line  >  and  if  that  lohich  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  "S vhole 
line  and  of  the  line  taken  away  added  together  he  mediall (  and  the  paraU 
lelogramme  contained  lander  the  fame  lines  rationall :  the  line  remaining 
is  irrationally  and  is  called  a  line  making  H>ith  a  rationall  fuperficies  the 
lohole  fuperficies  mediall. 

Fppofe  that  ABbea  right  line ,  and  from  the  right  line  A  B  take  away  a  right 
line  B  C  incommenfurable  inpoweriothe  whole  line  A  B,  and  let  that  which  is 
made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  added  together, be  mediall,  and  the 
parallelogramme  contained  Tinder,  the fame  lines  rationall .  Then  l fay, that  the 
line  remay ning,  namely,  the  line  A  C,  is  irratio¬ 
nall,  and  is  called  a  line  making  with  a  rationall  fg~~ - - — — ; 

fuperfcies  the  whole  fuperfcies  mediall.  For  for¬ 
afmuch  as  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of 

the  lines  A  B  andB  C  added  together  is  mediall  And  that  which  is  contained  Tinder  the  lines 

' .  '  A  B  and 


VemnUra^ 

tmu 


Diffintmn  0/ 
the  eleuethir •> 
rationall  lined 


Demttflra* 

tion. 


The  tenth  ^Boo^e 

AS  and  B  C  twife  isrationall,  therefore  that  which  is  triads  of  the  fquares  of  the  Urns  A  S 
and  B  C  added  together,  is  incomrnen far able  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E 
and  S  C  twife .  Wherefore  (by  the  1 6. of  the  tenth  J  the  ref  due,  namely,  the  fquare  of  the  line 
AC  is  inc«mmenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained -vnder  the  lines  B  and  B  C  twife. But 
that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife  is  rat  ion  all.  W her  fore  the  fquare 
of  the  line  A  C  is  irralionall .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  A  C  is  irrutionall :  and  is  called  a  line 
waking  with  a  rational!  fuperfties  the  whole  fit- 

perfries  wediall :  and  is  th  erf  ore  fo  called  for  that  g - — — - £ - 

that  which  is  made  of the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B 
and  B  C  added  together  is  medial f  ef  is  a  certains 

whole  fuperficies,  part  whereof  is  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  B  C, which 
is  a  rationallfuperfcies.  For  the fquares  of 'the  lines  ABandBC,areequalltothat  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  twife,  and  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  AC  (by  the  7  .of 
thefecond )  .  Or  it  is  therefore  fo  called  for  that  the  fquare  thereof  added  to  a  rationallfu¬ 
perfcies,  m.iketh  the  whole f (per fries' wediall,  as fall  be  proued  bp  the  109.  Propoftion  of 
this  books :  which  was  required  to  be  proved. 

In  this  Proposition  is  declared  the  nature  of  the  twelueth  hind  ofirrationall  lines, 
which  is  called  a  line  making  with  a  rational!  fuperficies  the  whole  fuperficies  mediall, 
whole  definition  is  thus. 


ftiffinitim  of  lAline  making  \tnb  a  ration  alt  fuperficies  the  whole  fuperficies  medial, l,  is  an  irrationaU  ling 
the t  we  'uel  h  ir  wich  nm.dncth,  whs  fro  a  right  line  is-  taken  away  a  right  line  incomenfurable  in  power  to  the  Whole 
ftUlO>idli  Ime  Hnc' aft!  'fquare  of  the  whole  line  &  the  fquare  of  the  part  taken  a  Way  added  together  make  a  me ■=> 
diall  fuperficies, and  the  par  Alelogramme  contained  of  them  is  rationall. 

This  Proportion  alfo  may  after  Campanes  way  be  dembriftrated3obferuing  the  former  caution. 

tp  The  60.  Theorems.  The  78.  Tropofition. 


If  from  aright  line  he  taken  aAoay  a  right  line  incommenfurahlein  power 
to  the  Aohole  line ,  and  if  that  lo  Inch  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  Aohole 
line  and  of thelmetaken  aAvay  added  together  be  medial ,and  the  parallels 
gr am.me  contayned  louder. the fame  lines  he  alfo  rnediall  y  and  incomrnen & 
far  able  tb  that  ipbich  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  fayd  lines  added  toge* 
tbenthe  line  remayning  is  ifrdtionall  y  and  is  called  a  line  making  Aoith  & 
rnediall fuperficies  the  Aohole fuperficies  rnediall. 


/.xw,  line  B  C  incommenfurable  in 
'gffiTTM-  power  to  the  whole  line. AB, 

And  let  tha  t  which  is  made  o  f  the  fquares. 
of  the  lines  AB  and  B  O  addedtcgcther.be 
wediall, afid  let  the  paralldorrame  contayned 
<vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  be  alfo  medial, 
and  let  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of 
the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  added  together  be  in¬ 
commenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained 
vnder  the  lines  AB  WB  Q.Thel ftp  that  the  line  remapning,  nmelp >  the  line  A  C  is 

*  '  ' "  irrationaU 


of Buclides  Elementrh  FoL  z26* 

ftrAtUmll  And  is  called  a  line  making  with  a  medial!  fuperf.cies  the  whole  fupe'rf ties  medial, 
T tike  a  rati  end!  line  D  \.\_And(  by  the  44^ the frH)vnto  the  line  D I  apply -t  he parallelo- 
gramme  D  E  equal!  to  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  added  to¬ 
gether, and  making  in  breadth  the  line  D  G  .  And  vnto  the fame  line  D  I  apply  the  parade- 
iogramme  D  H  cquall to  that  which. is  contayned  'wider  the  lines  A  B  andB  Qtivife  and 
making  in  breadth  the  line  D  F  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  remay  ning,  namely  the  pa* 
rallelograhrne  F  E  its  equal!  to  thefquare  of  the  line  A  C .  Wherefore  the  line  A  C  ccntay - 
neth  in  power  the  par allelogr time  F  E.  o/W forafmuch  as  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares 
of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  added  together  is  medially  and  is  equal!  to  the  parallel  oar arnme 
D  E  ,t here  fore  a  If o  the  paralldogramme  D  E  is  medial!.  x^And  the  parallelogramme  D  E  is 
apply  ed  to  the  rational!  line  D I  making  in  breadth  the  line  D  G.Wherfore(by  the  22. of  the 
tenth)  the  line  I)  G  is  rational!  and  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  DI.  Agayne 
forafmuch  as  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  Unis  AB  and  B  C  twife  is  medial!  and  is 
equallio  the  parallelogramme  D  H, therefore  the  parallelogramme  D  H  is  mediall.  And  the 
farallelograme  D  H  is  apply  ed  vnto  the  rational l  line  D I  making  in  breadth  the  line  D  P, 
wherefore  the  line  D  F  is  rational l  and  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  D  I.  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  added  together  t  s  in¬ 
commenfurable  to  that  which  contayned.  vnder  the  lines  ABe^BC  twife, therefore  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  D  E  is  incommenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  D  H  .  But  as  the  parallel 0- 
gramme  D  E  is  to  the  parallelogramme  D  H,fb(by  thefrfi  ofthefixtfs  the  line  D  G  to  the 
line  D  F  mherforethe  line  D  G  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  D  F.  And  they  are 
both  rationall  lines. Wherefore  the  lines  D  G  and  D  F  are  rationall  commen fur able  in  pow¬ 
er  onelys wherefore  the  line  F  G  is  a  ref  dual!  line  by  the  73  -  of  this  booke.But  the  line  F  H  is 
rational! for  that  it  is  equal!  -vnto  the  'line  D  I .  But  a  rectangle  parallelogramme  contayned 
'under  a  rationall  line  and  an  irrational l  line  is  irrational /,  and  the  line  alfo  that  contayneth 
in  power  the fame  parallelogramme  is  irrationality  the  21. of the  tenth j  .  But  the  line  C  A 
contayneth  in  power  the  paralldogramme  F  E.  Wherefore  the  line  AC  is  irrational!  and  is 
called  a  line  making  with  a  medial l fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperficies  mediall .  And  is  therfore 
fo  called  for  that  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  BWB  C  added  together 
is  mediall ,  dr  is  a  certayne  whole fuperfeies, part  whereof  is  that  which  is  cotayned  vnder  the 
lines  A  B  and  B  C, which  is  alfo  mediall :  you jhallaljo  bythetio.propoftion  of  this  books 
vnderf and  an  other  caufe  why  it  is fo  called. 

This  proportion  may  thus  more  briefely  be  demonftrated:  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  com pofed 
of  the  ftjuares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  is  medially  and  that  alfo  which  is  contayned  vnder  them  is  me” 
diail, therefore  the  parallelogrammes  D  B  and  D  H  which  are  equal!  vnto  them  are  mediall  :  buta  me* 
diall fuperficies  exceedeth  nota  mediall  fuperficies  by  a  rationall  fuperficies.  Wherefore  the  fuperficies 
T  E  which  is  the  exceffe  of  the  mediall  fuperficies  D  E  aboue  the  mediall  fuperficies  D  H  is  irrational. 
And  therefore  the  line  A  C  which  contayneth  it  in  power  is  irrationall.&c. 

In  this projjofition  is  fhewed  the  conditioand nature  of the  thirtettth  andiaftJdnde 
ofjrrationail  lines  ,  which  is  called  a  line  making  with  a  mediall  fuperficies  the  whole 
fuperficies  mediall ,whofe  definition  is  thus. 

SS&t  "  ■  V  .  ‘  i  .  .  ■  .  • 

Aline  makpig  With  a  mediall  fuperficies  the  whole  fuperfeies  mediallis  an  irrational!  line  Which 
remaynethjWhen from  a  right  line  is  taken av?ay  aright  line  incommenfurable  in  power  to  the  Whole 
line,  and  the  fquares  of  the  Whole  line  and  of  the  line  taken  may  added  together  make  a  mediall 
fuperficies  ^and  the  parallelogramme  contayned  of the  is  alfo  a  mediall  fuperficies  ,moreouer  the  fa  Hares 
of  them  are  mcommetifurable  to  the  parallelogramme  contayned  of them «  * 1 

An  affumpt  of  Campane. 

‘  -T.  *  NNJ,  ’  jf 


CwlhufHctit 


Vemufirts* 

ttett. 


Dtffinhiottof 
the  thinenth 
and  lafi  in  a-* 
timaU  line \ 


An  AJfampt 

C>A9flpllH€* 

I. Dee , 

Though  Cam- 
pan  es  lemma 
he  true, yet  the 
matter  ofde - 
monfirating 
it ffuarrowty 
confideredfis 
mt  artificial!. 


Second  Sena¬ 
ry* 

Demcnflrati- 
on  leading  to 
an  impofibi- 
litie * 


7 he  tenth  ‘Booty 


If  there  hefornr  qualities,  &  if  the  difference  eft  he  fir fi  to  the  fecond,  he  as  the  difference  of the 
thirdto  the  fourth, then  alternately  ,as  the  difference  of the  firft  is  to  the  third  y  Jo  is  the  difference  of 
the fecond  to  the  fourth. 

This  is  to  be  vnderfbtnd  of  quatities  in  like  fort  referred  the  one  to  the  other, tiiat  is  if  the  firfi  be 
greater  then  the  fecond, the  third  ought  to  be  greater  then  the  fourth  and  ifthefirffbe  Idle  then  thefe- 
cond,the  third  ought  to  be leffe  then  the  fourth: and  is  alfo  to  be  vnderftand  in  arithmetician  propor¬ 
tionality  .As  for  example  let  the  difference  of  a  be  vnto  b  as  the  difference  of  c  is  to  d  .  Then  I  fay  that 
as  the  difference  of  a  is  to  C,fo  is  the  difference  of  b  to  d  .  For  (by  this  common  fetence,the  difference 
oftheextreatnesisccimpofedofthedifferencesoftheex- 
treames  to  the  meanes),the  difference  of  A.to  c.  is  Compo- 
fed  of  the  difference  of  a  to  Band  of  the  difference  of  b  to  A.  * 
c.  And  (by  the  fame  common  fentence)  the  difference  of 
b  to  d  iscompofed  of  the  difference  of  b  to  c  ,  andofrhe 
difference  of  c  to  d  .  And  forafinuch  as  (  by  fuppofition) 
the  difference  ofAtOB  is  as  the  difference  ofe.  to  »,and 
the  difference  of  b  to  c  is  common  to  them  both.  Where¬ 
fore  it  fol!oweth,that  as  the  difference  of  a  is  to  c,fo  is  the 
difference  of  b  to  d  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


b— 

: — b — 

— — < — - 

.  a  . 

— 1 

■  * 

ft  1  'be  6 i.Theoreme. 


The  7p.  Tropofition . 


Vnto  a  rejtdual  line  can  he  ioynedone  onely  right  lyne  rational ,  and  com* 
mcnfurablein power  onely  to  the  ^ohole  lyne. 


Et  A  B  be  a  refiduallline ,  and  vnto  it  let  the  line  B  C  he  fuppofed  to  he  tinned? 
f  that  let  the  lines  A  C  and  B  C  be  ratio  nail  commenfurable  in  power  on  elf.  T  hen  I 
that  vnto  the  line  A  B  cannot  be  ioyned  any  other  rationallline  cotnmenjurd 
*  me  in  power  bfiely  to  the  whole-  line.F or  if  it  be poffble,  let  B  D  be  fu eh  a  line  ad* 
dedvntoit.Wherfore  the  lines  AD and  DB  -A 

are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  mely.  a_ _  b  c  ‘ 

^Andforafmuch  as  how  much  the  fquares  of 
iffe  lines  A  D  and  D  B'do  -excee.de  that 


is  contained  vnder  thelines  A  D  aridD  Biwife ,fo much  alfo  do  the fquares  of  the  lines  AC 
and  C  B  exceede  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AC  and  CB  twifefor  the  exceffe  of 


fo.r^,;  ,  ,  ..  -  -M-  •,  V1JU.  .  „„  U.i  :.  v 

1)  and  D  B  do  exceede  the fquares  of  the  lines  AC&C  B,fo  much  alfo  excedeth  that  which 

is  Contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife ,  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
'  Vines  A  C and  CB  twife .  Bui  that  whisk'.  is  made.  of, the. fquares .  of  the.  lines  AD  and 
DB  added  together ,  exceedeth  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lynes  AC  and 
CE  added  together  kfarationallfuperficksyffot 'they  are  either  of them  rational)  .  Where¬ 
fore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife r  exceedeth  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  by  a  rat  ion  all  fuperfeies.  -  But  that  which  ft 
contained  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife ,  is  mediall,  for  it  is  commenfurable  to  that 
which  is  contained  vhder  thelines  AD  and  DB  once ,  which  fuperfeies  is  mediall  (by 
the  2 1. of  the  tenth}  and  by  the fame  'r.eafqn  alfo  that  which  is  contained  vnder. the  lynes  A  C 
"ant 'C  'B hxffffmfdiaJdV/harfon, amedi^fufierpktdffmihfrom a  mediall juperfetef 
by  a  rationally fupeifcies,which(byfheyd.af the  tenthfis  impoffible.  Wherfore  vnto  the  lywfi 
A  B  cannot  be  iojned  any  other  rationallline  befides  B  C  commenfurable  in  power  onely,  to 
the  whole  line. Wherfore  vnto  a  refidu  all  line  can-  be  ioyned  one  onely  right  line  rational l  and 
commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  whole  lyne :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf rated . 

■  %Tht 


of  Sudities  Elementes ,  FoLi$y« 

f  T he  62.  T heoreme.  T he  80.  ^Propofifio'rt. 

Vnto  afiyfi  medial refeduall  line  can  he  ioyned one  onely  mediall  right  lyne, 
commeijunible  in  polver  onely  to  the  Ivhole  lyne, and  comprehending  yoyth 
the  hdjolclyne  a  rational l fuperficies . 

Fppofc  that  A  B  he  a  first  mediall  re fduall  line,  dr  unto  A  B  ioyne  the  lyne  B  C,fo 
that  let  the  lynes  A  C  andB  C  be  mediall  commen fur  able  m  power  onely, & let  that 
lyi  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  C  and B  C  be  rationally  T hen  I  fay  that  unto 
the  lyne  A  B  cannot  be  ioyned  any  other  mediall  line  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the 
whole  lyne, and  comprehending  together  with  the  whole  lyne  a  rational l fuperficies.  For  if  it 
hepofifible  let  the  line  BD  be  fiuch  a  line.  Wherf  ore  the  lynes  A  D  and  D  B  are  mediall  coni - 
men  fur  able  in  power  onely  ,and  that  which  is  con- 

tayned  under  the  lynes  AD  and  D  Bis  rational.  ^  sc» 

<l And fiorafimuch  as  how  much  the fqttares  of  the  ‘ - - — — — 1 — - — ’ 

lynes  A  D  and  D  B  exceeds  that  which  is  contay- 

ned  under  the  lynes  A  D  and  D  B  twife, fio  much  alfio  exceeds  the fiquares  of the  lynes  AC  fir 
B  Cyhai  which  is  contayned  under  the  lynes  A  C  and  C  B  twife  (for  the  excejfe  of eche  is  one 
and  the fame, namely, the fquare  of  the  lyne  A  B).  Wherf  ore  alternately  (as  it  wa  s fayd  in  the 
former  propof non)  hew  much  the  fiquares  of  the  lynes  A  D  and  D  B  exceeds  the fiquares  of 
the  lines  A  C  and  C.Bfio  much  a/fib  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  i^/l  D  and  D  B 
twife,  ex cedeth  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife. But  that  which  is 
contained  under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife, excedeth  that  which  is  contained  under  the 
lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  by  a  rationall  fuperficies,  for  they  are  either  of  them  a  rationall  fu¬ 
perficies. Wherf  ore  that  which  is  made  of  the fiquares  of  the  lines  AD  dr  DB  excedeth  that 
which  is  made  of  the  fiquares  of  the  lines  AC  dr  CB  by  a  rationall  fuperficies, which  (by  the 
26.  of the  tenth)  is  impoffible.For  they  are  either  of  them  mediall  (for  thofefoure  lines  were 
put  to  be  mediall.)  Wherf  ore  unto  afirfi  mediallrefiiduallline  can  be  ioyned  onely  one  right 
mediall  line  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  whole  line,  and  comprehending  with  the 
whole  line  a  rationall fuperficies  ':  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


f  The  63.  T heoreme.  The  8  c  Tropofition. 

Vnto  a  fecond  mediall  refiduall  line  can  he  ioyned  onely  one  mediall  right 
line,  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  lohole  line,  and  comprehending 
K>ith  the  lohole  line  a  mediall fuperficies . 


Vppofe  that  A  B  be  a fecod  mediall  re - 
;  f anal  line, fir  unto  the  line  A  B  ioyne 
the  line  BC,fo  that  let  the  lines  A  C 
and  CB  be  mediall  comenfurable  in  power  one¬ 
ly, and  let  that  which  is  comprehended  under 
the  lines  A  C  and  CB  be  mediall .  T hen  /  fay, 
that  unto  the  line  A  B  can  not  be  ioyned  any  0- 
ther  mediall  right  line  comenfurable  in  power 
onely  to  the  whole  line,  and  comprehending  to¬ 
gether  with  the  whole  line  a  mediall  fuperficies. 
For  ifitbepofible ,  let  the  line  B  D  be  fiuch  a 
line .  Wherefore  the  lines  AD  dr  D  B  are  me¬ 
diall  commenfurable  in  power  onely,  and  that 


A 


3 


C  D 


which 


I 


D  amr  Pira¬ 
tic*  n  leaditw  ti> 
an  abfurime • 


Cwflruttm. 


Vtntonflra- 
tion  hiding  to 
in  abfxr  ditie. 


which  is  contained  under  the' lines  lM  T>  and  D  B  is  affo  mediall .  Take  a  rational! 
line  E  F  .  And(  by  the  44.  of  the  frfi  )  unto  the  line  E  F  apply  the  parallelogramme 
E  G  cquall  to  the  [quarts  of  the  lines  o A  C  and  C  B,  and  making  in  breadth  the  line 
E  CM  :  and  from  that  parallelogrammc  E  G  take  away  the  parallelogramme  H  G  e- 
quall  to  that  which  is  contained  under  C  and  C  B  twife ,  and  making  in  breadth 
the  line  H  CM  .  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  remayning ,  namely ,  EL,  is  (by  the 
7. of  the fecond)  e  quail  to  the fquare  of  the  line  AB  .  Wherefore  the  line  AB  containeth  in 
power  theparallelograme  EL.  Againe,  unto  the  line  E  F  apply  ( by  the  44- of  'theft ft)  the 
parallelogramme  E 1  e  quail  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B,and  making  in  breadth 
the  line  E  N .  But  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  are  cquall  to  that  which  is  contain 
ned  under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife,  and  to  the fquare  of  the  line  AB .  Wherefore  the 
parallelogramme  E  I  is  Cquall  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  D  &  D  B  twife , 
and  to  the  fquare  of  the  line.  A  B  .  But  the  parallelogramme  E  Lis  e quail  to  the fquare  of the 
line  A  B.  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  remaining,  namely,  HI,  is  equallto  that  which  is 
contained  under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  twife .  And forafmuch  as  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are 
mediall ,  therefore  the  fquares  alfo  of  the  lines  AC  and  C  B  are  mediall :  and  they  are  e  quail 
to  the  parallelogramme  E  G :  wherefore  the  parallelogramme  EG  is  ( by  that  which  Was fa¬ 
ke#  in  the  7$ .  Proposition )  mediall :  and  it  is  applied  unto  the  rational l  line  E  F,  making  in- 
breadth  the  line  E  M .  Wherefore  (by  the  22.  of  the  tenth )  the  line  E  M  is  rationall,  and 
incommenfur able  in  length  to  the  line  E  V .  Againe,  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  contayned 
under  the  lines  A  C  and  CB  is  mediall,  therefore  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  23 .  of  the  tenth  ) 
that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  C.  and  C  B  twife  is  alfo  mediall :  and  it  is  equal l 
to  the  parallelogramme  HG :  wherefore  alfo  the  parallelogramme  H  G  is  mediall ,  and  is  ap¬ 
ply  ed  to  the  rationall  line  E  F,  making  in  breadth  the  line  H  M .  Wherefore  (  by  the  '22  of 
thetenth)  theline  H  M  is  rationall, and  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  EF  .And 
forafmuch  as  the  lines  A ■  C  and  C  B  are  commen fur  able  in  power  onely,  therefore  the  line  A  C 
is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  CB.Butas  the  line  A  C  is  to  the  line  C  B,fo  (by  the 
Afftmpt  going  before  the  22.  of  the  tenth  )  is  the fquare  of theline  AC  to  that  which  is  con¬ 
tayned  under  the  lines  AC  &CB .  Wherefore  (by  the  10. of thetenth)  the  fquare  of  the  lint 
AC  is  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B .  But  unto 
the  fquare  of  theline  AC  are  commenfurable 
the fquares  of  A  C&C  B, and  unto  that  which 
■is contained  under  the  lines  AC  and C B, is 
commenfurable  that  which  is  contained  under 
the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  .  Wherefore  the 
fquares  of the  lines  AC  &C  Bare  incommen¬ 
fur  able  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the 
lines  A  C  and  C.  B  twife .  But  unto  the  fquares 
of the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  is  cquall  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  E  G,  and  unto  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  under  the  lines  A  C  &  C  B  twife, is  equall 
theparallelogramme  G  H .  Wherefore  the pa- 
rallelogranme  E  G  is  incommenfurable  to  theparallelogramme  H  G .  But  as  the  parallelo- 
qramme  E  G  is  to  the  parallelogrmme  H  G,fo  is  the  line  EM  to  the  line  H  M.  Wherefore  the 
line  EM  is  incommenfur  able  in  length  to  the  line  H  M .  And  they  are  both  rationall  lines. 
Wherefore  the  lines  E  M  and  M  H  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely  .  Wherefore 
the  line  EH  is  a  refidiutttine ,  and  unto  it  is  toy  ned  a  rationall  line  H  M  commenfurable  in 
power  onely  to  the  whole  line  EM .  In  like fort  alfo  may  it  be  proued,  that  unto  the  line  E  H 
is  ioyned  the  line  H  N  ,  being  alfo  rationall,  and  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the  whole 

line 


B 


S 


ofSuclidesElementes .  Foil  88« 

line  EH .  Wherefore  vnto  a  refiduall  line  is  ioyned more  then  one  onely  line  comrhenfura* 
ble  in  poweronely  to  the  whole  line :  which  ( by  the  79  .of  the  tenth )  is  impofible .  Wherefore 
vnto  a fecond  mediall  refiduall  line  can  be  ioyned  onely  one  mediall  right  line  commenfura- 
ble  in  power  onely  to  the  whole  line,  and  comprehending  with  the  whole  line  a  mediall  juper* 
feies  :  which  was  required  to  be  dctnonHrated. 

f  The  64.  Theorems*  The  82.Propofition. 


Vnto  a  lejfe  line  can  he  ioyned  onely  one  right  line  incommenfurahle  in 
power  to  the  'Whole  lyne,  and  making  together  1 vith  the  'Whole  lynethat 
'Which  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  rationall, and  that  which  is 
contayned lender  them  mediall. 


Vppofc  that  A  B  be  a  lejfe  tine, and  to  A  B  ioyne  the  line  BC,  fo  that  let  B  C  be 
fuch  aline  as  is  required  in  the  T heor erne. Whet  fore  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are 
incomen fur able  in power, hauing  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  them  ad¬ 
ded  together  rationall,and  that  which  is  contained  vnder  them  mediall.  T hen 
1 fay  that  vnto  A  B  cannot  be  ioyned  any  other 
fuch  right  line  .For  if it  be pc [file,  let  the  lyne  A 

B  D  be fuch  aline.Wherfore  the  lines  AD  &  * — 1 - - 5 - £ - $ 

D  B  are  incommenfurable  in  power,  hauing 

that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  them  added  together, ration  all,  and  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained 'under  them  mediall.  And  for  that  how  much  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and D  B 
ex  cede  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B,fo  much  that  which  is  Contained  'under  the  lines 
A  D  and  D  B  twife,excedeth  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twifelby 
thffij  things  which  werefpoken  in  the  79  .propoftion)  But  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares 
of  the  lines  A  D  and  DB  added  together  excedeth  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  A  C  and  C  Bedded  together  by  a  rationall fuperficies, for  they  are  either  of  them  ratio - 
mil  byjappofitim.V/herf ore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AD  andD  B  twife, 
excedeth  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  by  a  rationall  fuperfi¬ 
cies:  which  ( oy  the  26. of  the  tenth)  is  impoffblefor  either  of them  is  mediall  by  fuppofition . 
Wierj ore  vnto  a  lejfe  line  can  be  ioyned  onely  one  right  line  incommenfurable  in  power  to 
the  whole  line, and  making  together  with  the  whole  line  that  which  is  made  of  their  fquares 
added  together  rationall, and  that  which  is  contained  vnder  them  mediall :  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  demonf  rated. 


VemnUra- 
tim  leading 
an  abfurdme» 


f  The  6 /.  Theorems.  The  83.  propoftion. 

Vnto  a  line  making  "With  a  rationall fuperfides  the  'Whole  fuperficies  me* 
di  ally  an  be  ioyned  onely  one  right  lyne  ineommenfur  able  in  power  to  the 
'Whole  lyne, and  making  together 'With  the  whole  line  that  -W hick  is  made 

of  their  fquares  added  together  mediall, and  that  which  is  contained  lender 
them  rationall. 

BVppofethat  A  B  be  a  line  making  with  a  rationall  fuperfeks  the  whole  fuperficies 
mediall, and  vnto  it  lettbedincB  C  be  ioyned,  fo  that  let  B  C  be  fuch  a  line  as  is  re¬ 
quire  in  i  eTheoremeWi n  erf  or e  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  incommenfurable  in 

NN.iij ,  power 


Demujlratlo 
hading  to  an 
mpoJJtbiHih . 


power,  halting  that  which  is  made  of  thefquares 

ofihe  lines  A  C  and  C  B  added  together  mediall,  ^  b  c  B  ' 

and  that  which  is  contained  -under  the  lynes  A  C  — * - * — - * 

and  C  B  rational l.  T hen  1 fay  that  -unto  the  lyne  \ 

A  B  cannot  heioynedany  other fuch  line.  For  if  it  bepojfble,  letthelincB  D  be  fuch  aline, 
Wherfore  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  are  incommenfurable  in  power, hatting  that  which  is  made 
of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  added  together  mediall, and  that  which  is  contained 
-under  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  ration  all.  Tpowfor  that  how  much  the fquares  of  the  lines  A 
p  and  D  3  exceede  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B,  fo  much  that  which  is  contained 
under  the  lines  andDB  twife  exceedeth  that  which  is  contayned  under  the  lynes 
AC  and  C  B  twife,  by  that  which  was  fpoken  in  the  j q. propoftion.  But  that  which 
is  contained  -under  the  lines  D  and  D  B  twife ,  exceedeth  that  which  is  contained 
- under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  by  a  rationall fuperfcies, for  they  are  either  of  them  ratio- 
nail  byfuppoftio.  Wherfore  that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  ad¬ 
ded  together  ^excedeth  that  which  is  made  if  the  fq'uares  of  the  lines  AC  and  CB  added  to¬ 
gether  by  a  rationall  fuperfcies  ^whichby  the  2-6. of  the  tenth ,is  impoffiblefor  they  are  either 
of  them  modi  all  by fuppoftion  .Wherfore  -unto the  line  A  B cannot  be  ioyned  any  other  lyne 
befides  B'C, making  that  which  is  required  in  t he  pr op  oft tion.  Wherfore  vnto  a  line  making 
with  a  rational! fuperfcies  the  whole  fuperfcies  medial! can  be  ioyned  onely  one  right  line  in¬ 
comen  fur  able  in  power  to  the  whole  line, and  making  together  with  the  whole  line  that  which 
is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  mediall,  and  that  which  is  cotained  under  them  ra¬ 
tionall:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

yjThc  66.  Theoreme.  The  Byfropoftion. 

Vnto  a  line  making  yoith  a  media  l fuperfcies  the  "5 vhole fuperfcies  medial 7 
can  he  ioyned  onely  one  right  line  incommenfurable  in  power  to  the  K>hole 
line  3  and  making  together  loith  the  yohole  line  that  yohich  is  made  of 
their  fquares  added  together  medially  and  that  lohich  is  contained  loader 
them  medialf  and  moreouer  making  that -which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of 
them  added  together  incommenfurable  to  that  K>hich  \is  contayned 
dec  them . 


Fppofe  that  A  B  be  aline  making  with  a  mediall fuperfcies  the  whole  fuperfcies 
mediall, and  unto  it  let  the  line  BC  be  ioyned fo  that  let  BC  be fuch  a  line  as  is 
required  in  the  T he  or  erne .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  incommenfu¬ 
rable  inpower, hauingthat  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AC  and 


C  B  added  together  mediall,  &  that  which 
is  contained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B 
mediall ,  and  moreouer  that  which  is 
made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  C 
and  C  B  is  incommenfurable  to  that 
which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  <d  . 


p 


v 


and  C  B  .  Then  I  fay ,  that  unto  the 
tine  A  B  can  be  ioy  ned  no  other  fuch  line.  | 

For  if  it  be  p  of ible,  let  B  D  be  fuch  a  line.  ! 

Wherefore  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  are  in-  i 
comenfurable  in  power,  hauing  that  which  j 

is  made  oft  he  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  l 

DJB  * 


D  B  added  together  mediall ,  and  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  <^AD 
and-D  B  medially  and  moreover  that  which  is  made  of the fquares  of  the  lines  '^AD  and 
and  D  B  added  together •>  is  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the 
lines  o/  D  and  D  B  .  Take  a  ration  all  line  E  F  .  (Jtfnd.  (  by  the  44.  of the  jirjl )  unto 
theltneE  V, apply  the parallelogramme  E  G  cqnallto  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AC  and  CB, 
and  making  in-breadth  the  line  E  M :  and  from  the  parallelogramme  E  G  take  away  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  B  G  equallto  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  AC  &  CB  l  wife, and 
making  in  breadth  the  line  H  M .  Wherefore  the  ref  due, namely,  thefquare  of  the  line  A  B 
is  equallto  the  far dlelo gramme  EL  (by  the  7. of the feeond  )  .  Wherefore  the  line  A3  com 
tajneth  in  power  the parallelogramme  E  L .  Againe  (  by  the  44.0 f the frft)  unto  the  line 
E  F  apply  the  parallelogramme  E I  equallto  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  D  and  T>  B,akd  ma¬ 
king  in  breadth  the  line  E  Tf.  But  the fquare  of  the  line  A  Bis  equall  to  the  parallelogram? 
E  L .  Wherefore  the  r  eft  due,, namely ,  the  parallelogramme  H  Us  equall  to  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  under  the  lines  AD  and' JD  B  twife .  And fora [much  as  that  which  is  made  of  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  is  mediall ,  and  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  E  G,  there¬ 
fore  alfo  the  parallelogramme  E  G  is  mediall .  And  it  is  applied  unto  the  rationall  line  E  F, 
making  in  breadth  the  line  E  M .  Wherefore  (by  the  22  .of  the  tenth )  the  line  E  M  is  ratio¬ 
nall  and  incommen fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  E  F .  Againe, forafmuch  as  that  which  is 
contained  under  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B  twife  is  mediall, and  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme 
II G  .  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  H  G  is  mediall,  which  parallelogramme  H  G  is  appli¬ 
ed  to  the  rationall  line  E  F ,  making  in  breadth  the  line  H  M .  Wherefore  the  line  II M  is  ra¬ 
tionall  and  incommen  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  E  F .  And forafmuch  as  the  fquares  of the 
lines  A  C  and  C  B  are  incommenfur able  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  A  Cand 
C  B  twife,  therefore  the  parallelogramme  EG  is  incommenfur  able  to  the  parallelogramme 
H  G .  Wherefore  the  line  E  M  is  incommen  finable  in  length  to  the  line  M II,  and  they  are 
both  rationall .  Wherefore  the  lines  E  M  and  MB  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power 
onely .  Wherefore  EH  is  a  refiduall  line .  And  the  line  ioyned  unto  it  is  H  M  .  <^And  in  like 
fort  may  weproue ,  that  the  line  E  H  is  a  refiduall  line,  and  that  the  line  H  N  is  ioyned  unto 
it.  Wherefore  unto  a  refiduall  line  is  ioyned  two fmdry  lines,  being  eche  commenfurable  in 
power  onely  to  the  whole  line  .•  which  ( by  the  7  9. of the  tenth)  is  impofible .  Wherefore  un¬ 
to  the  line  A  B  can  not  be  ioyned  any  other  right  line  befides  the  line  B  C ,  which  jhall  be 
in  commenfurable  in  power  to  the  whole  line,  efihaue  together  with  the  whole  line  that  which 
is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  mediall,  and  that  which  is  contained  under  them 
l  mediall, andmoreouer  incommenfur  able  to  that  which  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  toge¬ 
ther  .  Wherefore  unto  a  line  making  with  a  mediall fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperfeies  mediall , 
can  be  ioyned  onely  one  right  line  incommenfurable  in  power  to  the  whole  hne ,  and  making 
together  with  thewhole  line  that  which  is  made  oft  heir fquares  added  together  mediall, and 
that  whief  i{  contained  under  them  mediall,  and moreouer  making  that  which  is  made  of 
the  fquares  cf them  added  together  incommenfur  able  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the s 
which  was-required  to  be proued. 

yp  T  bird  i T)efi?ution$ . 


S  of  binom-klltynes,tbere  are  6.  diners  kindes,  foalfo  of  refid  nail  iynes 
which  are  correfpondent  vnto  them  and  depend  of  them  (fora  refiduall 
line  is  nothing'els  (as  was  before  faid)  but  that  which  remayneth  whe  the 
lefTe  part  ofa  binomiall  line  is  taken  from  the  greater  part  or  name  ther- 
of,)  there  are  likewife  fixe  feuerall  kindes.  All  which  are  knowne  and  con- 

NN  .iiij.  fidereci 


Ccuftrulhtn, 


Emonfr-ra- 
tkn  hading  to 
an  abjuT&tis» 


Sixe  kindes  of 
tsfiduall  tines. 


Firft  difjtni* 
tion. 


Second  difi~ 
•  itiorst 


Third  diffim- 
tm. 


ThctentbcBoof<e 

fide  red  in  comparifon  to  a  rational!  line  fet  forth  &  appointed,  and  thefe  refidual  line 
haue  the  felfe  fame  order  of  production  that  the  binomials  had ,  For  as  the  three  firft 
kindes  of  binomiall  lines,namely,the  firft,fecorid,  and  third,  were  produced  when  the 
fquarc  of  the  greater  part  of  the  binomiall  excedeth  the  fquare  of  the  le(fe  part  thereof 
by  the  fquare  ofaline  commenfurable  vnto  it  in  length:  fo  in  likewife,  the  firft  three 
kindes  of refiduall  lines,  namely,  the  firft,  fecond,  and  third,  areproduced,  when  the 
fquare  of  the  whole, namely,of  that  which  is  made  of  the  refiduall  line,and  the  line  ioy- 
ued  vnto  it  added  together, excedeth  the  fquare  of  the  lineioyned  to  the  refiduall.,  by 
the  fquare  ofa  lyne  which  is  commenfurable  vnto  it  in  length.  And  as  the  three  laft 
kindes  of  binomials,namely,the  fourth,fifth,and  fixth  were  produced  when  the  fquarc 
of  the  greater  part  excedeth  the  fquare  of  the  leffc,by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfii- 
rablc  in  length  vnto  it,eueii  fo  the  three  laft  kyndes  of  refiduall  lynes  are  produced  wh£ 
the  fquare  of  the  whole  excedeth  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  adioined,by  the  fquare  ofa  line 
incommcnfurable  vnto  it  in  length.  As  ye  may  perceiue  by  their  definitions  following. 

Afirft  refiduall  line  is,  4? hen  the  fquare  of  the  Tvbole  excedeth  the  fquare 
of  the  lyne  adioyned Jy  the fquare  of  a  lyne  commenfurable  lento  it  in  legth , 
and  alfo  the  1 vbole  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  firft  fit. 

Aslet  AB  bea  ratio-  A  (  t  1  t  ,  ■  B 

nail  line,  whofe  partes  '  *  ^ 

are ccrtaine, diftin£,  Sc  1 — . - , - ■ - •— m ^ ,  , . ,  E 

to  be  exprefled  by  mim-  p 

ber.  And  let  the  refidual  «. - - — - — - . - 

lyne  be  C  D,and  let  the 

line  ioyned  vnto  it  be  E  C,and  let  the  whole  being  compofed  of  the  refiduall  C  D,  and  the  line  adioy- 
ned  E  C,be  the  line  E  D  *  let  moreouer  the  fquare  of  the  whole  line  E  D,  excedc  the  fquare  of  theline 
adioyned  EC  by  the  fquare  of  the  line  F,  which  line  F  let  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  whole 
lyne  E  D,and  let  the  whole  line  E  D  be  alfo  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  A  B :  then  is 
the  refiduall  lyne  C  D  by  this  definition  a  firft  refiduall  line. 

Aficond  refidual  line  isgtoben  the  fquare  of  the  lohole  excedeth  the  fquare 
of  the  line  adioyned  Jay  the fquare  of a  line  commenfurable  lento  it  in  legth , 
and  alfo  the  line  adioyned  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  lyne. 

AsfuppofethelineC  D  to  be  a  refiduall,  and  let  theline  adioy-. 
ned  vnto  it  be  EC,  and  the  whole  made  of  them  both,  let  be  the  c  ^ 

line  E  D  :  &  let  the  fquare  of  E  D  the  whole  line  cxcede  the  fquare  ’  - - 

of  the  lyne  adioyned  EC,  by  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  F,  and  let  the  _ 

lyne  F  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  whole  lyne  ED,moreo-  *"*  ’  J 

uerlet  theline  adioyned  EC  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 

rationall  line  A  B :  then  by  this  dcfinition,the  refiduall  line  C  D  is  a  fecond  refiduall  line. 

A  third  refiduall  line  is/tohen  the fquare  of the  Tobole  excedeth  the  fquare 
of  the  lyne  adioyned Jy  the fquare  ofa  line  commenfurable  lantoitin  legth 
and  neither  the  lohole  line , nor  the  line  adioyned  is  comenfurahle  in  length 
to  the  rationall  lyne. 


As(the  former  fuppofition  ftanding)fupppfe  that  the  fquare  of  the 
Whole  lyne  EDexceede  the  fquare  ofthe  lyne  adioyned  EC  by  the  * 
fquare  of  the  lyne  F,  and  let  the  lyne  F  be  commenfurable  in  length 
to  the  whole  lyne  EC,  and  let  neither  the  whole  lyne  E  D,  nor  the  p 
line  adioyned  E  C  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  lyne 
A  B,then  by  this  definition  the  refiduall  lyne  C  D  is  a  third  refidu- 
all  lyne. 


A  fourth 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


FoLiyo. 


\A fourth  refiduall  line  is ,  ivhen  the  fquare  of  the  t>hole  lyne  excedetb  the 
fquare  of  the  lyne  adioyned fy  the fquare  ofa  lyne  tncommen fur able  'bn  to 
it  in  lengthy  and  the  lohole  lyne  is  alfo  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  ra* 
tionall  lyne. 


B 


c 

-i — I — f- 


¥ 


As  the  refiduall  lyne  A  t 

beyng  as  before  C  D,& 
the  lyne  adioyned  EC,  p*  ...  . . 

and  the  whole  E  D,  let  F 

the  fquar  e  of  the  whole  * - - — - - - — — -  , 

lyne  ED  exceede  the 

fquare  of  the  line  adioyned  EjC  by  the  fquare  ofthe  lyne  F,  and  let  the  lyne  F  be  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  whole  line  ED, and  let  ED  the  whole  line  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rational! 
lyne  A  B,then  is  the  refiduall  line  C  D  by  this  declaration  a  fourth  refid uall  lyne. 


jd fueth  refiduall  line  isgtohen  the  fquare  of  the  lehole  lyne  exceedeth  the 
fquare  of the  lyne  adioyned 3hy  the fquare  ofa  lyne  incommenfurable  'bn  to 
it  in  lengthy  and  the  lyne  adioyned  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  ra* 
tionall  lyne. 


As  the  refiduall  line  beyng  e  d,  thelyne-adioyned  e  c,  and 
the  whole  lyne  ED,  let  the  fquare  ofthe  whole  lyne  ed  excecde 
the  fquare  ofthe  line  adioyned  e  c  by  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  F,and 
let  the  lineF  be  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  whole  lyne  e  d, 
andletalfo  e  c  the  lyne  adioyned  be  commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  rationall  line  a  b, then  ihall  the  refiduall  c  d  be  by  this  defini¬ 
tion  a  fifth  refiduall  lyne. 


Dt- 


C 

~i — 


A fixth  refiduall  line  is  *tohen  the  fquare  of  the  tyhole  liney  exceedeth  the 
fquare  of the  line  adioyned fby  the fquare  ofa  line  incommenfurable ' bnto  it 
in  lengthy  and  neither  th e 'whole  line  nor  the  line  adioyned  is  commenfu* 
rable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line . 

As  fuppofe  the  refiduall  line  to  be  c  d,  and  the  lyne  adioyned  to 

be  e  c,and  the  whole  lyne  compofed  of  them  let  be  e  d,  and  let  the  -p _  c  V: 

fquare  of  the  whole  lyne  e  d  exceede  the  fquare  of  the  line  adioyned  *  - - - -» 

by  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  y, which  line  f  let  be  incommenfurable  in  £_ _ _ _ __ 

lengthto  thewholelyneE  d  :  moreouer  let  neither  the  whole  lyne 
c  d  nor  the  line  adioyned  e  c,  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
rationall  line  a  is, then  fh all  the  refidualllyne  c  d  be  by  this  explica¬ 
tion  a  fixt  refiduall  lyne,and  the  lall.  * 


ft  The  ip.  Problem?. 
Tofinde  out  a  firft  refiduall  line . 


T he  BsdPropofitiorh 


~|  ^  Ake  a  raiicr.all  line  and  let  the  fame  be  A ,  and  >vnto  it  let  the  line  B  G  be  common* 


fj %fUrifJc  in  length .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G  alfo  is  rationall .  K^nd  take  two fquare 
numbers  D  E  andE  F  which  let  he  fitch ;  that  the  excefe  of the greater , namely,  of 

DE, 


Fourth  diffi* 
ration* 


Fifth  dffinim 
turn* 


Sixth  diffinU 
tion. 


Thud  Sena^ 
O- 

tonftruetm* 


Demon  ftra- 
mu. 


Construction . 


Vmo'iffra* 

turn* 


r  -  *  *The  tenth  Toofie 

D  E ,  about  the  left  E  F  (  which  exceffe  let  he  the 

number  D  F)  be  no  fquare  number  ( by  the  corollary  a 

of  the  frf  afumpt  of  the  28  .of  the  tenth  ).W  her  fore  “  ’  ’  ’  '  '  ’  1  '  1 

the  number  EX)  hath  not  to  the  number  D  F  that  Z _ c  1? 

proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 

number  ( by  the  a^.ofthe  eight )  .  And  as  the  number  t - ...  , 

E  D  is  to  the  number  DF  ,  fo  let  the  fquare  of  the 

line  B  G ,  be  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C  (by  the  D  .......  F . E 

corrollary  of  the  fixt  of  the  tenth  )  .  Wherefore  the 

fquare  of  the  line  B  Gis  commefuraUe  tot  he  fquare  of  the  line  G  C .  But  the fquare  of  the 
line  B  G  is  rational /,  wherefore  alfo  the fquare  of  the  line  G  C  isrationall.  Wherefore  the 
bine  G  C  is  alfo  rationdl.Andforafmuch  as  the  number  E  D  hath  not  to  the  number  D  F, 
that  proportio  that  a  fquare  nuber  hath  to  a fquare  nuber, therf ore  neither  alfo  hath y fquare 
cf  the  line  B  G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C  that  proportion  that  a fquare  number  hath  to 
a  fquare  number. Vf  herfore  (by  the  9. of  the  tenth)  the tline  B  Gis  incommen fur  able  in  length 
to  the  line  G  C .  And  they  are  both  rdtionallWhercf ore  the  lines  B  G  arid  G  C  are  rational 
nommen fur  able  in  power  onely. Wherefore  the  line  B  C  is  a  refid  nail  line.l fay  moreouer  that 
it  is  a  jirfrefiduall  line .  For  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  is  greater  then  the 
j faare  of  the  line  G  C  ( that  it  is  greater  it  is  mamfeH  ,for  by  fuppoftion  the  fquare  of  the 
line  B  G  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C,as  the  greater  number ,  namely  ,E  D  is  to  the  num¬ 
ber  D  F  )vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  let  the fquares  of  the  lines  G  C  and  H  be  equaU. 
And  for  that  as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  number  D  F  ,fo  is  the  fquare  of the  line  B  Gto  the 
fquare  of the  line  G  G  .therefore  by  conuerfion  of  proportion  (by  the  corrollary  of  the  9.0 ft  he 
ffth)as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  number  E  F  ,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  B  Gto  the fquare 
of  the  line  H .  But  the  number  D  E  hath  to  the  number  E  F  that  proportion  that  a  fquare 
number  hath  to  a  fquare  number  for  either  of  them  is  a  fquare  number ,  wherefore  alfo  the 
fquare  of  the  line  B  G  hath  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  H  that  proportion  that  a fquare  num¬ 
ber  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  the  line  G  B  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line 
H .  Wherefore  the  line  G  B  is  in  power  mere  then  the  line  G  C  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  com- 
ynerfuralle  in  length  to  the  line  G  B  .•  and  the  whole  line, namely  ,G  B  is  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  ration  all  line  A  Wherefore,  the  line  B  C  is  a  frjl  refiduall  line  Wherefore  then 
is  fd uncle  out  afrf  refiduallline  • which  was  required  to  be  done. 

fThe  20.  Trobleme.  The  86.  Tropojition. 

Tofinde  out a fecond  refiduall,  line. 

\  Ake  a  rat  ion  all  line,  and  let  the  fame  be  A.  and  <vnto  it  let  the  line  G  C  be  com • 
j menfurablein  length .  And  take  two  fquare  numbers  D  E  and  E  F,and  let  them 
[be fuck  that  the  exceffe  of  the  greater,  namely,  I)  T ,  be  no  fquare  number.  And 
'[as  the  number  T>  F  is  to  the  number  D  Efo  let  the fquare  of  the  line  GC  be  to  the 


fquare  of  the  line  G  It  .Wherefore  both  the  fquares  are  commenfu¬ 
rable  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C  is  rationally 
therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  is  alfo  rationall :  Wherefore 
alfo  the  line  B  Gis  rationall .  And forafmuch  as. the  fquares  of the 
lines  B  G  c!r  GC  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that 
a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number,  therefore  the  lines  B  G 
and  G  C  are  incommenfurable.  in  length,  and  they  are  both  ratio- 
nail.  Wherefore  the  lines  B  G  and  G  C  are  rationall  commenfura¬ 


4 - » - • — 

3  C 

- b 

A, 

H 

D  .... 

•  l f~  > 

.  F  ....5 

ble 


kitinpowerontlf.  Where  fore  the  tine  B  C  is  a  rcfiduall line .  ifay  mofeouer ,  that  it  is  a  ft * 
cond.  refiduallme.  F  or for  a  fame  h  as  the fquare  of  the  line  B  G  is  greater  the  the fquare  of  the 
line  G  C^vnto  the fquare  of  the  tine  BG let  the  ( flares  of the  tines  G  C  &-B  be  equaliAnd 
for  that  as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  nuher  D  Efo  isthefquareof  thetine  G  B  to  the fquare 
of  the  line  G  C,  therefore  (by  Conner  fan  of  proportion }  as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  number 
E  F,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  .But  either  of thefe  numbers 
D  E  and  EE  is  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  the  tine  G  Bis  commenfardble  in  length  to  the 
line  B .  Wherefore  the  line  EG  is  in  power  m  ore  then  the  line  G  C,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line 
commenfarable  in-length  to  the  line  B  G  :  and  the  line  G  C  that  is  icynecl  to  t  he  rcfiduall  line 
is  commen fur able  in  length  to  the  ration  all  line  A.  Wherefore  the  tine  B  C  is  afecond  refi¬ 
duall  line  .  Wherefore  thereis  found-out  a  fecond refiduall  tine :  which  was  required  to  he 
done . 


f[  The  21.  Trobleme.  The  87.  Trofofition. 

To finds  out  a  third  refiduall  line. 


ylkea  ration-all  line >  &.  let  the  fame  be  A;  and  take  three  numbers  E,B  C,  and 
C  D  ,  not  haumgthc  one  to  the  other  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  nub  er  hath 
to  a  fquarr  number  sand  let  the  number  B  C  haue  to  the  number  B  D  that 
proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath,  to  a  fquare  number .  And  let  the  num¬ 
ber  B  C  be  greater  then  the  number  C  D  .  And  as  the  number  E  is  to  the  num¬ 
ber  B  C,fo  let  the  fquare  oft.be  line  A  be. to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  F  G :  and  as  the  number  B  C  is  to  the  number 


H 


G 


K 


B 


D 


C  D,fo  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G  be  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  B  G .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is  com¬ 
menfarable  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G .  But  the fquare 
(f the.  like A  isr'tAionall.  Wherefore' alfit.  thefauk-egf 
the  tine  E  G  ti  ratiwatl :  wherefore  the  line  F  G.  is  alfa 
Uitionall.  Andforafamchasthe  number  E  hath  not  to 
tire  number  B'G  that  proportion,  that  a  fquare  number 
hath  to  a  fquare  number,  therefore  neither  alfo.  haththe  . 
fquare  of  the  Imp  A  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F.Gttiat 

proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  the  tine  A  is  incom - 
menfambkm  length  to  the  tine  F  G.  Again e  for  that  as  the  number  B  G  is  to  the  number 
CD,fois  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the fquare  of the  tine  BG, therefore  the fquare  of  the 
line  F  G  is  commenfarable  to  the fquare  of  the  lineB  G.  But  the  fquare  of the  line  F  G  is  ra - 
tionall.  Wherefore  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  line:  B-  G  is  rat  ion  all '  Wherefore  alfo  the  tine  B  G 
is  rational.  And  for, that  the  'number  B  C  hath  not  to  the  number  C  D ,  that  proportion  that 
a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number,  thercfcre.neither  alfo-hath  the  fquare  of the  tine 
twh.efqmfaofthe  timB'G,  that proportion  that  a  fquare  miber  hath  to  a fquare  mm- 
her « Wbfttfptoim  lme  F  G  mkejmmenfarakle.m  k»gth  to  the  tine  B  G  :  and  they  are  both 
ndtionati.  iWfaxefurc  the  tines  F'  G'bfaB  G  are  rationallcbmenfur able  in  power  onely ,  Whew 
fyetheWt^fii-kia:r.efidmlWm\'i fay.moreo^en  ihdt'itis  a  third  refiduallline  .  For for 
that  as.  thefamkerlE  is  to  ihemmber  B  G,fais4hefqmre  of  the  line  A  tot  he  fquare  of  the 
Uni  $sGpmdfa-tke:nwfcbg'W(t  is  tithe  number.  CE>,  fa  is  the fquare  of  the  line  FG  to  the 
fatsare  -of  the  line,  B  G  rtkhdf^hykquatitie-efprbfoHion,  as  the  number  E  is  to  the  num¬ 
ber  the  fquare  of  the  line  BG  V  but  the  number  E  hath 

sot  to  the  number  C  D  that  proportion  that  a  CcuLke  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number  ,ther- 

fore 


Conilmtiictt* 


Vetnottjlr i** 
non. 


€wjlmtkn% 


V&towjlrA- 


A 


K 


-) — « 


H 


G 


^ThetentbTBooke 

fare  neither  alfo  hath  the [quart  of  the  line  A  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  hi  G  that  proportion 
that  a  f quart  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,  therefore  the  line  A  is  incommenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  U  G .  Wherefore  neither  of  the  lines  FG  and  H  G  is  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  rationall  tine  And  forafmuch  as  the 

fquare  of  the  line  FG  is  greater  then  the  fquare  of  the 
line  II G  ( that  the  line  F  G  is  greater  then  the  line  B  G 
it  is  manifeflyfor  by  fuppofition  the  number  B  C  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  number  CD)  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line 
F  G  let  the  fquares  of  the  lines  H  G&  K  he  equall.  And 
for  that  as  the  nuber  B  C  is  to  the  number  C  D  ,fo  is  the 
fquare  of the  line  F  G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  H  Gather - 
fore  ( by  cornier fon  of  proportion)  as  the  number  B  C  is 
to  the  number  BDffo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  K.  But  the  nuber  B  C  hath  to  the  num 

her  B  D  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  th* 
fquare  of the  line  F  G  hath  to  the fquare  of  the  line  K  that  proportion  that  a fquare  number 
hath  to  a  fquare  number .  Wheref  ore  the  line  F  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  K . 
Wherefore  the  line  F  G  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  B  G,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commen¬ 
surable  in  length  to  the  line  F  G,  and  neither  of  the  lines  F  G  and  G  B  is  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  rational!,  line  A :  whenyet  notwithfandingeither  of  the  lines  F  G  andGBis 
rationall  .Wherefore  the  line  F  B  is  a  third  ref duall  line .  Wherefore , there  is  found  out  a 
third  reftduall  line ;  which  was  required  to  be  done . 


B 


D 


«  *  «  •  « 


f  T he  22.  Troblerfte. 

To  finde  out  a  fourth  refuluall  line. 


The  8$.  (Proportion. 


Ah  a  rationall  line  and  let  the  fame  be  A  :  and  vnto  it  let  the  line  BG  be 
commenfurable  in  length.  Wherefore  the  line  BG  is  rationall .  t^Andtake 


two  numbers  D  F  and  F  E ,  and  let  them  be  fitch  that  the  whole  number , 
namely  ,D  E  haue  to  neither  of  the  numbers  D  F  and  F  E  that  proportion 


i  i .  i  t  i  ■  i- 


3 


O 


H 


D  .......  F .*  M 


that  it  fquare  number  bath  to  a  fquare 
number .  And  as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  number  E  F , 
fo  let  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  be  to  the  fquare  of  the 
line  G  C  :  wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  is  corn- 
men fur able  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C,  wherefore  alfo 
the  fquare  of the  line  G  C  is  rationall,andlhe  line  G  C 
is  alfo  rationall .  And  for  that  the  number  ID  E  hath  not 
the  number  E  F  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number 
hath  to  a  fquare  number  >  therefore  the  line  B  G  is  incom- 
menfnrabk  in  length  to  the  line  G  G  .  And  they  are  both  rationall :  wherefore  the  line  B  C 
is  a  ref  duall  lined fay  more  oner  that  it  is  a  fourth  reftduall  line. For forafmuch  as  the fquare 
of the  line  B  G  is  greater  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C ,  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G 
let  the  fquares  of  the  lines  C  G  and  H  be  equall.  Andf or  that  as  the  number  DHL  is  to  the 
number  E  the fquare  of  the  line  !&G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  C,  therefore  by  Con¬ 

ner  fim  of  proportion  as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  number  D  F ,  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line 
B  G  to  the  fquare  of  ’the line  H  .  But  the  numbers  D  E  andTD  F  haue  not  the  one  to  the 
other  that  por portion  that  a fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number. Wherefore  the  line  B  G 
is  mcommenjurabk  in  length  to  the  line  H .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  in  power  more  then 

the 


ofSuclides  Elementeu 


Folzpi. 


the  line  G  C  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  B  G  .*  and  the 
whole  line  B  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  A .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G 
is  a  fourth  refidudl  line. Wherefore  there  is founds  out  a  fourth  refiduall  line -.which  was  re • 
quired  to  be  doom. 

The  23.  Problems,  The  S 9.  Proportion . 

T 0  finde  out  a fife  refiduall  ly/te. 


■fc/v  Ake  a  rational  line  and  let  the  fame  be  A,  and  into  it  let  the  line  CG  be 

r  >  ,  cowmen  fir  able  in  length .  Wherefore  the  line  C  G  is  rationall.  And  take 

nfeSff  Qgjp  two  numbers  D  F  and  F  E  ?  which  let  be  fuch ,  that  the  number  D  E 


A 

I — I - i— — t, 

B  C 


H 


D 


’IsM  ^aue  t0  mi"Kr  °f  dsefe  numbers  D  F  nor  F  E  that  proportion  that  a 
■  "  dd^^fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number.  And  as  the  number  F  E  is  to  the 
number  D  E,  fo  let  the [quart  of  the  line  C  G  be  to  the 
fquare  oft  he  line  B  G.Wherfore  the  (quart!  of  the  IrheC  G 
is  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G.  Wherefore 
the fquare  of  the  line  B  G  is  rationall,  and  the  line  B  G  is 
alj 0  rational. But  the  numbers  D  E  and  E  F  haue  not  that 
proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a  fquare  number  hath 
to  a  fquare  nuber.Wherfore  the  lines  B  G  and  G  C  are  ra¬ 
tionall  commenfurable in  power  onely .  Wherefore  the  line 
BCis  a  refiduall  line. :/  fay  mercouer  that  it  is  afft  refi¬ 
duall  line.  F  or for a f much  as  the fquare  of  the  line  b  G  is  greater  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  0 
C  ,vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  let  the fquaresofthe  lines  GC  and  H  be  equal.  ?iow  there¬ 
fore  for  that  as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  number  E  F,fio  is  the fquare  of  the  line  BG  to  the 
fquare  of the  line  G  C,t her  fore  by  conuerfon  of  proportion,  as  the  number  D  E  is  to  the  m- 
her  D  F,fc t  is  the  fquare  of  the  the  BG  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B.  But  the  numbers  DE& 
D  F  haue  not  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 
number .  Wherefore  theline  B  G  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  H.  Wherefore  the 
line  B  G  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  CG  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  Itgth 
to  the  line  B  G,and  theline  C  G  which  isiojned  to  the  refulml  line  is  Comme fur able  in  ifth 
to  the  rationall  line  A.Wher for e  theline  B  Cisaffi  refiduall  line,  Wherfore  there  is found 
out  a [fit  refiduall  line :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


f  The  24.  Probleme. 

T 0  finde  out  a  fixtb  refiduall  line. 


The  9o.Propofition, 


g^ffAke  a  rational  line  andlet  the fame  be  A.  And 

[fiktake  three  numbers  E,  B  C,  and  CD,  not  ha-  A 
rfiuwg  the  one  1 0  the  other  that  proportion  that  a  *~ 

fiquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number.  And  let  not  £ 
the  number  B  C  haue  to  the  number  BD  that proporti¬ 
on  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number.  And 
let  the  number  B  C  be  greater  then  the  number  CD, dr 
as  the  number  E  is  to  the  number  B  C,fo  let  the  fquare 
of  the  line  A  be  to  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  F  G.  And  as 
the  number  B  C  is  to  the  number  CD,  fo  let  the  fquare 


H 


K 


D 


B 


CouJlmCioBi 


VmonHrti* 
tion . 


CoHfimtm • 


00.  i. 


'DmmfrA- 

tim* 


%An  other 
more  redie 
IP  4y  tofinde 
cut  the  fixe  re 
fduall  tines. 


§f  the  line  FG  be  to  the fquare  of  the  line  G  H.  T(ow  therfore for  that  at  the  number  E  is  to 
the  nuber  B  C,Jo  is  thefquare  of  the  line  A  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  Gather  fore  the fquare 
of the  line  A  is  commensurable  to  the fquare  of the  line  F  G.Wherfore  thefquare  of  the  line 
F  G  is  rationally  and  the  line  F  G  is  alfo  rationall.  And for  that  the  number  E  hath  not  to 
the  number  B  C  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a fquare  number , therfore  the 
line  A  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  G  .Againe  for  that  as  the  number  B  C  is  to 
the  number  C  D, Jo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the fquare  of the  line  G  H,  therefore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  F  G  is  commenjurable  to  thefquare  of  the  UneG  H.  But  thefquare  of  the 
line  F  G  is  rationall  therfore  the  fquare  alfo  of  the  line  G  His  rationall,  wherfore  the  line 
C  His  alfo  rationall.  And for  that  the  number  B  C  hath  not  to  the  number  C  D  that  propor¬ 
tion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number  ,therf ore  the  line  F  G  is  incommenfurd - 
hie  in  length  to  the  line  G  H , and  they  are  both  rationall .  Wherefore  the  lines  F  G  and  G  H 
are  rationall  cornmen fur  able  in  power  onely..  Wherfore 
the  lyne  F  Has  a  refduall  line.  1  fay  moreouer  that  it  is 
a  fixt  ref  mail  line. For  for  that  as  the  number  E.  is  to 
the  number  B  Cffo  is  thefquare  of  the  line  to  the 

fquare  of  the  line  F  G,  and  as  the  number  B  G  is  to  the 
nuber  C  Dfo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  the fquare 
of  the  line  G  H,  therefore  by  equalise  of  proportion  as 
the  number  E  is  to  the  number  C  iD,fo  is  thefquare  of 
the  line  A  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  H.  But  the  num¬ 
ber  E  hath  not  to  the  number  C  D  that  proportion  that 
a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number.  Wherefore 

fhe  lint- A  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  G  H,  and  neither  of thefe  lines  F  G  nor 
GH  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  A.  And forafmuch  as  the fquare  of  the 
line  F  G  is  greater  then  the fquare of the  line  G  H ,  •vnto  thefquare  of  the  line  FG  let  the 
the  f quarts  of  the  lines  G  H  and  K  be  equail.  Now  therfore  for  that  as  the  number  B  C  is  to 
the.  number  C  Dfo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  F  G  to  thefquare  of  the  line  G  H,  therefore  by 
cdriuerfon  of  proportion  as  the  number  B  C  is  to  the  number  B  D  ,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line 
F  G  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  K.But  the  number  B  C  hath  not  to  the  number  3  D  that  pro¬ 
portion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare  number ,  therfore  the  line  F  G  is  incommen¬ 
furable  in  length  to  the  line  K.  Wh  erf  ore  the  line  F  G  is  in  power  more  then  the  lyne  G  H  by 
the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  G ,  and  neither  of  the  lines  F  G 
nor  G  H  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  A.  Wherfore  the  line  F  H  is  a  fxt 
reft dud  line  .WherJ ore  there  is  found  out  a fixt  refduall  line:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

T  here  is  alfo  a  cert  ay  ne  other  redier  way  tofnde  out  euery  one  of  the forfayd fixe  refdu¬ 
all  lines  which  is  after  this  maner .  Suppofe  that  it  were  required  to fnde  out  a  frit  refduall 
line. Take  afrf  binomiall  line  AQ,&  let  the  greater  name 
thereof  be  Alb  .  And  amt  o  the  line C  let  the  line  B  D  be 


- 1- — i - - 

p 

- - - f 

H 

a 

K 

l - — - 

E  ... 

C . 

...  B 

3 


T> 


equail .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C ,  that  is  the  lines  b 
A  B  and  B  D  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely , 
and  the  line  A  B  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  B  C,  that  is, then  the  line  BD^  the fquare 
of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  AB.  And  the  line  A  B  is  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  rationall  line  geuen. For  the  line  A  C  is  put  to  be  a frf  binomiall  line  .Where¬ 
fore  the  line  A  D  is  afrf  ref  dual  line.  And  in  like  maner  may  ye  fnde  out  a fecond^a  thirds 
a fonrth,afft,and  a fixt  refduall  line,  if  ye  take for  eche  a  binomiall  line  of  the  fame  order , 


The 


f  The  67.T heoreme.  The  pi.^Propofithm. 

If  a fuperficies  he  contained  Crider  a  rational 1  line  <&  a  fir  ft  refiduaU  fine: 
the  line  lebichcontayneib  in  polo er  that  juperficies  is  a  refiduall  line. 

1  Vppofie  that  there  be  a  rectangle  fuperficies  A  B  contained  vnder  a  rationall line 
A  C  and  a  firfi  refiduall line  AD.T hen  l fay  that  the  line  which  contayneth  in 
power  the fuperficies  A  Bis  a  refiduall  line,  F  or  forafmuch  as  AD  is  afirfi  re¬ 
fiduall  line  Jet  the  line  hynedvnto  it  be  D  G  {by  the  line  toyned  vnto  it  vnder- 


2' 


T  & 


$ 


3 


1  K 


n 


Jr 

P fj 

/ 

V 

K  C 

l  M 

x 


ft  and  fuch  a  line  as 
vc  as  fpoken  of  in  the 
end  of  the  79  .pro- 
pofition )  .Wherefore 
the  lines  A  G  and 
G  D  are  rationall 
come  fur  able  in  pow¬ 
er  only ,  dr  the  whole 
line  AG  iscomen- 
fihrablc  in  length  to 
the  rationall  line  A 
C,andtl:eline  AG 

is  in  power  more  then  the  line  GD  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfiurable  in  length  vnto 
AG,  by  the  definition  of  a  firfi  refiduall  line.  Deuidethe  line  G  D  into  two  e  quail partes  in 
t  he poynt  E.  firtd  vpon  the  line  A  G  apply  a  pardllelogramme  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
E  G  and  wanting  in  figure  by  a fquare, and  let  the faydparallelogramme  be  that  which  is  co- 
tayned  vnder  the  lines  A  F  and  F  G.  Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  commenfiurable  in  length  to 
the  UneY  G  (by  the  17  .of 'the  tenth)  .And  by  the  poyntesU,Y  and  G,draw  vnto  the  line  AG 
'tbefefiarallel  lines  E  H,F  I  ,andG  YL.  And  make  perfect  the  par allelograme  A  K.  And  for¬ 
asmuch  as.the  line  A  F  is  commenfiurable  in  length  to  the  line  FG,  therefore  alfio  the  whole 
line  A  G  is  commenfiurable  in  length  to  either  of  the  lines  A  F  and  F  G  (by  the  1$.  of  the 
fifth). But  the  line  AG  is  commenfiurable  in  length  to  the  line  AC.  Wherefore  either  of 
the  lines  A  F  and  F  G  is  commenfiurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  C  .  But  the  line  A  C  is  ra¬ 
tion  all, where  fore  either  of  the  lines  A  F  and  F  G  is  alfio  rationall.  Wherefore  (by  the  ip.  of 
the  tenth  )  either  of  the parallelogram  'mes  A I  and  F  K  is  alfio  rationall .  And  forafmuch  ft 
the  line  Y)  E/r  comm  e fur able  in  length  to  the  line  E  G,t before  alfo  (by  the  1$.  of the  tenth ) 
the  Uve  D  G  is  commenfiurable  in  length  to  either  o  f  the  lines  D  E  and  EG.  But  the  line • 
D  G  is  rationall  therefore  either  of  the  lines  D  EandE  G  is  rationall ,  and  the fife  fame 
live  D  G  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  C  (by  the  definition  of  a  frft  refiduall 
line, or  by  the  ft. of  the  tenth  )  .  For  the  line  D  Gisiricbmmenfurablo  in  length  to  the  line 
AG, which  line AG  is  comenfitrablein  length  ib  the  line  A  C:  wlferf ore  either  of 'the  lines 


,  .  „  thepA 

rallelogramme  A I  let  the  fquare  L  M  be  equall,and  vnto  the  parallelcgramme  F  K  let  the 
fquareYi  X  be  equall, being  taken  away  from  the  fquare  L  M,and  baiting  the  angle  L  O  M 
common  to  them  both.  (And  to  doo  this, there  mufit  befounde  out  the  meane proportionall  he- 
twene  the lines  YfiandY  G .  For.  the  fquare  of  tbemearit ’proportionall  is equall  to  the  pa- 
fdtfilogr ammec  b'nt ayned vnder  the  lines  F I  and  F  G .  And  from  the  line  L  0  cut  of  a  line 
equall  to  the  meant  proportionallfo founds  out ,  and  deferibeihe fquare  thereof).  Wherefore 
both  the f quarts  L  M  and  N  X  are  about  one  and  the fie  If e  fame  diameter  (  by  the  26.  of the 
'  -  OO.fi  fixtk 


Fourth  Sena* 

The  firfi  ‘)art 
of  the  Can* 
firuftioa. 


The  firfi  part 
of  the  demon « 
Jiramn. .  ^ 


Note'. 

Aland  FK 
concluded  ra¬ 
tional  paralle* 
logrammem 


Note • 

DHandFK 

parallel 3- 
grammes  me* 

diall. 

Second  part  of 
the  confirm 
tion. 


Smnipdrt  of 
the  dernttijlra 
non. 


L  N,  is  the 
onely  lire  that 
IPs  fought  esr 
r  onjiier. 


"V  7he  tenth  ‘Boofie 

(ixth)let  their  dimeter be  OR  and  defcribe  the figure  as  it  is  here  fet  forth Notv  then  for- 
afinuch  as  the  para  l lelo gramme  contained,  vnder  the  lines  A  F  &  F  G  is  equal  to  the f quart 
of  the  lineUi  G,therefore(by  the  if. of  the fixth )  as  the  line  A  F  is  to  the  line  E  G ,  fats  the 
line  E  G  to  the  line  F  G.But  as  the  line  AF  is  to  the  line  EG  3fo  is  the  parallelogramme 
hi  to  the  parallelo- 
gramme  E  K .  And 
as  the  linen  G  is  to 
the  line  F  G ,  fo  is 
the  parallelogramme 
E  K  to  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  YK.Wher- 
fore  betwene  the  pa - 
grammes  A  I  and 
F  K  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  E  K  is  the 
medne proportionall. 

But  ( by  the  fecondpart  of the  afjumpt  going  before  the  $4.  of  the  tenth)  betwene  the fquares 
L  M  and  N  X  the  parallelogramme  M  N  is  the  meane  proportionall .  And  vnto  the  paral¬ 
lel 'ogramme  A I  is  equal!  the fquare  L  M ,  and  vnto  the  parallelogramme  F  K  is  equall  the 
fquare  N  X  by  consiruclion .  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  M  N  is  equall  to  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  E  K  (by  the  2.  affumpt  going  before  the  54.  of the  tenth )  .  But  the  pa?  allelogramme 
E  K  isfby  thef.rfl  of  the  fixth )  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  D  H  ,and  the  parallelogramme 
M  N  is(  by  the  43. of  thefrH )  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  L  X .  Wherefore  the  whole  pa- 
nallelcgramme  D  K  is  equall  to  the  gnomon  V  T  Z  (  which  gnomon  con f Beth  of  thofe  pa- 
rallelogrammes  by  which  ye fee  in  the  figure  pafeth  a  portion  of  a  circle  greater  then  a fe¬ 
rn  icircle)  and  moreouer  to  the  fquare  N  X  and  the  parallelogramme  AK  is  equall  to  the 
fquaresh  M  and  N  X  by  conf ruction  :and  it  is  now  pr  cued,  that  the  parallelogramme  D  K 
is  equall  to  the  gnomo  V  T  Z ,  and  moreouer  to  the fquare  N  X  .1 Wherfore  the  ref  due  name¬ 
ly  the  parallelogramme  A  B  is  equall  to  the  fquare  S  Q which  is  the  fquare  of the  line  L  N . 
Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  L  N  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  A  B  .  Wherefore  the 
line  L  N  contayneth  in  power  the  parallelogramme  A  B .  I fay  moreouer  that  the  line  L  N  is 
a  refduall  line. For forafmuch  as  either  ofthefe  parallelogrammes  A I  and  F  K  is  ration  all, 
as  it  is  before fayd,  therefore  the  fquares  L  M  <WN  X  which  are  equall  vnto  them, that  is, 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  L  O  and  O  N  are  rationall.Wherefore  the  lines  L  O  and  O  N  are 
alfo  rationafl.Agayne forafmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  D  H  that  is  L  X  is  mediall,  there¬ 
fore  the  parallelogramme  L  X  is  incommenfurable  to  the  fquare  N  X.  Wherefore  {by  the  1. 
of  the  fixth, and  10.  of  the  tenth)  the  lim\>0  is  incomenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  O  N  .* 
and  they  are  both  rationall.Wherefore  they  are  lines  rationallcommenfurablein  power  onely. 
Wherefore  L  N  is  a  ref  duall  line  by  the  defnition,and  it  contayneth  in  power  the  paraltclo- 
par allelogramme  A  B .  If  therefore  a  fuperfeies  becontayned  vnder  a  rational!  line  and  a 
frsl  ref  dual  line,  the  line  which  contayneth  in power  that fuperfeies, is  a  ref duall  line:  which 
was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


ffTbe  68.  Theoreme , 


The  92.  (proportion. 


If  a fnper fries  be  contained  lender  a  rational!  line  and  a  fecond  rejtduall 
line:  the  line  *tobich  contained  in power  that  fuperfeies  ,  is  a  firH  mediall 
rejtduall  line. 

v  Suppofe 


zr 


FoL%9$. 


Fppafeiljdt  A B  ke  a  fuperf  ties  contained  ‘underarafidnalllne  AC,  andafti 
cmdnfduall  line  AD  .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  line  that  containeth  in  power  the 
fuperfties  A  B  is  afrf  medially efduall  line.  For  let  the  line  ioyned  to  the  line 
AD  be DG  .Wherefore  the  lines  A  G  and  G  D  are  rationall  commenfurable 


Fifftpdttof 

the  construe* 
tion . 


L 

-  -M\V  0 

A 

T> 

i 

F  0 

■v* 

/ 

' 

S' 

T  / 

'■'/g 

/ 1 

:  /- 

r  7 : 

| 

\r 

C 

3 

H 

1 

K.  K 

< 

t  M 

V 


in  power  onely ,  and  the 
line  that  is  ioyned  to  the 
refidual  line ,  namely, the 
line  D  G  is  comenfura- 
ble  in  length  to  the  rath 
wall  line  AC :  and  the 
line  ^A  G  is  in  power 
more  then  the  line  D  G, 
by  the  fquare  of  a  line 
comenfurable  in  length 
to  the  line  AG .  Deuide  . 
the  line  D  G  into  two  e- 

■  quail partes  in  the  point  E .  And  ‘unto  the  line  A  G  apply  a  parallelogramme  e quail  to  the 
fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  G,  that  is,  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  G,  and 
wanting  infgure  by  a  fquare,  and  let  that  parallelogramme  be  that  which  is  contained  ‘un¬ 
der  the  lines  A  F  and  FG .  Wherefore  ( by  the  17. of the  tenth )  the  line  A  F  is  commenfara- 
ble  in  length  to  the  line  F  G .  And  by  the pointes  E ,  F,and  G,  draw  ‘unto  the  line  A  C  thefe 
parallell lines  E  H,  F  I,  and  G  K :  andforafmuch  as  the  line  A  F  is  comenfurable  in  length  T/ 
to  the  line  F  G,  therefore  the  whole  line  AG  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  either  of  thefe 

lines  A  F  and  F  G .  But  the line  A  G  is  rationall  and  incommenfur able  in  length  to  the  line  Bratton.  ° 
A  C .  Wherefore  either  of thefe  lines  A  F  and  F  G  are  rationall  and  incommenfur  able  in- 
length  to  the  line  A  C .  Wherefore  either  of  thefe  par allelogrammes  A  l  and  F  K  is  (  by  the 
2 1. of  the  tenth )  mediall .  Againe,forafmuch  as  the  line  D  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  line  E  G,  therefore  the  line  D  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  either  of  thefe  lines  D  E 

■  and  E  G .  But  the  line  D  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  A  C.  Wherefore 
either  of  thefe  lines  D  E  and  EG  is  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  AC. 

Wherefore  (by  the  ip.  of  the  tenth)  either  of thefe  parallelogrammes  D  H  and  EK  israti- 
onall  .Vnto  the  parallelogramme  A 1  defer ibe  an  equall  fquare  L  M,  and  ‘unto  the  par alle- 
logrammeF  K  let  the  fquare  NX  be  equall,  as  in  the  Bropof tion  going  before .  Wherefore 
the  fquares  L  M  and  N  X  are  both  about  one  and  the  fame  diameter .  Let  the  diameter 
be  0  R,  and  defer  ibe  the figure  as  is  in  the former  Prop  of  tion  exprejfed .  Now  therefore for- 
afnuch  as  the  parallelogrammes  A I  and F  K  are  mediall  and *  commenfurable  the  one  to 
the  other, and  the  fquares  of  the  lines  LO  fro  N  which  are  equall  to  thofe  par allelogrames, 
are  mediall,  therefore  the  lines  L  0  and  ON  are  alfo  mediall  cowmen  fir  able  in  power. 

(And  it  is  manifef,  that  the  lines  L  O  and  O  N  are  comenfurable  in  power, for  their  fquares 
are  commenfurable,  and  thofe fquares, namely,  the  fquares  of  the  lines-  LO  &  ON  are  corn- 
men  fur  able, for  they  are  equall  to  the parallelogrammes  A  l  and  F  K,  which  are  commenfu¬ 
rable  the  one  to  the  other :  and  that  thofe  parallelogrammes  A  land  F  K  are  commenfurable 
' the  one  to  the  other, hereby  it  is  manifef  for  that  it  was  before  proued  that  the  lines  A  F and 
F  G  are  commenfurable  in  length .  Wherefore  (by  the  i.ofthefxtfand  10.  of tie  tenth)  the 
parallelogrammes  Aland  F K  are  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  it  is 

*  vow  manifef  by  the  way  ofrefolution,that  the  lines  LO&ONare  comenfurable  in  power ) . 

•  And  forafmuch  as  the parallelogramme  contained  Ender  the'lines  A  F  and  F  G  is  equallto 

■  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  G,  therefore  as  the  line  AF  is  to  the  line  E  G,fo  is  the  line  *E  G  to 
the  line  F  G .  But-  as  the  line  A  F  is  to  the  line  E  G,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  A 1  to  the  pay 

'  rallelogrammeE-K  rand  as  We  line  E  G  is  to  the lineF  G,  fits  the  parallelogramme  E  Kto 


A1  and 
concluded  pa • 
ralldfigrames 
mediall , 
DR&El C, 
rationall. 

7 he fecund 
pan  of  the 
confirutticn. 
The  feccnd, 
pan  of  the  de- 
nsonHraticnj 

*  Analytically 
the profe  hereof 
fclloweth  arnogti 
other  t hinges. 


tc 

cc 

(C 

cc 

cc 


.r 
oodii. 


the 


The  lint  LN 
fo  ■nelywbtch 
is  the  prmcr- 
pall  drift  of  all 
the  former 
diJsQHrjt, 


Thefrfl  hart 
of  the  Con- 
fruflton. 

Tbtfift  part 
of  the  demon - 
firauon* 


Thetertth'Boolg 


the  farallelogramme  F  K .  Wherefore  the  farallelogramme  E  X  is  the  meant  frofortionall 
betwenctheparallelogrammes  A 1  and  FK:  and the  farallelogramme  OMlN^isalfe  the 
meane  frofortionall  be* 
trvenc  the  f quarts  LM 
&  :  and  the  faral¬ 

lelogramme  A I  is  equall 
to  the fquare LM :  and 
the  parallelugrame  F  K 
is  equall  to  the  fquare 
.  Wherefore  the  fa¬ 
rallelogramme  CM  N  is 
equall  to  the  parallelo- 
gramme  E  I<  .  But  the 
far  all elogramm  e  EK  is 
equall  to  the  farallelogramme  D  H :  and  the  farallelogramme  L  X  is  equall  to  the  farallelo* 
gramme  M  N .  Wherefore  the  whole  farallelogramme  D  K  is  equall  to  the  Gnomon  VT  Z, 
and  to  the fquare  N  X .  Wherefore  the  re fidue, namely,  the farallelogramme  AB  is  equall  to 
the fquare  S  that  is,  to  the fquare  oft  he  line  L  N .  Wherefore  the  line  L  N  containeth 

in  fower  the  fuferfeies  A  B .  I  fay  moreouer,  that  the  line  L  FI  is  a  frf  medial l  reftduall 
line .  F or for afmuch  as  the farallelogramme  EK  is  rationally and  is  equall  to  the farallelo¬ 
gramme  M  N,  that  is,L  X,  therefore  L  X,that  is, the  farallelogramme  contained  vnder  the 
lines  L  0  and  0  N  is  rationally  But  the fquare  FfX  is  mediall, for  it  is  already  froued  that 
the  farallelogramme  F  K  which  is  equall  to  the fquare  FfX,  is  mediall .  Wherefore  the fa¬ 
rallelogramme  LX  is  incommen fur  able  to  the  fquare  ?{X .  But  as  the  farallelogramme  L  X 
is  to  the  fquare  N  X,fo  is  the  line  L  O  to  the  line  O  N  (by  the  i. of  the  fxt )  .  Wherefore  ( by 
the  to.  of the  tenth )  the  lines  L  0  and  O  N  are  incommenfurable  in  length .  And  it  is  alrea¬ 
dy  froued,  that  they  are  mediall  commenfur able  in  fower  .Wherefore  the  lines  LQ&QFt 
are  mediall  commenfurable  in  fower  onely  containing  a  rationall fuferfeies .  Wherefore  the 
line  L  N  is  afrjl  mediall  reftduall  line,  and  containeth  in  fower  thcfuperfcics  A  B,  which 
is  contained  vnder  a  rationall  line  andafecond  reftduall  lint .  if  therefore  a  fuferfeies  be 
contained  vnder  a  rationall  line  and  a fecund  reftduall  line :  the  line  which  containeth  in 
fower  that fuferfeies, is  afrit  mediall  reftduall  line:which  was  required  to  be  demonf rated. 


f  The  69.  T beoreme.  T he  93.  ropofition . 

If  a fuferfeies  he  contained  louder  a  rationall  line and  a  third  reftduall 
line :  the  line  that  containeth  in  power  that fuperficies  is  a  fecond  mediall 
reftduall  line. 


Vpfofe  that  ABbea fuferfeies  contained  vnder  a  rationall  line  A  C,&  a  third 
reftduall  line  AD  .T hen  1 fay,  that  the  line  which  containeth  in  fower  the fu¬ 
ferfeies  AB  is  a fecond  mediall  reftduall  line .  Let  the  lineioynedvnto  AD, be 

_ D  G .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  G  and  G  D  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  fower 

onely,  and  neither  of  the  lines  A  G  nor  G  D  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line 
A  C,  and  the  whole  line  AG  is  in  fower  more  then  the  line  GD,bytht fquare  of  a  line  com¬ 
menfurable  inlength  to  the  line  A  G .  Let  the  rest  of  the  con  fruition  be  as  it  was  in  the  for¬ 
mer  Prof  oft  ions .  Wherefore  the  tines  A  F  and F  G  are  commenfurable  in  length :  and  the 
farallelogramme  A  l  is  commenfurable  to  the  farallelogramme  F  K .  Andforafmuchasthe 
lines  A  F  and  F  G  are  commenfurable  in  length » therefore  the  whole  line  AG  is  common fu 


ft 


ementeto 


Fol.ip$* 

fablein  length  to  either  tf  thefe  lines  A  F  and  FG .  Rut  the  lint  . AG  isratimaU  and  in* 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  C .  Wherefore  either  of  thefe  lines  A  F  and  F  G  isra - 
tiondl  and  incommensurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  C .  Wherefore  ( by  the  21. of  the  tenth) 
either  of  thefe parallelogrammes  A I  and  F  K  is  mediall.  Againe,  forafmuch  as.  the  line  B  E 
is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  G,  therefore  alfo  the  whdeline  D  G  is  commenfu- 
rable  in  length  to  either  of  thefe  lines  B  E  and  E  G .  Buttheline  BG  is  raiionall  common* 
furable  in  power  on¬ 
ly  to  the  line  k^AC.  ;  T  - 

Wherfore  alfo  either  A _ J>_  E  T  <s 

of  the  lines  B  E  and 


A I  and  JF  tg 
mediall. 


& 


EG  is  rationall and 
commenfurable  in 


S 


3 


u 


I  K 


/ 

et: 

V. 

< 

L  M 

PC 


power  only  to  the  line 
A  C  .  Wherefore  ei¬ 
ther  of  thefe  paralle- 
lozrammes  B  B  and 
EK  is  mediall .  A- 
gaine  forafmuch  as 

the  lines  A  G  and  B  G  are  commenfurable  in  power  onely,  therefore  they  are  incommenfura- 
ble  in  length. But  the  line  A  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  F :  and  the  line  B  G 
is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  G  E .  Wherefore  the  line  AiF  is  incommen  furable  in 
length  to  the  line  EG  .But  as  the  line  A [  F  is  to  the  line  E  G,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  Alto 
the  parallelogramme  E  K  .Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  A 1  is  incommenf arable  to  the 
parallelogramme  E  K .  Vnto  the  parallelogramme  A1  defcnbe  an  c  quail fquare  L  M :  and 
• vnto  the  parallelogramme  F  K  defcnbe  an  equall fquare  NX:  and  defribe  the  figure  as  you 
didin  the  former  Propoftion .  Now forafmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  contained vnder  the 
lines  A  F  and  F  G  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  E  G,  therefore  as  the  line  F  f  is  to  the 
line  EG,fois  the  line  E  G  to  the  tine  F  G .  But  as  the  line  A  F  is  to  the  line  E  G,fois  the  pa¬ 
rallel  ogramme  A I  to  the  parallelogramme  E  K :  and  as  the  line  E  G  is  to  the  line  F  G,fo  is 
the  parallelogramme  E  K  to  the  parallelogramme  F  K .  Wherefore  as  theparallelograme  A  l 
is  to  thepar  allelogramme  E  Kffois  the  parallelogramme  E  K  to  the  parallelogramme  F  K. 
Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  E  K  is  the  meaneproportionallbetwene  the  parallelogrames 
A 1  and  F  K .  Bui  the  parallelogramme  M  N  is  the  rneane  proportionall  betwene  thefquares 
L  M  and  NfX .  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  E  K  is  equall  to  the parallelogramme  M  N. 
Wherefore  the  whole  parallelogramme  B  K  is  equall  to  the  Gnomon  V'T  Zfffi  to  the fquare 
N  X .  And  thepar  allelogramme  A  K  is  equall  to  thefquares  L  M  and  N  X .  Wherefore  the 
refdue, namely,  the  parallelogramme  A  Bis  equall  to  the  fquare  ffS,  that  is,  to  the  fquare 
efthe  line  L  N .  Wherefore  the  line  L  N  containeth  in  power  the fuperfeies  A  B  .1 fay  more- 
cuer ,  that  the  line  L  N is  a  feernd mediall  refiduallline .  For  for  that  as  it  is proued,the pa - 
rdklogrammes  A. I  and  F  Fare  mediall,  therefore  thefquares  that  are  equall  vnto  them , 
namely,  thefquares  of  the  lines  L  0  and. 0  N,  are  alfo  mediall .  Wherefore  either  of  thefe 
lines  L  0  and  0  N.  is  mediall .  And forafmuch  as,  the  parallelogramme  A  j  is  *  commenfu¬ 
rable  to  the  parallelogramme  F  K,  therefore  thefquares  that  are  equall  to  them,  namely, the 
fquares  ofthelines  L  0  andb  N  arealfo  commenfurable.  Againe,  forafmuch  as  it is proued, 
that  the parallelogramme A 1 [is.  m  commenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  E  K,  therfore  the 
fquare  L  M  is  incommenfurabkto  the  parallelogrammeM  N,  that  is,  the  fquare  efthe  line 
L  0  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  L  0  frON.  Wherfore  alfo  the  *  line 
LOis  incommen  fur  able  in. length  to  the  line  Off,  Wherefore  the  lints  LO  andoNjire 
mediall  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  I  Jay  moreouer,  that  they  co  Maine  a  mediall  fuper¬ 
feies  .  For  forafmuch  ds  it  is  proued,- that  the  parallelogramme  E  K  is  mediall,  therefore  the 

00.  ufi  parallelogramme 


Note 

DHandEtf 

mediall. 


Noli, 

A I  tncommett- 
fur  Ale  to  E  Kf 
Second part  of 
the  Confiru&ie 


Thepr'meipa if 
iine„L  foudf. 


^tiicaufe  the 
lines  A  f  and  F* 
C  are  proued 
commenfurallt 
in  length. 


the  fit-fi  pf 
the  Jixth  and 
tenth  of  the 
tenth. 


iVv..trT 


The  firfl  part 

cftbecon- 

■fmftion. 


The  fir  ft  part 
of  the  demon - 
jlr&tion , 
■'Note, 

A/\  rational* 

'^VY  — '•’>* 

Note, 

I)  /C  medUll, 
■yUamlFK 
hmmmen/u- 
rfote* 

Theficmd 
par  to  ft  he 
cbnEruiliou, 
Thefecond 
part  of  the  de- 
'mwft  ration. 


f  arMlelogramm  which  is  tqtiall  vnto  it, namely,  theparallelogramme  contained  vnder  'the 
lines  L  O  and  o  N  is  alfo.mediall.  Wherefore  the  Me  LNisa  fecond  mediallrefcluall  line, 
and  containeth  in  power  the  fuperfties  A  B .  Wherefore  the  line  that  containeth.  in  power  the , 
fuperfeies  A  B  is  a fecondmediall  refiduall  line  .If therefore  a  fuperfties  he  contained  vnder 
a  rationall  line  and  a  third  refiduall  line,  the  line  that  containeth  in  power  that  fuperfties , 
is  a.  fecondmediall  refidualLltne  i  which  was  required! a.  he  demonstrated. 

—  ft  The  7Q.Theoreme.  The  P4.  fropofition. 

If a  foperficieshe  contqyned  louder  a  rationatt  lyne)  and  a  fourth  refiduall 
lyneithe  Ijne  1 X>hich  contqyneth  in  power  that fuperfeiesps  ale  foe  lyne. 

Vppofe-  that  there  he  a  fuperfties  A  B  contained  vnder  a  ration  all  line  A  C,and 
a  fourth' refiduall  line  A  I).T hen  I fay  that  the  Ime  which  'containeth  in  power 
the fuperfties  A.  Bis  a  lejfe  line.  For  let  the  line  ioyned  unto  it  he  D  G.  Where¬ 
fore  the  lines  A  G  andD  G  are  rational!  cowmen  for  able  inpower  only, and  the 
line  A  G  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  D  G,  by  the fquare  of  a  line  inc omen fur ahk  in  length 
to  the  line  A  G,  and  the  line  A ■  G  is  commenforahle  in  length  to  the  line  A  C,  Deuide  the 
line  D  G  into  two  equal! partes  in  the  point  E .  iyindvnU  the  line  A  G  'apply  a  f  arallelo- 
grqmme equal  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  E 
G, and  wanting  inf-  '  A 

gure  hy ,  a  fquare, and 
let  that '  par allelo- 
gramebethat  which 
ss  contayned  vnder- 
tbe'linesAF  andF 
G.  Wherfore  ( hy  the 
if  of  the  tenth)  the 
line  A  F  is  inc  omen¬ 


;  ’v! 

•1 

,  ^  " 

■  - 

[ _ _ — — , — — 

,  .  '1  V  „ 

'd 


i  iC 


..  rf  : 

r* — —~7\ 

l/y 

fgl 

?  J 

V 

•  \  r 

X-_ 


M 


fur  ante  in.  tenet n  to 


t  he  line  FjG.Draw  hy  the pointes  E,F,&  G  fopto  the  lines  A:C and D  B  theft parallel  lines 
EH,  FT, and  G  K  .Now  for afmuch  as  the  line  A  G  is  rational, and  c ommen for ahlejn  length 
to  the  'line  A  Cyherfore  the  whole  par atleUgr'dmme  A  K  is  (by  the  i  p  .ofthetenth)rational. 
\yfgaine for afmuch.  as  the  line  D  G  is  inti'nd&enfurdbleln  length  to  the  line  A  C  (for  if  the 
linfD  Gwere  commenforahle  id  length  to  the  line  A  G,  then  for  afmuch  as  the  line  AG  is 
commenforahle  in  length  to  the  fame  line  A  C,  the  lines  A  G  and  D  G  fhonld becommenfo- 
rable  inlength.  the  one  to  the  other, whenyct.  they  are  put  to  be  commenforahle  in  power  one* 
ly)  and  both  thefe  lines  A  C  and  D  G  are  rationall.  Wherfore  the  parallelograme  D  K  is  me - 
diall.Againe for  afmuch fs  the  line  A  F  is  inc  ommen  for  able  in  length  to  the  line  F  G,  thed 
fore  thefaralldogramme  A I  is  incomnenfur.ahle  to  the  parallelogramme  F  K.  Vnto  the  pa- 
railelogramme  A I  deferihean  equal  fquare  L  M,and  vnto  the  parallelograme  F  K  deferibe 
an  e quail  fquare  N  X, and  let  the  angle  L  0  M  be  common  to  both  thofefquares.  Wherefore 
the fquares  L  M  and  N  X  are  about  one  and  the  felfe fame  diameter. .  Let  their  diameter  he, 
0  R, and  deferihe  the  figure.  And  for  afmuch  as  the  parallelograme  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  F  and  F  G  is  equal!.  to  the fquare  of  the  line  E  G,therf ore  proportionally  as  the  line  A  F  it 
to  the  line  E  G,  fo  is  the  Me  EG  to  the  line  F  G,  hut  as  the  line  A  F  is  to  the  line  EG,  fo  is 
the  parallelogramme  A I  to  the  parallelogramme  E  K(bythei.ofthefxt.)  And  as  the  line 
'  E  G  is  to  the  line  F  G,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  EK  to  the  parallelogramme  F  K.  Wherfore 

■  thi 


ofSudicks  Elements s . 


FoLip6* 


the  parallelograrn'me  E  K  is  the  meaneproportionall  betwene  the  pardldogrammcs  A  land 
E  K  :  wherfore  as  it  was [aid in  the  former propoftions,the par allelogramme  M'N is  equal 
to  the  par  allelogramme  E  K :  but  the parallclcgramme  D  H  is  equal l  to  the  paralleloqrame 
E  K,ancl  the  parallelogramme  CM  Nto  the  parallel ogramme  L  X.  Wherfore  the  whole  pa¬ 
rallelogram  me  D  K  is  equall  to  the  gnomon  V  T  Z, and  to  thefquare  N  X.  Wherfore  the  re- 
fidue, namely ,  the  p  ar  a  IUI ogramme  A  E  is  equall  to  the  ref  due-,  namely,  to  the  fquare  S  Jpg  ^  ^ 

■fillet  ic  t i/iit/iv'P  nr  thr>  iiY}?  T  AT  T  I  Art  nv-p/\n T  7\T-te  //jvff  1 1 ™ tic 


fquare s  of  the  lines  L  O  and  0  N,t  her  fore  that  which  is  made  of the fquares  of  the  lines  L  0  founde. 
and  0  N  added  together  is  rationall.  Againefora  (much  as  the par  allelogramme  D  K  is  me- 
diall,  and  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  L  6  and  0  N  twife,  therefore 
that  which  is  contained  under  the  lynes  L  o  and  0  N  twife, is  alfo  mediall.  Andforafmuch 
as  the  parallelogram  m  e  A I  is.  incommenfur ablet  o  thcparallelogramme  F  K,  therefore  the 
fquares  which  are  equall  vnto  them  ^namely, the fquares  of the  lines  L  0  and  0  N  are  incom 
menfurable  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherfore  the  lines  L  O  and  0  N- are  incommenfur  able  in 
power,hauyng  that  which  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  rationall,  and  that  which 
is  contained  under  them  twife  mediall, which  is  commenfirable to  that  which  is  contayned 
under  them  once  Wherfore  that  which  is  contained  under  them  once  is  alfo  mediall.  Wher-  - 
fore  L  N  is  that  ir rationall  line  which  is  called  a  lejfe  line, and  it  containeth  in  power  the fu- 
perficies  A  h.lftkerfore  a  fuperfeies  be  contained  under  a  rationall  line  and  a  fourth  ref - 
duall line, the  line  which  containeth  in power  that fuperfeies  is  a  lejfe  line :  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  demonf  rated. 

pp  T he  7I.T. heoreme.  T he  ps.  Tropoftion. 


If a fuperfeies  be  contained  loader  a  rationall  line  and  a  fft  ref  dual  line: 
the  line  that  cotayneth  in  power  the fame fuperfeies  fs  a  line  making  with 
a  rationall fuperfeies  fhe  Echoic fuperfeies  mediall 


The  tint  LN» 


;  7 he  tenth  ‘Boo^e  > 

xng  before fo  alfo  in  this  may  we  front, that  the  line  L  N  containeth  in  power  the fuperfeies 
A  Ji.  I  fay  moreover  that  that  line  LN  is  a  line  making  with  a  rationall  fuperfeies  the 
whole  fuperfeies  mediall.  For forafmuch  as  t he paradelogramme  A  I<  is  mediall,  therefore 
that  winch  is  eqttall  'unto- it  , 'namely, \ that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of  the  lines  L  O  and 
0  N  added  together  is  alfo  mediall.  e^igaine  forafmuch  as  the  parallelo gramme  D  K  is  ra~ 
tionalftherfore  that  which  isequall  vnto  it, namely, that  which  is  contamedynder  the  lines 
LO  and  0>N  twifefs.alfo rationall.  s-Alnd forafmuch  as  theline  AFis  incommenfurahle 
in  length  to  the  line  F  Gather fore  ( by  the  i  .of the fext,&  i  o  .of the  tenth )  the  parallelograms 
A I  is  incornmenfurahk  to  the  parallelogramme  F  I\,wherfore  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  lyne  L 
O  is  incommenfurahle  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  O  N.Wherfore  the  lines  L  0  and  Q  N  are  in- 
common fir able  in-power  hailing  that  which  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  medi- 
afljdnd ’that  which  is  contaynedvnder  them  twife  rationall.  Wh  erf  ore  the  line  LN  is  that 
irrationall  line  which  is  called  a  lyne- making  with  a  rationall flip  erf  ties  the  whole  fuperf- 
ciesmediall,and  itcoptayneth  in  power  the  fuperfeies  A  B.Wberfore  the  lins.contayning  in 
power  the  fuperfeies.  A  By  is  a  line  making  with  a  rationall fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperfeies 
mediall,  iftherfore  a  fuperfeies  be  contained  -under  a  rationall  lyne  &  a  fft  refduall  line „ 
the  ling  that  contayneth -in  power  the fame fuperfeies,  is  a  line  makyng  with  a  rationall fi¬ 
fe  ffeiesy  he  whokf  tpevfcies  mediall ••  which  was  required  to  be  proved. 

,  yj T he  72.  T heoreme.  The  96.  Tropoftion. 

If  a  fuperfeies  be  contained  lender  a  rationall  line  and  a  JJxth  rejiduatl 
imef  he  line  ‘ft  hich  contqyneth  in  power  the  fame  fuperfeies  is  a  line  ma# 
king  -tyitfaa.  mediall fiperficks  the  Gobble fuperfeies  mediall. 


ofSuclides  Elementes*  Fohipy* 

/  ■ 

faediiilt.F or  the parallelograms  A  K  is  medially wherefore  that  which  is  equal ‘unto  it,  name* 
ly,that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  L  O  and  O  N  added  together  is  alfo  mediall. 
And  fora  [much  as  the parallelogramme  1)  K  is  mediall,  therefore  that  which  is  equall  unto 
if, namely, that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  L  0  and  O  N  twife  is  alfo  mediall And 
for af much  as  the  parallogramme  A  K  is  incomrhen fur  able  to  the  parallelogramme  DK, 
therefore  the fquares  of  the  lines  L  O  and  0  N  are  incofnmen fur  able  to  that  which  is  contain 
tied  ‘under  the  lines  L  O  and  O  N  twife.  And  forasmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  A I  is  in- 
commen. 'fur able  to  the parallelogramme  F  K , therefore  alfo  the  fquare  of  the  line  LQ  is  in- 
commet. fur able  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  O  N .  Wherefore  the  lines  L  O  and  0  N  are  in com- 
menf arable  in  power  fatting  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  L  0  and  O  N  mo¬ 
di  all,  and  that  which  is  contained  ‘under  them  twife  mediall,  and  moreouer  that  which  is 
made  of  the  fquares  of  them  is  incommen  fur able  to  that  which  is  contained ‘under  them 
twife.  Wh  erf  ore  the  line  L  N  is  that  irrational l  line  which  is  called  a  line  making  with  a  me » 
dull fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperfeies  mediall, and  it  contdyneth  in  power  the fuperfeies  A  B, 
Wherefore  the  line  which  contayneth  in  power  the fuperfeies  A  Bis  a  line  making  with  a  me¬ 
diall fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperfeies  mediall .  if  therefore  a  fuperfeies  be  contained  ‘under  a 
rationall  line  and  a fxth  refiduall  line,  the  line  which  contajneih  in  power  the fame  fuperfi- 
cies  is  a  line  making  which  a  mediall  j  uperf.cies  the  whole  fuperfeies  mediall .  which  was  re-, 
quired  to  be  demon f  rated. 

-  fj  The  73.  Theorems.  The 97.  Tropofticn. 


.  The  fquare  of  a  refiduall  line  apply  ed  lento  a  rationall  line  3  maketb  the 
breadth  or  other  fide  afirft  refiduall  line. 


A 


V 


0 


JC  ft 


X 


Bi  h 


Vppofe  that  A  B  be  a  refiduall  line ,  and 
CD  be  a  rationall  line .  And  •unto  the 
line  C  D  apply  the  parallelogramme  C  E 
equall.  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B,andmaking  the 
breadth  the  line  C  F .  T  hen  I  fay  that  the  line  C  F 
is  a  frft  refiduall  line .  For  vnto  the  line  A  B  let  the 
line  couemently  ioynedhe  fuppofed  to  be  BG  (which 
feife  line  is  alfo  called  a  line  ioyned,  as  we  declared 
in  the  end  of  the  7  9 .  proportion  )  .Wherefore, the 
lines  A  G  and  G  B  are  rationall  commenfurable  in 
power  onef.  And.  vnto  the  line  C  D  apply  thepa- 
rallelogramme  C  H  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
A  G, and  vnto  the  line  K  H  (which  is  equall  to  the  line  CD)  apply  the  parallelogramme  K  L 
equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  .Wherfore  the  whole  parallelogramme  C  Lis  equall  to  the 
fquares  of the  lines  A  G  and  G  B.And  the  parallelogramme  C  E  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the 
line  A  B, wherefore  the  parallelogramme  remetymng ,  namely, the  parallelogramme  F  Lis  e- 
quall  to  that  pa Inch  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  twife.  For  (  by  the  7 .  ofthefe - 
cond)the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  are  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  A  G  dr  GB  twife, and  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  E.Deuide  the  line  FM  into  two  equall 
partes  in  the  point,  N.And  iy  the  poynt  N  draw  vntotheline  CD  a  par  allell  line  N  X. Wher¬ 
fore  either,  of  the  paralldogrammes  F  X  and  is  equal  It  0  that. whiejo  is  contayned  vn¬ 

der  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  once.  Andforafmuch  as  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  are 
fat  ion  all ,  vnto  which fquares  the parallelogramme  CL  is  equall,  therefore  the  parallel >- 
gramme  C  L  alfo  ts  rationall :  wherefore  the  line  G  M  is  rationall  and*  commenfurable  "in 

length 

O 


Tbefiueth 
Senary \ 

The fe fixe 
proportions 
following  are 
the  conuerfes 
of  the  Hxe  for** 
met  pro  pop - 
turns* 

Conilrufiion* 


Demonjlra* 
tion . 


the  2Qtof 

the  tenth. 


the  it. 
tftbt  tenth . 
*Bythen.of 
Shi  tenth. 


€  Feo eluded  4 
nfiduut  hne. 


CunSmttm, 


The  tenths  coke 


length  to  the  tine  C  D.^Agayne forafmuch  as  that  which  is  contayned  wider  the  lines  A  G 
a  'hi  G  B  twife,  is  **  mediall t  therefore  the far allelogramme  e  quail  vnto  it  ,  namely  the 
parallelogramme  F  L  is  alfo  mediall .  Wherefore  the  line  FMw  rationall  and  *  incommen¬ 
surable  in  length  to  the  line  C  Id.^And forafmuch  as  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B 
are  rationall ,  and  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  twife ,  is  medially 
therefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  are  incomenfurable  to  that  which  is  contay¬ 
ned  vnder  the  lines  A  G.  and  G  B  twife. But  vnto  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  is 
equall  the  parallelogramme  C  L,and to  that which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  KG  and 
G  B  twife  is  equall  the parallelogramme  F  h,wher ef, ore  the par allelogramme  C  L  isincom - 
men  fir  able  to  the  parallelogramme  F  L  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  C  M  is  incommen fur  able 
in  length  to  the  line  F  M  :and  they  are  both  rationall.  Wherefore  the  lines  C  M  and  F  M  are 
rati  onallcommenfir able  in  power  onely:and  therefore  the  line  C  F  is  a  refiduall  line  ( by  the 
7  3  .of the  tenth ) .  1 fay  moreouer  that  it  isafrfi  refiduall  line .  For  forafmuch  as  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  is  the 
tneane proportion-all  betwene  the fquares  of  the  lines 
A  G  and  G  lb(by  the  affumpt going  before  the  5^. 
of the  tenth  ).And  vnto  the fquarc  of  the  line  A  G 
is  equall  the  par  allelogramme  C  H,  and  vnto  that 
which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B 
is  equall  the  par  allelogramme  N  L  ,  and  vnto  the 
fquare  of  the  line  G  B  is  equall  the  parallelograme 
K  L .  Wherefore  the  par  allelogramme^  L  is  the 
mpane  proportionall  betwene  the parallelogrammes 
C  H  andK  L  .  Wherefore  as  C  H  is  to  N  L  ,fo  is 
N  L  to  K  L  .  But  as  C  H  is  to  N  L  ,fo  is  the  line 
C  K  to  the  line  N  M  &  as  N  L  is  to  K  L  ,fo  is  the 
line  N  M  to  the  line  K  M .Wherfore  as  the  line  C  K  is  to  the  line  N  M  ,fo  is  the  line  N  M 
to  the  line  K  M. Wherfoi'e  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  K  and  KM  is 
equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  N  M  ,thatis  to  the fourth  part  of  the fquare  of the  line  F  M. 
And  forafmuch  as  the fquare  of  the  hne  A  G  is  commenfurable  to  the fquare  of  the  line  G  B, 
therefore  the  parallelogramme  C  H  is  comenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  K  L .  But  as 
C  H  is  to  K  L  fo  is  the  line  C  K  to  the  line  KM:  wherefore  the  line  C  K  is  commenfura- 
hie  in  length  to  the  line  K  M .  Wherefore  (  by  the  17. of  the  tenth  )  the  line  C  M  is  in  power 
more  then  the  line  F  M  by  the fquare  of  aline  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  C  M  .But 
the  line  C  M  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  C  D.  Wherefore  the  line  C  F 
is  afirfl  refiduall  line .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  a  refiduall  line  apply ed  vnto  a  rationall 
line,makcth  the  breadth  or  other fide  a frit  refiduall  line :  which  was  required  to  be  demon¬ 
strated. 

f  T be  74.  T heoreme.  T he  p£.  Tropofition. 

T he  fquare  of  a  firjl  mediall  refiduall  line  applied  to  a  rationall  line ?  met* 
keth  the  breadth  or  other  fide  a  fecond  refiduall  line. 


A  B  G 


Fppofe  that  A  B  be  afrft  mediall  re fidual  line, and  let  C  D  be  a  rationall  line.  And 
vnto  the  line  C  D  apply  the  parallelogramme  C  E  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  lyne 
A  3, and  making  in  breadth  the  line  C  F.T hen  l fay  that  the  line  CF  is  a  fecond 

refiduall 


Fo/.zpS, 


B 


TV 


K  M. 


£ 


H  U 


of Suclides  Element eu 

refduall  line.  For  vnto  the  line  A  B,  let  the  lyne 
coueniently  ioyned  he  fuppofed  to  he  B  G.  Where-  / 

fore  the  lines.  A  G.  and  B  G  are  medial l  commen- 
fur able  in  power  onely comprehending  a  rationall 
fuperfcies.eA nd  •vnto  the  line  C  D  apply  the  pa¬ 
rallel gramme  CH  equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
A  G,and  making  in  bredth  the  line  C  K,  and  vn~ 
the  line  K  H  ( which  is  e  quail  to  the  line  CD)  ap¬ 
ply  the  parallelogramme  K  L  e quail  to  the  fquare 
of  the  line  G  B  and  waking  in  breadth  the  line  K 
M.Wherfore  the  whole  paralle  logramme  C  Lise- 
quail  to  both  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G 
B  which  are  mediall  &  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other.  When  fore  the  parallelogram  rn  es 
C  H  and  K  L  are  mediall  and  commenfurable  the  one  to  the  other.  Wher for e(  by  the  is -of the 
tenth )  the  whole  parallelogramme  C  L  is  commenfurable  to  either  ofthefc gar  dido  grammes 
C  H  and  K  L.Wherfore  {by  the  corollary  of  the  23  .of the  tenth )  the  whole  gar  alldegramme 
C  Lis  alfo  mediall.  Wherefore  ( by  the  22. of  the  tenth)  the  line  C  M  is  rationall  and  incorn- 
men  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  C  D  .^mind forafmuch  as  the parallelogramme  C  L  is  equal 
to  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B-  and  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  are  equall 
to  that  which  is  cotained  under  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  twife,  together  with  the  fquare  of  the 
line  AB  (by  the  7  .of the  fecond) :  and  vnto  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B  is  equall  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  C  E. Wher  fore  the  ref  due, namely, that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and 
G  B  twife, is  equal  to  the  ref  due,  namely,  to  the  paraHelogrameF  L.  But  that  which  is  Contai¬ 
ned  vnder  the  lines  A  G  fr  G  B  tivife  is  rational.  Wher  fore  the  parallelogramme  F  L  is  alfo 
rationall. Wherf  ore  the  line  F  M  is  rationall  and  comenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  C  D  (by 
the  20. of  the  tenth.)  2{ow forafmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  C  L  is  mediall,  and  the par 'al¬ 
ldogramme  F  Lis  rational,therfore  they  are  incbmenfurable  the  one  to  the  other. Wher  fore 
alfo  the  lyne  C  Mis  in  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  lyne  F  M,and  they  are  both  rationall. 
Wherf  ore  the  line  CFisa  re  fid  hall  line. I fay  morcouer  that  it  is  a fecond  refdualllyne.  For 
deuide  the  line  F  M  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  N,  from  which  point  draw  vnto  the 
line  C  D  a  parallel  line  dfX.  V/ her  fore  either  ofthefe  par  dido  grammes  F  X  and  N  L  is  c- 
quall  to  the  par alldogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B ,  And forafmuch  as  the 
parallelogr amme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  is  the  msanc  proportional!  betwene 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  andBG.  Therefore  the  par  alldogramme  N  L  is  the  meane  pro¬ 
portionall  betwene  the parallelograrnmes  C  H  and  K  L .  But  as  C  H  is  to  N  L,fo  is  the  line  C 
K  to  the  line  TpM,and  as  N  L  is  to  I<  L,fo  is  the  line  TfM  to  the  line  K  M.Wherfore  as  the 
line  C  K  is  to  the  lyne  N  Mfo  is  the  lyne  N  M  to  the  line  K  M.W her  fore  the  parallelogr  amt 
contayned  vnder  th f lines  C  I<  and  K  M is  equall.  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  TgM,  that  is,  to 
the fourth  part  of  the fquare  of  the  lyne  F  M.But  the  parallelogramme  C  H  is  commenfura¬ 
ble to  the parallelogramme  K  L.Wherfore  alfo  the  lyne  C  I<  i s' commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  lyne  K  M.Wherfore  ( by  the  17.  of the  tenth )  the  line  C  M  is  in  power  more  then  the  line, 
F  M,by  the fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  ImeC  M.  And  the  line  F  (Jit 
which  is  the  line conueniently  ioyned, is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  lyne  C  D . 
Wher  fore  the  lint  C  F  is  a fee  ond  refduall  lyne .  Wher  fore  the J  quare  of  a  first  mediall  ref 
dualline  applied  to  a  ration  all  line, maketh  the  breadth  or  other fide  a  fecond  refduall  lyne? 
which  was  required  to  be proued. 


Xf.j, 


Xb 


* 


Vemcxftra* 

non. 


CFccnchdei 
a  refidur.il 
line • 


<• 


Conftmtim, . 


"Demnftra- 

fm. 


CF  tone  faded 
grefidual  line . 


fThe  7  fa  Theorems . 


A  A'. 


The  pp.  WropoJitiotr. 


K  Al 


Thefquare  of  a fecond  medially  efiduall line  applied  lento  a  rationall  linex 
maketb  the  breadth  or  other fide  a  third  refiduall  line. 

Vppofe  that  A  B  be  a fecond  media.ll  refiduall  line ,  and  let  CD  be  a  rationall  line . 
Andvnto  the  line  C  D  apply  the  parallelogramme  C  F  equall  to  thefquare  of  the 
line  A  B,  add  making  in  breadth  the  line  C  F .  T hen  I  fay ,  that  the  line  CF  is  a 
third  refiduall  line .  For  vnto  the  line  A  B  let  the  line  conuenient  f  ioyned  be  fiypofed  to  be 
B  G .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  G  &  GB  are  mediall commenfurable  in power  onely  containing 
a  medial! fiperficies .  And  let  the  ref  of  the  confimcHon  be  as  in  the  Propoftion  next  going 
before  .Wherefore  the  line  C  M  is  rationall  and 

incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  A _ ft  .  .  f 

C  D.  And  either  of  the  parallel ogrammes  F  X  and  G 

2 fL  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained vnder 
the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  .  But  that  which  is  contay-  • 
red  vnder  the  lines  A  G  &  G  B  is  mediall.Wher- 
fbre  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  G 
and  G  B  twif  e  is  alfo  medial l.  Wherfore  the  whole, 
parallelo gramme  F  L  is  alfo  medtall .  Wherefore 
the  line  F  M  is  rationall  and  incommenfurable 

in  length  to  the  line  C  D  .  And  fora  [much  as  the  P  £  %  H 

lines  AG  and  G  B  are  incomen far  able  in  length, 

therefore  alfo  the  fquare. of  the  line  A  G  is  incommenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  cmlaf 
ned  vnder  the  lines  A  GandGB .  Butsuntothe fquare  cf the  line  AG  arc ’common fur  able 
the  fquares  of  the  line's  AG  and  G  B  :  and  vnto  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  G  and  GB,  is  commenfurable  that  which  is  contained,  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  GB 
twife .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  are  incommenfurable  to  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  t  wife .  Wherefore  the parallelogrammes  which  are 
equall  vnto  themm'amely,  the  parallelogrammes  C  L  and  F  L  are  incommenfurable  the  one 
to  the  other .  Wherefore  a!fo  the  line  C  M  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  M:and 
they  are  both  rationall .  Wherefore  the  line  CF  is  a  refiduall  line .  ifay  moreouer,  that.it  is 
a  third  refiduall  line .  For forafmuch  as  thefquare  of  the  line .  A  G,  that  is,  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  C  H  is  commenfurable  .to  thefquare  of  the  line  BG,  that  is,  to  the  parallelogramme 
FC  L,  therefore  the  line  C  K  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  KM .  And  in  like  fort  as 
fn  the  former  Propoftion, fo  alfo.  in  this  may  m  prime t  that  the  parallelogramme  cent  ay  ned 
finder  the  lines  C  K  and  I(  M,  is  equall  to  thefquare  of  the  line.NM,  that  is,  to •  the  fourth 
pari  of  the fquare  of  the  line  F  fafa.  Wherefore  the  line  C  M  is  in power  more  then  the  line 
F '  M, by  the fquare  of aline  cammed  fir  able  in  length  to  the  line.  C  M  ctnd  neither  of  the 
lines --CM  nor  FM  is  commenfurable  in  length  to.therationaHlrne.CD  ;i  Wherefore  the 
line  CF  is  a  third  ref  dual  line. Wherfore  thefquare  of  a  fecond  mediall  ref  dual  line  applied 
fifit.q  a  rationall  line,  makeththe  breadth  or  other fide  a  third  refiduall  line :  which  wasye- 
'qiiired  to  be  demon f  rated. 


f  The  76.  Theoreme. 


The  1 00.  Tropofition . 


T he  fquare  of  a  lefie  line  appliedlmto  a  rationall linepnaketh  the  breadth 
w  other  fide  a  fourth  refiduall  line ; 

Suppofe 


a 


es. 


c 


K  M 

T"1 


Vemo'iHrar’ 

tion. 


< 

..  IV#-:'  V>.  d% 


i  Vppofe  thatxyfB  be  a  lejfe  line, and  let  C  D  be  drahonalt line  xdind  vnto  the  line 
'  C  D  apply  the  par  alldog*' amine  C  £  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  and  ma¬ 

king  in  breadth  the  line  C  F.T hen  1 fay , that  the line  GF  is  a  fourth  refdudl  line . 

For  vnto  the  line  A  B  let  the  line  conuenkntly  toyned  befuppofed  to  be  B  G .  Wherefore  the  Confer  uttion* 
lines  AG  f  G  B  are  incommenfurable  inpower, baiting  that  which  is  made  of their fquare  s 
added  together  rationally  and  thatwhich  is  contained  vnder  them  mediall .  And  let  the  rest 
of  the  confruchon  be  as  in  the  P r op ofitions  going  before .  Wherefore  the  whole  pardlelo- 
gramme  C  L  is  rationall .  Wherefore  the  line  G  M 

is  dforationdly  and  commenfur able  in  length  to  a  3  0 

the  line  C  D .  And  forafmuch  as  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  bander  the  lines  A  G  and  G’B  twifrii  medi¬ 
ally  therefore  the  par  allele  gramme  which  is  equdl 
unto  it, namely,  the par allelogramme  F  L,  is  alfo 
mediall  .  Wherefore  the  line  E  M  is  rationall  and 
incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  CD.  But 
the  line  C  M  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  C  D  .  Wherefore  ( by  the  i  j  .of  the  tenth}  the 
line  C  M  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line 
F  M :  and  they  are  both  rationall .  Wherefore  the 
lines  C  M  and  F  M  are  rationall  commenfurable  in power  onely  .  Wherefore  the  line  C  F  is  CF  proueda 
a  ref dnalL  line  .  1 fay  moy  cotter,  that  it  is  a  fourth  refidtiall  line  .For  forafmuch  as  the  lines  refdudl  line . 
AG  and  G  B  are  incommenfurable  in  power ,  therefore  the  fjuares  of  them,  that  is,  the pa¬ 
rallel ogrammes,  which are  equdl  vnto  them,  namely,  the par allclogrammes  CH  and  K  L, 
are  incommenfurable  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  C  K  is  incommenfurable 
in  length  to  theline  K  M  .And  in  like  fort  may  weproue,  that  the  par  allelogramme  contay - 
ned  vnder  the  lines  C  K  and  K  M,  is  e  quail  to  the fquare  of the  line  TTgM,  that  is,  to  the 
fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  M .  Wherefore  (by  the  1 8  .of the  tenth )  the  line  C  M 
is  in  power  more  then  the  line F  FI,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  C  Ml  \fAnd  the  whole  line  G  M  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationallline  CD. 

Wherefore  the  line  CF  is  a  fourth  refduall  line .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  a  left  line  applied 
• vnto  a  rationallline,  maketh  tjbe.  breadth  or  other  fide  a fourth  refduall  line :  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  proved. 

...  ..  1  '  V*  .  UY.b  t'wV  -  - 


H  Jj 


vS4  i  j 


n-.s 


.  fTbe  77’Theoreme.  The  loi.Trofofitm. 


^  ifetionatl fufg$i$ies  the  lehole  fuper* 
ficies  Jtiedia  ll  applied  pnto  a  rational  line /naketh  the  breadth  or  other  fide 
a fift  refiduall  lyne, -  : 

■-*  'jjr  7»  1  CUNll  V"  \\  .  *  -a  *  *  .  •.  ■  .  •  i 

Vppofe  that  A  B  be  aline  makingwith  a  rationall  fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperfeies 
medialfand  let  CD  he  a  rationall  line.  And  -vnto  theline  C  D  apply  the  parallelo- 

_ , gramme  C  E  equall  to  the fquare  oft  he  line  A  B,andmaking  in  breadth  the  line  C 

E.  Then  /  fay  that  the  line  C  F  is  afft  refdudl  End  For  vnto  the  line  A  B  let  the  line  con- 
ueniently  ioyned  be  fuppofed  to  be  B  G.  Wherfore  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  are  incommenfura- 
ble  in  power  ,hauingthat  which  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  mediall,  and  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  them  rationall.  Let  the  ref  of  the  confruchon  be  in  this  as  • it  was 
in  the  former  propoftions. Wherfore  the  whole  par  allelogramme  C  L  is  mediall.  Wherefore 
the  line  C  M  is  rationall  and  incommenfurable,  in  length  to  the  lint  CD  .And  either  of  the 

PP.ij.  par  ah 


CF  proueda 
refiduull  line. 


ConJlruRioti. 


Dmo'ittra- 

tion. 


TV 


K  M 


H  U 


e 

pxralklogramme  Ft  dr  IfL  is  rationall .Wher- 

forc  the  whole  parallelogramme  F  L  is  alfo  ratio*  A _ B 

mil.  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  F  M  is  rationall  and 
eommenfurable  in  legth  to  the  line  C  D .  And  for - 
afmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  C  L  is  medially 
and  theparallelogramme  F  L  is  rationally  there - 
fore  C  L  and  F  L  are  incommenfurahle  the  one  to 
the  other,  and  the  line  C  M  is  incommenfurahle 
in  length  to  the  line  F  M,and  they  are  both  ratio* 
nail.  Wherfore  the  lines  C  M  and  F  M  are  ratio- 
nail  eommenfurable  in  power  one ly  .Wherfore  the 
lyne  CF  is  a  refiduall  line.  ifay  moreouer  that  it 

is  afft  reft  dual  line. For  we  may  in  like  fort pr out, that  the parallelogramc  contained  vnder 
the  lines  C  I(  and  I<  M ,  is  equal 7  to  the fqUare  of  the  line  N  M,  that  is,  to  the  fourth  part  of 
the fquare  of t  he  lyne  F  M. And fordfmuch  as  t he f quart  of  the  line  A  G,  that  is >  the  par aL 
lelogramme  C II  is  incommenfurahle  to  the fquare  of  the  line  BG,  that  is  to  the  parallelo- 
gramme  K  L,therfore  the  line  C  K  is  incommenfurahle  in  length  to  the  line  K  M. Wherfore 
(by  the  1 8. of  the  tenth )  the  line  C  M  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  F  M,by  the  fquare  of  a 
line  incomraenfura  ble  in  length  to  the  line  C  M.  And  the  line  comeniently  ioyned,  namely  > 
the  line  F  .Mis  eommenfurable  in  length lo  the  rational!  ItncC  D .  Wherfore  the  line  CF  is 
afft  refiduall  line. Wherfore  the  line  C  F  is  a fft  ref duall  line.  Wherfore  the  fquare  of  a  line 
making  with  a  rationall  fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperfeies  medial,  applied  tvnta  a  rational  line 
maketh  the  breadth  or  other fide  afft  refiduall  lyne:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 


The  7 8.  Theorem*. 


The  102 .  (proportion . 


T  he  fquare  of a  lyne  making  loith  a  mediall fuperficies file  ^holefuperfi* 
ties  mediall  applied  to  a  rationall  lineymaketh  the  breadth  or  other  fide 
fixt  refiduall  line. 

Vppofe  that  A  B  be  a  line  making  with  a  mediall fuperfeies,  the  whole fuperfeies 
mediall, and  let  CD  be  a  rationall  line.  And  vnto  the  line  C  D  apply  the  paraf 
lelogramme  C  E  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  AB  and  making  in  breadth 
the  line  C  F.Then  I fay  that  the  line  C  F  is  a fixt  ref  dual  line.  For  vnto  the  lint 
A  B  let  the  line  comeniently  ioyned  be  B  G.  Wherfore  the  lines  A  G  and  B  G  are  incommen- 
furable  in  power  hauing  that  which  is  made  of  their fquares  added  together  mediall,  dr  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  them  mediall,  ana  moreouer  that  which  is  made  of  their  fquares 
added  together  is  incommenfurahle  to  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  them.  Let  the  reB  of  the  con- 
fir  uciion  be  in  this,  as  it  was  in  the propofitiosgo- 
ing  before.  Wherfore  the  whole  parallelogrammc 
C  L  is  mediall,  (for  it  is  equall  to  that  which  is 
made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  dr  G  B  added 
together, which  is  fuppofed  to  be  mediall)  .Where¬ 
fore  the  line  CM  is  rationall  and  incommenfura - 
ble  in  length  to  the  line  CD:  and  in  like  manner 
the  parallelogramme  F  L  is  mediall  Wherfore  al¬ 
fo  the  line  F  M  is  rationall  and  incommenfurahle 
in  length  to  the  line  C  D.And  forafmuch  as  that 


0 


N 


KM 


$ 


H  b 


which 


ofEuclides  Elementes .  FoL^qq. 

which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  added  together,  is  incommenfurabk 
to  that  which  is  contained 3 under  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B  tivife ,  therefore  the  parallelograms 
e quail  to  them, namely ,  the paralklogrammes  C  L  and  F  Lare  incommenfurabk  the  one  to 
the  other  Wherf  ore  alfo  the  lines  C  M  and  F  M  are  incommenfurabk  in  length, and  they  are 
both  r ationd.  Wherf  ore  they  are  ratio  nail  comenfurabk  in  power  only  Wherf  ore  the  line  C  F 
is  a  refiduall  line.  I  fay  mcreouer  that  it  is  a fxt  refiduall  line. Let  the  ref  of  the  demonfi ra¬ 
tion  be  as  it  was  in  the  former  proportions.  And forafmuch  as  the  lines  A  G  and  B  G  are  in¬ 
commenfurabk  in  power,  therfore  their f quarts, that  is,  the  par allUogr amines  which  are  e- 
quallvnto  them, namely, the parallelogrammes  C  H  and  K  L  are  incommenfurabk  the  one 
to  the  other  Wherf  ore  alfo  the  line  C  K  is  incommenfurabk  in  length  to  the  line  K  M.Wher- 
fore(  by  the  i  S  .of the  tenth  )the  line  CM  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  F  M  by  the  fquare  of 
aline  incommenfurabk  in  lengthto  the  lineC  M.  And  neither  of  the  lines  CMnor  F'Mis 
commenfurabk  in  length  to  the  rationall  lineC  D  Wherf  ore  the  line  CF  is  afixt  refiduall 
line  Wherf  ore  the fquare  of  aline  making  with  a  medial fuperfcies  the  whole fuperfcies  me- 
diall  applied  to  a  rationall  lme,maketh  the  breadth  or  other  fide  a  fixt  refiduall  line ;  which 
was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 

f  The  7  9- Theorems*  The  103.  Tropojttion. 

A  line  commenfurabk  in  length  to  a  refduall  linens  it felfe  alfo  a  ref  dual! 
line  of  the felfe fame  order . 


B 


c 

1— 


Vppofe  that  A  B  be  a  refiduall  line,  imto  which  let  the  line  CD  be  commenfu¬ 
rabk  in  length .  T  hen  I fay,  that  the  line  C  D  is  alfo  a  refiduall  line,  and  of the 
felfe fame  order  of  refiduall  lines  that  the  line  AB  is  .  F  or  forafmuch  as  the 
line  A  B  is  a  refiduall  line,  let  the  line  conueniently  ioyned  vnto  it  befuppofed 
to.be  B  E .  Wherefore  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  are  ra¬ 
tionall  commenfurabk  in  power  onely  .  As  the  line 
A  B  is  to  the  line  C  E>,fo  ( by  the  12.  of  the fixt)  let 
the  line  BE  be  to  the  line  D  F .  Wherefore  {by  the 
12  .of the fft )  as  one  of  the  antecedentes  is  to  one  of 
the  confequentes,fo  are  all  the  antecedentes  to  all 
the  confequentes  Wherefore  as  the  line  A  b  is  to  the 

line  C  D,fo  is  the  whole  line  <^AE  to  the  whole  line  C  F ,  and  the  line  BE  totheiine  D  F. 
Wherefore  ( by  the  1 0  .of  the  tenth)  the  line  A  E  is  commenfurabk  in  length  to  the  line  C  F, 
and  the  line  BE  to  the  line  D  F .  But  the  line  A  E  is  rationall.  Wherefore  the  line  C  F  is  alfo 
rationall .  And  in  like fort  the  line  D  F  is  rationall,  for  that  the  line  BE,  to  whom  if  is 
commenfurabk,  is  alfo  rationall.  And  for  that  at  the  line  B  E  is  to  the  line  A  E,fo  is  the  line 
D  F  to  the  line  C  F .  But  thclines  B  E  and  A  E  are  commenfurabk  in  power  onely  :  Where¬ 
fore  the  lines  C  D  and  D  F  are  commenfurabk  in  power  onely .  Wherefore  the  line  CD  is  a 
refiduall  line .  1 fay  moreouer,  that  it  is  a  refiduall  line  of  the  felfe  fame  order  that  the  line 
A  B  is .  For  for  that  as  we  haue  before  faid,  as  the  line  iW E  is  to  the  line  C  F,fo  is  the  line 
BE  to  the  line  D  F,  therefore  alternately,  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  BE,fois  the  line  C  F 
to  the  line  D  F  .  But  the  line  A  F  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  E  B,  cither  by  the  fquare  of 
a  line  commenfurabk  in  length  tothe  line  A  E,  or  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurabk 
in  length  to  the  line  A  E  .If  AE  be  in  power  more  then  B  E,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  com¬ 
menfurabk  in  length  toAE,  then  the  line  C  F  fall  alfo  (by  the  t^.of the  tenth)  beinpowcr 
more  then  the  line  D  F,  by  the fquare  of  a  line  commenfurabk  in  length  tothe  line  C  F,  and 
fo  if the  line  A  E  be  commenfurabk  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  put  forafmuch  as  the  line 

FP.iij.  AE 


CF  brniedi 

refiduall . 


The  fixt  Se* 
nary » 

Contfruflioite 


Demonjlra*-- 

tm. 


C  D  codudei 
a  refidmll 
line* 


t. 

s. 

3* 

•4* 

5* 

6. 

Note* 


ConClruHion. 

Demon /ha¬ 
iku. 


The  tenth  TSooke 

ME  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  C  F,  therefore  (  by  the  12.  of  the  tenth)  the  lint 
C  F  pall alfo  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame  rationall  line.  Wherefore  either  of  the 
lines  A  B  and  CD  is  afrit  refiduall  line .  And  if the  line  B  E  be  commenfurable  in  length 
t£  the  rationall  line  put,forafmuch  as  the  line  B  E  is  commenfurable  in  length  tot  he  line 
D  F,  therefore  the  line  D  F  pall  alfo  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  put: 
and  then  fit  her  of  the  lines  A  B  and  CD  is  a fecond  refdmll  line .  And  if  neither  of the  lines 
A  E  nor  BE  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  ra¬ 
tionall  line  put, then  neither  of  the  lines  C  F  nor  g _ _ p_ _ _ _ _ _ & 

D  F pall  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame 

raiiondliim  (  by  the  r  3. of  the  teth) .  Andfo  either  c  o _  _ _  f 

of  the  lines  AB&  CD  is  a  third  refiduall  line.  But 
if  the  line  A  E  he  in  power  more  the  the  line  B  E,  by 
the fquare  of  a  line  mcomenfurablein  length  to  the 

line  A  E,the  line  C  F  pall  in  like fort  ( by  the  r  4. of 'the  tenth )  be  in  power  more  then  the  line 
D  E,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  C  F :  and  then  if the  line 
A  E  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line, the  line  CF  pall  alfo  in  like  fort  be 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the fame  rationall  line  •  and  fo  either  of  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D 
■is  a  fourth  refiduall  line.  And  if  the  line  BE  be  come  fur  able  in  legth  to  the  rationall  line,  the 
line  D  F  Pall  alfo  be  comen  fur  able  in  legth  to  the fame  line:  andfo  either  of  the  lines  A  B  & 
CD  is  a p ft  refiduall  line .  And  if  neither  of  the  lines  E  nor  B  E  be  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  rationall  line  ,in  like fort  neither  of  the  lines  C  F  nor  D  F  pall  be  comenfurable 
in  legth  to  the  fame  rational  line.  And fo  either  of  the  lines  AB  &  C  D  is  a fxt  re  ft  dual  line. 
Wherefore  the  line  CD  is  a  refidtull  line  of  the felfe fame  order  that  the  line  A  B  is .  A  line 
therfore  common  ft Treble  in  length  to  a  refiduall  line,  is  it felfe  alfo  a  refiduall  line  of  the  felfe 
fame  order :  which  was  required  to  be proued. 

As  before  touching  binomiall  lines,  Co  alfo  touching  refiduall  lines,  this  is  to  be 
noted,  that  aline  commenfurable  in  length  to  a  refiduall  line,  is  alwayes  a  refiduall  line 
of  the  felfe  fame  order  that  the  refiduall  line  is,vnto  whom  it  is  comenfurable ,  as  hath 
before  in  this  103  .propofitio  bene  proued.But  if  a  line  be  comenfurable  in  power  only 
to  a  refiduall  line, then  followeth  it  not,  yeait  is impoffible,  that  that  line  Ihould  bea 
refiduall  of  the  felf  fame  order  that  the  refidual  line,  is  vnto  whom  it  is  commenfurable 
in  power  onely .  Howheit  thofe  two  lines  (hall  of  neceffitie  be  both  either  of  the  three 
firflorders  of  refiduall  iines,or  of  the  three  laft  orders  :  which  is  not  hard  to  proue,  if 
ye  marke  diligently  the  former  demonftration,  and  that  which  was  fpoken  of  binomi¬ 
al!  lines  as  touching  this  matter. 

fThe  So.Theoreme.  The  104.  Prof  option. 

A  line  commenfurable  to  a  rnediall  refiduall  linefis  it felfe  alfo  a  medial  re * 
fiduall  line3and  of  the  felfe  fame  order. 

Fppofe  that  Althbea  mediall  refiduall  line,  vnto  whom  e  let  the  line  C  D  be 
commenfurable  in  length  and  in  power, or  in  power  onely.T hen  l fay  that  C  D 
is  alfo  a  mediall  refiduall  line, and  of the felfe fame  order.  For forafmuch  as  the 
l we  A  B  is  a  mediall  refiduall  line ,  let  the  line  conueniently  ioynedvnto  it  be 
B  E  ••  wherefore  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  are  mediall  com-  A  $  E 

men  fur  able  in  power  onely  .  As  A  B  is  to  C  ijfc  ,fo  by  the 

2  2.  of the  fixth  )  let  B  E  he  to  D  F .  And  in  like  fort  as  in  c  f  _ I 

the  former  fo  alfo  in  this  may  we  proue,  that  the  line  A  E 
is  commenfurable  in  length  and  in  power, or  in  power  one- 

t’.  ly  vnto 


cfSuclides  Elementcs.  FoL^ou 

lyvnto  the  line  C  F ,&  the  line  B  E  to  the  line  D  F .  Wherefore  (  by  the  2$.  ofthetenthfhe 
line  G  V  is  a  mediall  line,  and  the  line  D  F  is  alfo  a  mediali  line  ,for  that  it  is  cowmen f ura- 
hie  to  the  medtall  line  B  E .  And  in  like  fort  the  lines  C  F  and  I)  F  are  commerfurahlein 
■power  onely: for  that  they  haue  the felfe fame  proport io  the  one  to  the  other, that  the  lines  A  E 
and  E  B  haue, which  are  commenfurable  in  power  onely  Wherefore  the  line  C  D  is  a  mediall 
ref duall  line. 1 fay  more  oner  that  it  is  of the  felfe fame  order  that  the  line  A  B  is. For  for  that 
as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  B  E  fo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  line  D  F  .  But  as  the  line  A  E  is  to 
the  line  B  E,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E  to  the  parallelogrammc  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  E  and  BE  (by  thefrsi  of the fxth )  :  and  as  the  line  C  F  is  to  the  line  D  F ,  fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  CF  to  the parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  DF. 
Wherefore  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  parallelogramme  contajned  vnder  the  lines 
A  E  and  B  E  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  F  to  the  parallelogramme  contayned  under  the 
lines  C  F  and  D  F  Wherefore  alternately  as  the fquare  of the  line  A  E  is  to  the fquare  of  the 
line  C  F  ,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  ,to  theparallelo- 
gramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  G  F  and  D  F.  But  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E  is  conrnun - 
fur  able  to  the fquare  of  the  line  C  F  ( for  the  line  A  E  is  cowmen fur able  to  the  line  C  F ) . 
Wherefore  alfi 0  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  ,is  commenfu - 
rable  to  the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  D  F  .  Wherefore  if  the  pa - 
rallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  be  rationall ,  the  parallelogramme 
alfo  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  F  D  fall  be  rationall .  And  then  either  of  the  lines 
A  B  and  C  D  is  a frH  mediall  red  duall  line .  But  if the  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder 
the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  be  mediall,  the  parallelogramme  alfo  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  F 
and  F  D  full  be  alfo  mediall  ( by  the  corollary  of  the  25  .of the  teth ) :  and  fo  either  of  the  lines 
A  B  and  C  D  is  a fecond  mediall  ref  duall  line  Wherefore  the  line  CD  is  a  mediall  refdu- 
all  line  of  the felfe  fame  order  that  the  line  A  B  is.  A  line  therefore  comm  enfur able  to  a  me¬ 
diall  ref  duall  line, is  it felfe  alfo  a  mediall  ref duall  line  oft  he felfe fame  order,  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  demonfrated- 


This  Theoreme  is  vnderftanded  generall  y,  that  whether  aline  be  commenfurable 
in  length  &in  poweigor  in  power  onely  to  a  mediall  refiduall  line,itis  it  felfe  alfo  a  me¬ 
diall  refiduall  line,and  of  the  felfe  fame  order,which  thing  alfo  is  to  be  ynderfbmded  of 
the  three  Theoremes  which  follow. 


An  other  demonftration  after  Campane. 

Suppofe  that  Abe  a  mediall  refiduall  line ,  vnto 
whome  let  the  line  2  be  commenfurable  in  length,or  in  A 
power  onely.  And  take  a  rationall  line  C  D ,  vnto  which  *  “  ' 

apply  the  parallelogramme  C  E  equal!  to  the  fquare  of  5 
the  line^and  vnto  the  line  FE  (  which  is  equall  to  the  1  ‘  “  5 

line  CD)  apply  the  parallelogramme  F  G  eqnall  to  the  r  ^ 

fquare  of  the  line  E  .  Now  then  the  parallelogram mes  - — - - - 

C  E  and  FG  fhal!  be  commenfurable ,  for  that  the  lines 
A,B  are  commenfurable  in  power:  wherefore  by  the  1. 
of  the  fixth  and  10.  ofthisbooke,the  lines  D  E and  /  G 
are  commenfurable  in  length  .  Now  then  if  A.  be  afirft 
m  ediall  refiduall  line  ,  then  is  the  line  D  E  2  fecond  refi¬ 
duall  line  by  the  98. of  this  booke  :  andiftheline^fbea 

fecond  mediall  refiduall  line, then  is  the  line  D  e  a  third  __ _ , _ - 

refiduall  line  by  the  99  .of  this  booke.  But  if  DE  be  a  fe-  G  £  P 

cond  refiduall  line ,  G  E  alfo  fhall  be  a  fecond  refiduall 
linefby  the  103  .-of  this  boke ).  And  if  D  E  be  a  third  re- 

PP.iiij, 


C  D  preued  a 
mediall* 


1. 


3. 


Conf.tpMkn* 


Vemcujl  ra¬ 
tion. 


fiduafl 


Conjlrhftkn, 

Vemonjlra - 
tm. 


Cmlmtion. 


The  tenth  *Boo%e 

fiduallline3C?  E  alfo  fhall  (by  the  fame)  be  alfo  a  third  refiduall  line.  Wherefore  it  followeth  by  the  9%. 
and  93  .of  this  booke,that  B  is  either  a  firft  medial  refiduall  line  orafecond  medial!  refiduall  linejaccor 
ding  as  the  line  A  is  fuppofed  to  be :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


f  T he  8 i.  T heoreme * 


The  jos.  {propofition. 


A  line  commenfurable  to  a  lejfe  line:  is  it  felfe  alfo  a  lejfe  line. 

A  B  be  Or  Ufa  line  junto  whom  let  the  line  CT)  be  commenfurable. T hen 
I  fay,  that  the  line  C  D  is  alfo  a  lejfe  line .  For  let  the fame  conf ruction  be  in  thisv 
juW$ ajfc  that  was  in  the  former  Propoftions .  And  forafnuch  as  the  lines  A  E  and  E  B  are 
incommenfur able  in  power, therefore  (by  the  22. 
of  the  fxt,  and  10.  of  the  tenth )  the  lines  CF  & 

F  D  are  incommenfur  able  in  power.  Againe  (by  A  3  e 

the  22.  of  the  fxt)  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  E  *  ~i  “  4 

is  to  the  fquare  of the  line  B  E,fo  is  the fquare  of  c _ _r> _ F 

the  line  C  F  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  F  .Wher- 
forc  by  copofition  as  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  E 
and  B  E  are  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  E,fo  are 

the fquares  of  the  lines  C  F  and D  F,  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  F :  and  alternately,  as  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  are  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  C  F  and  D  F,fo  is  the  fquare 
of the  line  BE  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  F.  But  the fquare  of the  line  B  E  is  commenfurable 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  F  ( for  the  lines  B  E  and  D  F  are  commenfurable  )  .  Wherefore 
that  which  is  made  of  the fquares  of the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  added  together, is  commenfurable 
to  that  which  is  made  of  the f quares  of  the  lines  C  F  and  D  F  added  together. But  that  which 
is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  added  together,  is  rationall .  Wherefore  that 
which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  CF  and  D  F  added  together,  is  alfo  rationall.  A- 
gaine,  for  that  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  E  and  BE,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  F  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  'under 
the  lines  C  F  and  DF  (  as  we  declared  in  the  Propoftion  next  going  before  J  therefore  ah 
ternately,  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  o AE  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  F,fo  is  the  parallelo - 
gramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  BE,  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder 
the  lines  CF  andD  F .  But  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E  is  commenfurable  to  the fquare  of  the 
line  C  F,  for  the  lines  AE&CF  are  commenfurable .  Wherefore  the parallelogramme  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E,  is  commenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  contained 
vnder  the  lines  C  F  and  D  F  .But  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  E  and 
BE  is  mediall  .Wherefore  the parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  CF  and  DFis 
alfo  mediall .  Wherefore  the  lines  CF  and  D  F  are  incommenfur  able  in  power,  hauing  that 
which  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  rationall,  and  the  parallelogramme  contai¬ 
ned  vnder  them  mediall .  Wherefore  the  line  C  D  is  a  lefa  line .  A  line  therefore  commenfu¬ 
rable  to  a  lefe  line ,  is  it  felfe  alfo  a  leffe  line :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

An  other  demonftratiori. 

Suppofe  that  A  be  a  lejfe  line,  and  vnto  A  let  the  line  B  be  commenfurable  whether  in 
length  and  power, or  in  power  onely.  Then  1  fay  that  B  is  a  lejfe  line.  Take  a  rationall  lineC 
D.  And  vnto  the  line  C  D  apply  (by  the  44  of the firf)  the  parallelogramme  C  E  e quail  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  A, and  making  in  hndth  the  line  CF.  Wherefore  (by  the  loo.propo- 

fition 


Fol. 


£ithn) the  lineC  F  is  a fourth  refiduall line.Vnto  tlx:  line  FEaff fry 

(by  the famc)tbe farallelogramme  E  H  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  A _ _ — 

line  B,and  making  in  breadth  the  line  F  H.  "Now  forafmueh  as  the  ^ 

line  A  is commenfurable  to  the  dine  B,  therefore  alfo,  the  fquare  of  * - - 

the  line  A  it  Comen  fur  able  to  the fquare  of the  line  B.  But  vnto  the  c  f  tt 

fquare  of  the  line  A  is  equall  the  fardklogramme  C  E,  &  vnto  the 
fquare  of  the  line  Bis  equal  the  far  allelogramme  EH  Wherf  ore  the 
farallelogramme  C  E  is  commenfurable  to  the  far  allelogramme  E 
H.  But  as  the  farallelogramme C  E  is  to  the  farallelogramme  E  H, 
fo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  line  F  H  Wherf  ore  the  line  C  F  is  commen¬ 
furable  in  length  to  the  line  F  H.  But  the  lineC  F  is  a  fourth  rep 
duall  line.  Wherf  ore  the  line  F  H  is  alfo  a  fourth  ref  duall  line  (by 
the  1 03. of  the  tenth):  and  the  line  F  E  is  rationall.But  if  a  fuferfi- 
cies  be  contained  vnder  a  rationall  line  ,and  a  fourth  ref  duall  lyne, 
the  line  that  containeth  in  fewer  that fuf  erf cies  is  (by  the  9  4.0ft he 
tenth )  a  leffe  lyne.  But  the  line  B  containeth  in  fewer  the fuf  erf  cies  t>  £ 

E  H. Wherf  ore  the  line  Bis  a  lefe  line;  which  was  required  to  be  f ro¬ 
ved.  - 


fT he  82.  T heoreme.  The  106.  Trogofition. 

jiline  commenfurable  to  a  lyne  making  Pith  a  rational l  fugerficies  the 
Poole  fugerficies  mediall fs  it  felfe  alfo  a  lyne  makingPtth  a  rationall  ju* 
gerficies  the  Poole  fugerficies  mediall 


B 


V 


Vffofe  that  A  B  be  a  line  making  with  a  rationall fuf  erf  cies  the  whole  fuf  erf- 
cies  mediall, vnto  whom  let  the  line  C  D  be  commenfurable. T hen  l  fay  that  the 
lineC  D  is  a  line  making  with  a  rationall fuf  erf cies  the  whole  fuf  erf  cies  me- 

_ diallVnto  the  line  A  B  lei  the  line  conueniently  ioyned  be  B  E.  Wherefore  the 

\  inesA  E  andE  B  are  incommcnfur able  infowerfauing  4 
that  which  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  me- ' 
dialfand  the  farallelogramme  contained  vnder  them  ra-  c 
tionall.Let  the  conf  ruction  be  in  this  as  it  was  in  the  for¬ 
mer  frof  of  tions.  And  in  like  fort  may  we  froue  that  as  the 

line  A  E  is  to  the  line  B  Efo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  line  D  F,  and  that  that  which  is  made  of 
the fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  added  together  is  commenfurable  to  that  which  is  made 
eft  he fquares  of  the  lines  C  F  and  D  F  added  together, and  that  that  which  is  contained  vn¬ 
der  the  lynes  A  E  and  E  B,is  in  like  fort  commenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder 
the  lines  C  F  and  D  F.  Wherf  ore  alfo  the  lines  C  F  and  D  F  are  commenfurable  in  fower, 
hauing  that  which  is  made  of their  fquares  added  together  mediall, and  that  which  is  contai - 
.  ned  vnder  them  rationall.  Wherf  ore  the  line  CD  is  a  lyne  making  with  a  rationallfuferf- 
cies  the  whole  fuf  erf  cies  mediall.  Wherf  ore  a  line  commenfurable  to  aline  making  with  a 
rationall fuf  erf  cies  the  whole fuf  erf  cies  mediall, is  it felfe  alfo  a  lyne  making  with  a  rational 
fuf  erf  cies  the  whole fuf  erf  cies  mediall ;  which  was  required  to  be  demonfi rated. 


An  other  demonftration. 

Suffofe  that  A  be  a  line  making  with  a  rationall fuf  erf  cies  the  whole fuf  erf  cies  mediall, 

and 


Vemo'tttra* 
t'm * 


Confruftion* 


Vmonttra' 

turn. 


VsnjlruHkn, 

Demonstra¬ 

tion* 


ConftruftioTU 

Demonstra¬ 

tion, 


and  vnto  it  let  the  lyne  B  he  commenfurable  either  in  length  and  in  power, or  in  power  onely. 
T hen  l fay  that  Bis  d  lync  making  with  a  rationall  fuperficies  the 
ivholc fuperficies  mediall'.T ake  a  rational  line  C  D,and  vntothe  line 
C  D  apply  the  pdrdllelograrnme  C  E  equal  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A 
and  making  in  breadth  the  lyne  C  F.  Wherfore  (bythcioi.propo- 
ftion  )the  lyne  CF  is  a p ft  refidualllyne.iAgaine  vnto  the  line  F  E 
apply  the  parallelogramme  FG  equaUfothe  fquare  of  the  line  B,and 
makyng  in  breadth  the  lyne  F  H.xtywforafmuch  as  the  line  A  is  co¬ 
men  fir  able  to  the  lyne  B,t her  fore  the fquare  of  the  lyne  A  is  comme- 
furable  to  the  fquare  of the  line  B.  But  vnto  the  fquare  of the  lyne  A 
is  equall  the  parallelogramme  C  E,and  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  B 
is  equall  the  parallelogramme  F  G.  Wherfore  the  parallelogramme  C 
E  is  commen fur  able  to  the  parallelogramme  F  G.  Wherefore  the  line 
C  F  is  alfo  comm er fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  F  H.But  the  line  C  F 
is  a  f ft  rcfduall  line  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  F  H  is  afiftref dual  line. 

And  the  line  F  E  is  rationall .  But  if  a  fuperficies  be  contayned  vn- 


- - — 

B 

- -A 

c 

:  H 

'  -- 

,  >  V,- 

,  f.  *.• 

in  power  that fuperficies, is  ( by  the  9$.  of the  tenth)  a  lyne  making  with  a  rationall fuperficies 
the  whole fuperficies  mediatl.But  the  lyne  B  containeth  in  power  the  parallelogramme  F  G. 
Wherfore  the  lyne- B  is  a  lyne  making. with  a  rationall fuperficies, the  whole  fuperficies  medi- 
all:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 

y  4  :  ’  .  '  .  UVs-  ■  ..-.j-v 

V:  f  The  83,  Tbeoreme.  The  107.  Tropofition.  1 

JL  line  comenfurable  to  q  linepnaking  Toith  a  medial! fuperficies  fihe  TP  hole 
fuperficies  medially  is  ttfelfe  alfo  a  line  making  Toith  a  mediallfuperficies 
the  Tchole fuperficies  mediall. 

,  \  •  •  ....  ,  „  I,  .  +  •  ‘  .  ‘  '  .  ‘  •.  A 

Fppofethat  cW  B  be  a  line  makingwith  a  mediallfuperficies  the  whole  fuperfi¬ 
cies  mediall, vnto  whome  let  the  line  CD  be  commenfurable.  T hen  J fay  that 
the  line  C  D  is  alfo  a  line  making  with  a -mediall  fuperficies  the  whole  fuperfi- 

.  cies  mediall. For  vnto.  the  line  A  B  let  the  line  conueniently  ioyned  bc(B  E.And 

let  the  refi  of the  confiruction  be  in  this  as  it  was  in  the  former  prop  0 fit  ions.  Wherefore  the 
lines  A.E  and  B  E  are  incomen  fur- aUe  in  power,  hauing  that  which  is  made  of their fquares 
added  together  mediall, and  that  which  is  contained  vnder  them  alfo  mediall,and  mor toner 
thatwhich  is  made  of  their  fquares  added  together  -  B  E 

is  incommenfurable  to  that  which  is  contained  vn-  ^ - - - - - r - - 

der  them. But  the  lines  A  E  and  B  E  (as  wehaue  be-  Q 

foreproued)  are  commenfurable  to  the  lines  C  F  &  ' — - 1  *  ’ 

D  F,  and  that  which  is  made  of  the  fquares  of  the 

lines  A  E  and  BE  added  together, is  commenfurablito  thatwhich  is  made  of  the f quarts  of 
the  lines  CF  and  F  D added  together, and  the parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  E  and  B  E  is  commenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  C]F  and 
D  F  Wherfore  the  lines  C  F  and  D  F  are  incommenfurable  in  power  hauing  thatwhich  is 
made  of their  fquares  added  together  mediall,and  that  which  is  contained  vnder  them  alfo 
mediall, and  moreouer  that  which  is  made  of  their fquares  added  together,  is  incommenfu¬ 
rable  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  them.Wherfore  the  line  CD  is  a  line  making  with  a 
mediall  fuperficies  the  whole  fuperficies  mediall.  kA line  therefore  commenfurable  to  a  lyne 


cfEuchdes  Elements 


Foil 


matengvokh  d  media'll  fuperfeies  the  whole fuperficm  mediall, is  it  fife  ulfi  a  line  maty  fig 
wjh  a  mediall fuperfeies  the  whole fup  erodes  mediall:  which  was  required  to  leproued.  ‘ 

This  propofition  m.Vy  aii"o  be  an  other  way  demonftrated>as  the  three  fqryner  propofitions  were.  If 
vpon  arationaliiineyouapply'paraflelogrammesequail  to  thefqiuresofthe lines  AB  and  CD,  the 
breadthes  of  which  parallelogrames  fhall  be  eche  a  fixth  refidual  line,  and  therforc  the  lines,  which  co- 
tayrietheip  in  powcr,namely, the  lines  A  Band  CD  fifellbe  both  fuch  Unes  as  is  required  nl  the  pro- 
pofitioiijwhich  is  eafy  to  conclude  marking  the  order  of  the  demonlfratron  in  the  rhree  former  pro- 
pofitions.  '  •  : 


f[  The  84.  T heoreme* 


be  108. 


to  fit  ton. 


If  from  a  ration  all fuperfeies  he  taken  away  a  mediall  fiperficies  ?  the  line 
Upbich  containetb  m  power  the  fuperfides  remay ning ,  is  one  of  theje  two  ir • 
rationall Unes  yiameiy  gather  a  refiduall line,  or  a  left’  line. 


-yrzy'~s  ypp0ft  that  E  C  be  a  rationall fuperfeies  f  and from  it  take  away  a  mediall fii- 
x  ‘  *  'V  perfeies, namely,  B  D  .F  hen  1  fay , that  the  line  which  containeih  in  power  the 
fjtiperf cies  rerfityning, namely , the  fupcrfc-iesEC,isoneofthejetwo.irratiohatl 
fiUwcs,, namely,  either., a  refiduall  line r  or  a  lejfe  line .  T ake  a  rationall  line  EG. 
Ardvpbn  F  G  deferile  (by  the  44-.ofthefrJl)  a  rectangle  parallelogramme  G  H  equall  to 
■the fuperfides  B  C.  And  from  thefpalUlogramjnt  GB  take  away the  parallelogramme  G  K 
re  quail  to  the  fuperfeies  B  p  > Wherefore  (. by  the  third  common 
f enterics  y  the fnpejfi ties  remayning,  namely,  EC,  is  equall  to 
the  parallelogramme  remafmng,n  finely, to  Lpi .  ’ 'Amfor.af 
much  as  B  C  is  rationall, and  B  D  Ts  niedia.ll, and  B  C  is  equall 
to  the  parallelogramme  G  B,afid"B  jD  ip  the.  paratBldgramint 
G  K  :  therefore  G  Ft  ifirduonallfqnd'WK.  is  medifiFahd  the 
parallelogramme  G  Ft  isappfed  vnto  the  rationall  Itye  F  G. 

Wherefore  (by  the  20  .of  the  tenth)  the  line  F 11  is  rationall 
;and  commen fur  able 
lelogranrme  G  K  ' 

fere  Qy  the  zy.oj  ineienpj J 


S'®- 

. 

F  •,] 

C  H 

L -  ' 

; 

to  thelineF.  GWhenfot -e( bytyfi 'Ajfumpt.ofity  12 fifths tenthjjthc line  F  H is incommen* 
'far able  in  length  to  the  line  F  K .  And  they. are  both  rationall.  Wherefore' the  lines  F  H  and 
Jf/Cvwj?  ^f^k^rfi'thfitye''K  Wisayifidftfillfiifip: 

and  the  line  conveniently  loped  vnto  it  is  IFF  .  Now  the  line  E  Bis  in  power  > more  then  thfi 
iine.fi  F,  either,  by]  the fquare  of  a  hnc  conmerfurahk in  length  to  the  line  F  H,  or  by  the 
fqu.areofaFmhycommenf.  r able  in  lengthto  the.  line  F  H .FirB  let  it  bt  in  power  more  then 

.1  T:  .  .  ft-  r.W  j’  -11  „  A  JjF  dtifs.h  ~  ill  x/  x  _  ^  7.  _  1.  '  3"nn  rt  .1.11  t 


line  K  B  is  afrfi  refiduall'lfne .  But  if  a  fuperfeies  be  contained  vnder'a  rationall  line,  and 
afrfi  refiduall ]fe,:  the  line  that  coptameth  in  power  thqtfujer ficus ,  is-  (  by  the  pi.  of  the 
tenth )  a  refiduall  line .  Wherefore  the  line  which  containeih  in  power  L  IF,  that  is,  the  fuper- 
'fifjes  E  C,  is-a  refiduall  line .  But  if  the  line.  H  F  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  F  If ,  by  the 
jfqiiare  of aline  incommenfrable  in  length  to  the  line  F  H,  and  the  whole  line  F  H  is  com- 
'penfurdhle  in  length  toihe  rafimdl Megwefi-  F  :G'-.  Wherefore  the  line  K  H  is  a  fourth 
refiduall  line .  But  a  tine  containing  in  power  a  fuperfides  contained  winder  a  rationall  line 
and  a fourth  refiduall  line,  is  a  lejfe  h  fief  by  ^  the  P4..of 'the  tenth  \  . Wherefore  the  line  that 
■containeih  in  power  the fuperfeies  L  B,that  is,  the fuperfides.  EC,  is  a  lejfe  line  .  if  there¬ 
fore from  a  rationall fuperfeies  be  taken  away  a  mediall fuperfides, the  line  which  cotitaincth 

in 


S euenth  Se¬ 
nary. 


ConjlmUiont 

If  6 

V.  vV.-  V  \.\h? 

Femofifirar- 

tithL. 


In  power  the fuperfdes  ferny  King,  is  one  of thefe  two  irratiomll  lines ,  namely,  either  a  reft 
duall  linear  a  left  Line :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

f  The  8y.  Theoreme.  The  top.  Tropofition. 

If  from  a  mediall fuperficies  he  taken  ayvqy  a  rationall fuperfdes  3  the  line 
"Which  contayneth  in  power  the fuperfdes  remayning  is  one  of thefe  two  try 
rationall  lines,  namely  either  afirf  mediall  refduall  line ,  or  aline  ma* 
king  "With  a  rationall  fuperfdes  the  * whole fuperfdes  mediall 


Vppofe  that  B  C  be  a 
Ko>  **  '■mediall  fuperfdes  and 
from  it  take  away  a  rati 
onal fuperfdes, namely , 


Vemonffra- 

sion. 


i. 


2. 


-  BD.  T  hen  J fay  that  the  line  which 

.  contayneth  in  power  the  fuperfdes 
remayning ,  namely ,  the'  fuperfdes 
EC  is  one  of  thefe  two  ir rationall 
lines ,  either  afirf  mediall  refduall 
line, or  a  line  making  with  a  rational 

Conftrttciian*  ftperf dies  the  whole fuperfdes  mediall. Take  a  rationall  line  F  G,  and  let  the  reft  of  the  con - 
f ruction  be  in  this  as  it  was  in  the former propoftion  .  Wherefore  it  follow  eth  that  the  line 
FH  is  rationall  and incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  G  (  by  the  22.  of  the  tenth  ). 
And  that  the  line  K  F  is  (by  the  20.  of  the  tenth  )  rationall  and  commen fur  able  in  length  to 
the  line  F  G. Wherefore  the  lines  F  H  and  F  K  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely . 
Wherefore  K  H  is  a  refduall  line.  And  the  line  conveniently  ioyned  vnto  it  is  F  K.  T(cw  the 
line  F  H  is  in  penver  more  then  the  line  F  K ,  either  by  the  fquare  ofra  line  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  line  F II,  or  by  the fquare  of  a  lint  incommenfurable  in  length  '•unto  it .  if  the 
line  F  H  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  F  K  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length 
to  the  line  F  H  and  the  line  coueniently  ioyned  vnto  it,, namely  ,F  K,is  comen  fur  able  in  legth 
to  therationalUine  F  G  .  Wherefore the  line  JCH/V  a  fecond  refduall  line .  ^And  the  lint 
F  G  is  a  rationall  line. But  a  line  contayning  in  power  a fuperfdes  comprehended  'under  a  ra - ' 
tionall  line  and  a fecond  refduall  line  is  (by  the  p2.of the  tenth )  afirf  mediall  refduall  line. 
Wherefore  the  line  that  contayneth  in  power  the  fuperfdes  L  H  ,  that  is,  the fuperfdes  C  E 
is  afirf  mediall  refdudlVlne .  But  if  the  line  HE  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  F  K  by  tht 
fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  H  ,and  the  line  conueniently  ioyned , 
namely, the  line  F  K  is  commenfurable  in  length. to  the  rationall  line  put ,  namely ,  to  F  G: 
wherefore  the  line  K  HF  a fift  refduall  line.  Wherefore(b)  the  9$. of  the  tenth )  the  line  that 
contayneth  in  power  the  fuperfdes  L  W.,  that  is, the fuperfdes  EC,  is  a  line  making  with  a 
rationall  fuperfdes , the  whole fuperfdes  mediall-which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

yjT he  86.  T heoreme.  The  no.  Tropofition. 

If  from  n  mediall fuperficies  he  taken  away  a  mediall  fuperfictes  income 
men fiur  able  to  the  lohole fuperficies fithe  line  lohich  contained)  in  power  the 
fuperficies  lohich  remained? ,is  one  of thefe  two  irratiomll  dines,  namely, 
either  a  fecond  mediall  refidualllme,  or  a  line  making  K>ith  a  mediall  fa 

perficies  the  19 hole  fuperficies  mediall 

"  v  .  !  '•  '■  v  •  ■  '  -  '-V1  .•  As 


ofEuclides  Elements* ,  Fol*\ 04* 

S  in  the former  defriptions, fo  here  alfo  take  way fro  the  mediall  fuperfeies 
y  BC  a  media! I fuperfeies  B  D,  and  let  BD  be  incommenfurable  to  the  whole 
4  fuperfeies  B  C  .'T hen  J  Jay ,  that  the  line  which  containeth  in  power  thej'u- 


3 


E 


r 


DC  G 


ficies  mediall.  For for afnuch  as  either  of  the fe  feperfcieces 
B  C  and  B  D  is  mediall,  and  BC  is  incommen fur able  to  B  D, 
itfdlmeth  (by  the  2  2. of  the  tenth)  that  either  of  thefe  lines 
F  Hand F  K  is rationall  and incommenfurable  in  length  to 
the  line  F  G.  i^And for aj much  as  the  fuperfeies  B  C  is  incom¬ 
men  fur  able  to  the fuperfeies  B  D,  that  is ,  the  fuperfeies  G  H, 
to  the fuperfeies  G  K,  therefore  ( by  the frf  of  the fxt,  &  10. 
of  the  tenth)  the  line  F  His  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  F  KWherfore  the  lines  IF  F  and  F  K  are  rational  comen- 
furablein power  onely .  Wherefore  ( by'theyy  .  ofthetenth)the 

line  K  H  is  a  ref  duall line, and  the  line  coueniently  ioyned  <vnto  it  is  F  K.Now  the  line  H  F  is 
in  power  more  then  the  line  F  I<,  either  by  the  fquare  of a  line  comen  fir  able  in  length  to  the 
line  H  F,  or  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  it .  If  the  line  H  F  be  in- 
power  more  then  the  line  F  K,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  comen  fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  F II , 
and  neither  of  the  lines  H  F  nor  F  K  is  commenfirable  to  the  rationall  line  put  F  G .  Where¬ 
fore  the  line  K II  is  a  third  ref  duall .  But  the  line  G  F,that  is,  the  line  K  L,  is  rationa.ll.And 
a  red  angle  fuperfeies  contained  wader  a  rationall  line  and  a  third  ref  duall  line,  is  irratio- 
nall,  and  the  line  which  containeth  in  power  that  fuperfeies,  is  (by  the  $3.  of  the  tenth)  a  fe¬ 
cond  mediall  ref duall  line  •  Wherefore  the  line  that  coni aineth  in  power  the fuperfeies  L  H, 
that  is,  the fuperfeies  E  C  is  a  fecond  mediall  ref  duall  line .  But  if the  line  II F  be  in  power 
more  then  the  line  F  K,  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  IF, 
and  neither  of  the  lines  H  F  nor  F  K  is  commenfirable  in  length  to  the  line  F  G .  Wherefore 
the  line  IF  K  is  a  fxt  ref  duall  line.  But  a  line  containing  in  power  a  fuperfeies  contained  un¬ 
der  a  rationall  line  add  a  fxt  ref  duall  line,  is  (by  the  96  .of the  tenth )  a  line  making  with 
a  mediall  fuperfeies  the  whole  fuperfeies  mediall .  Wherefore  the  line  that  contdineth  in 
power  the fuperfeies  L II,  that  is,  the fuperfeies  E  C,  is  a  line  making  with  a  mediall fuper¬ 
feies  the  whole  fuperfeies  mediall.  if  therefore  from  a  mediall  fuperfeies  be  taken  away  a. 
mediall  fuperfeies,  incommenfurable  to  the  whole  fuperfeies,  the  line  that  cont aineth  in 
power  the fuperfeies  which  remaineth,  is  one  of the  two  irrationall  lines  remaining,  namely , 
either  a  fecond  mediall  ref  duall  line,  or  a  line  makingwitha  mediall  fuperfeies ’  the  whole 
fuperfeies  mediall :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Demmflra* 

mn. 


ft  The  87.  Theorems  The  in.  frobofitwi. 


Arefid.mil  line 3  is  not  one  And  the  fame  ititb  a  hinomiall  Ijne , 

V pp of  that  A  B  be  a  ref  duall  line.  T  hen  I fay  that  A  B  is  not  one  and  the  fame 
with,  a  kinomiall  line  .For  if it  be  pofjible  let  it  be  a  hinomiall  line.  And  take  a  ra-  r  « 
tionall  line  D  C .  And  ( by  the  4-4-ofthe  dr it )  vnto  the  line  C.  D  attk  a  reel  anal?  ^Mjtructhn* 


*4  Corollary* 


e 


t> 


G  E 


T  and F  Ear e  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  on - 
ttyjond  the  line  D  F  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  F 
Eby  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  line  DE&the  line  D  F,is  comenfurablein  legth 
to  the  rational  line  put  D  C.  Again  forafmuch  as  A  B 
is  by  poftion  a  binomiall  line  ^therefore  (by  the  do. 
of  the  tenth )the  line  D  E  is  afrfi  binomiall  line.De- 
uide  it  into  his  names  in  the  point  G.  And  let  D  G  be 
the  greater  name.  Wh  erf  ore  the  lines  T>  G  and  G  E 
are  rationall  commenfurable  inpower  onely.  And  the 
line  D  G  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  G  E  by  the 
fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  lyne 

D  G,and  the  line  D  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line put  D  C.  Wherefore 
the  line  D  F  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  D  G.Wherfore  ( by  the  13 .  of  the  tenth ) 
the  whole  line  D  F  is  commenfurable  in  legth  to  the  line  remaining,  namely  A  o  the  line  G  F. 
And  forafmuch  as  the  line  T)  F  is  come  fur  able  to  the  line  F  G,but  the  line  F  D  is  rationall. 
Wherfore  the  line  FG  is  alfo  rationall.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  F  D  is  commenfurable  w 
length  to  the  line  F  G,but  the  line  T>  F  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  E Wher¬ 
fore  the  line  F  G  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  E  (by  the  1 3 .  of  the  tenth )  and 
they. are  both  rationall  lines.  Wherfore  the  lines  G  F  and  F  E  are  rationall  commenfurable 
in  power  onely  Wherfore(by  they  3. of  the  tenth)  the  line  E  G  is  a  refiduall  line,  but  it  is  alfo 
rationall  (as  before  hath  bene proued)  .-which  is  impofible, namely , that  one  &  the  fame  line 
fhould  be  both  rationall  and  irrationall.  Wherfore  a  refiduall  line  is  not  one  and  the  fame 
with  a  binomiall  line,  that  is, is  not  a  binomiall  line:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfi rated. 

f  jf  Corollary . 

j[ refiduall  lyne  and  the  other  five  irrationall  lynes  following  it, are  neither 
mediall  lines  fiior  one  and  the fame  hetwenethemfelues.  that  is,  oneis  vtterly  of  a 
diners  kinde fro  an  other. F  or  the fquare  of amediall  line  applied  to  a  rationall  line,  maketh 
the  breadth  rationall  and  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  lyne ,  whereun- 
to  it  is  applied  (by  the  a  2.  of  the  tenth)  The  fquare  of  a  refiduall  line  applied  to  a  rationall 
line, maketh  the  breadth  a firfi  refiduall  line  ( by  the  07.  of  the  tenth ).  The fquare  of  afrfi 
mediall  refiduall  line  applied  to  a  rationed  line,  maketh  the  breadth  a fiecond  refiduall  lyne 
(by  the  9  S. of  the  tenth)  The  fquare  of  a  fiecond  mediall  refiduall  line  applied  vnto  a  ratio¬ 
nall  line)  maketh  the  breadth  a  third  refiduall  line  ( by  the  9  9  .of the  tenth )  T he  fquare  of 
a  leffeline  applied  to  a  rationall  line, maketh  the  breadth  a  fourth  refiduall  line  ( by  the  100. ' 
of  the  tenth  )The  fquare  of  a  line  making  with  a  rationall  fiuperficies  the  whole  fiuperficies 
mediall  applied  to  a  rationall  line, maketh  the  breadth  a fift  refiduall  line  (by  the  101.  of  the 
tenth)  And  the  fquare  of  a  line  making  with  a  mediall  fuperficies  the  whole  fiuperficies  medi¬ 
all  applied  to  a  rationall  line, maketh  the  breadth  a fixt  refiduall  line  ( by  the  1 02. of  the  tetb ) 
T{ow  forafmuch  as  thefie forefiaid fides  which  are  the  breqdthes  differ  both from  the  firfi 
breadth  for  that  it  is  rational, and  differ  alfo  the  one  fro  the  other, for  that  they  are  refiduals 
vfdiuers  orders  and  kindes,it  is  manifefi  that  thofe  irrationall  lines  differ  alfo  the  one  from 
the  other. And forafmuch  as  it' hath  beneprouedin  the  in.  propofition,  that  a  refidualUne 
is  not  one  and  the fame  with  a  binomiall  line, and  it  hath  alfo  bene  proued  that  the  fquares 
of a  refiduall  line  and  of thefiueirrationall  lines  that follow  it  being  applied  to  a  rational  line 
do  make  their  breadthes  one  of  the  refiduals  of that  order  of  which  they  were,  whofie fquares 
were  applied  to  the  rationall  line,likewife  alfo  the fquares  of 2  binomiall  line,  and  of the fine 
irrationdUines  which  follow  it,  being  applied  to  a  rationall  line,  do  make  the  breadthes  one 

°f 


ofSuclides  Elementes . 


FoLzcf* 


of  the  binomials  of  that  order  of  which  they  were, whofe fquares  were  applied  to  the  rational! 
line.Wherfore  the  irrationalllines  which follow  the  binomiall  line,  and  the  irrational!  lines 
which  follow  the  refduall  line, differ  the  one  from  the  other fo  that  all  the  irrationdl  lyncs 
are  13. in  number, namely, theft.  >.  •  • 


I 
z 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

JO 

II 
12 
S3 


Amediailline . 

A  binomiall  line. 

April  bimediall  line. 

Afecondbimediallline.  v.  >:i 

A  greater  line. 

A  line  containing  in  power  a  rational l fuperfcies  and  a  medial l fuperfcies, 
A  line  containing  in power  two  medial ffuperfeieees. 

A  refduall  line.  ^  v  -dH  v 

A frSt  mediall  refduall  lint: -  c 

A  fecond  mediall  refduall  line.  -  U  A  - 

A  left  line. 

A  line  making  with  a  rationdl fuperfcies  the  whole fuperfcies  mediall. 

A  line  making  with  a  mediall fuftrfeies  the  whole fuperfcies  mediall . 

V  ,  ’.  ( I  '  <  .  ••  -  :  ••  • 


he  88.  Theoreme. 


11 2,  Tropojition. 


A 


B 


H 


K 


C //  Cl W’Vb't  f/  W/  *<  t  /  w  #  I  tvi-fc  W  i  W  *V-  y  ,  W  //  Ul  .  4  t-trirf  fj-fc Iff  V  rVl  *■  V 

the  names  of  the  binomiall  line fy  in  the  felfe fame  proportion  moreouer 
that  refiduall  line  is  in  the  felfe fame  order  of  rejtdnall  lines,  that  the  lino* 
miall line  is  of  binomiall  lines. 

Vppofe  that  A  be  a  rational l  line ,  and  B  C  a  binomiall  line  whofe greater  name 
!  let  be  QlD.Andvnio  the fquare  of  the  line  A  let  the parallelogramme  contayned 
\vtfder  the  linesB  CandEE(fo  thatEE  be  the  breadth)  be  e  quail .  Then l  fay 
that  EE  is  a  refduall  line ,  whofe  names  are  commen fur  able  to  the  names  of the 
linomialllineB  G, which  names  let  be  C  D 
andD  B  ,  and  are  in  the  fame  proportion 
with  them  rand  moreouer  the  line  EF  is  in 
the felfe fame  order  of  ref  dual  lines, that  the 
line  B  C  is  of  binomiall  lines .  Vnto  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  let  the parallelogramme  p 

contayned.  vnder  the  lines  B  D  and G  bee-  - 

qu  a  l.  Nowfcrafnncb  as  that  which  is  cotajned  vnder  the  lines  B  C&EE  is  equal  to  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  D  and  G,therfore  reciprocally  ( by  the  i4.ofthe  fxth ) 
as  the  line  C  Bis  to  the  B  D  fobs  the  line  G  to  the  IrneEE  .But  the  line  B  C  is  greater  then 
the  line  B  D,  wherefore  the  UneG  is  greater  then  the  line  E  F .  Vnto  the  line  G  let  the  line 
EH  be  equall.Whereforc(by  the  iT.cf'ihefft  )astheliheCZ  B  is  to  the  line  BDfo  is  the  line 
H  E  to  the  line  F  E  Wherefore  by  denifon  {by  theif.  of  the  fifth  )  as  the  line  CD  is  to  the 
line.  B  D  fo  il  the  line  VLEto  the  line  P  E-.  IhmFiAo  the  f  E,fi  let  the  lint  f  /<:  be  to  the  line 

yfk(h'ow  this  is  to  be  done  we  will  declare  at  the  end  of  this  demonstration)  .  Wherefore  (  by 
the  re.  of  the  f ft )  the  whole  line  H  K  *  is-to  the  whole  line  K  F  as  the  line  F  K  is  to  the  line 
EL  E.Fcr  as  one  of  the  antecedentes  is  to  one  of  the  confequentes,fo  are  all  the  antecedent es  to 
ail  the  confequentes  .  But  as  the  line  F  K  is  the  Itne  K  E  ,fo  is  the  line  C  D  to  the  line  D  B 
(for  F  K  //  to  E  K  as  H  F  is  to  F  E,andE{  F  is  to  F  E  as  C  D  is  D  By  .Wherforef by  the  1 1 . 


The  dettvmU, 
nation  hath  r, 
fundry  partes 
orderly  to  be 
proued. 


Conjlruftion. 


Demnffra* 

lion* 

This ts  an  Af. 
fumpt,proble~ 
maticaU.artif~ 
ciallj  ^fed  and. 
demon  flrated. 
*2‘  h  erf  ore  thops 
three  lines  are 
in  continual t 
proportion. 


p'EeorMuded 
a  tspduaU  4. 
Une,whkh  is 
Jomwh#  pre-, 
p3&£roufly,iit 
tefpect  0/  the 
order  ptopoun 
ded,bethin  t» 
the  propofit'to, 
and  a  (jo  in  the 
determinated* 

2* 


4. 

S* 


of the fift)as  the  tin eH  K  is  to  the  line  K.  E  ,fo  is  the  tine  C  D  totbelimD  B. But  the  fquare 
of the  line  C  D  is  commenfurable  to  the fquare  ofthetineD  £  .* wherefore  (  by  the  io  .of the 
tenth)  thefqaarc  of  the  ImeH  K  is  camenf arable  to:  thefqudre  of  the  line  F  fi.Butthefe  three 
lines  H  K,F  K ,and  E  K  are  proportional  in  cotinuallproportiojas  it  hath  already  ben&pro- 
ued )  .Wherefore  ( by  the fecond  cor  rollary  of  the  20  .of the fixth )  the fquare  of the  line  H  K  is 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  K  as  the  line  H  K  is  to  the  line  E  K.- » vherfore  the  line  H  K  is  com - 
menfurable  in  length  to  the  line  E  K  .Wherefore^  by  the  1$  .of the  tenth)  the  line  H  E  is  com- 
menfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  K  .  K^And forafmuch  as  the  fqmre  of  the  line  A  is  e quail 
to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  E  H  and  B  D ,  but  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is  ra¬ 
tion  all ,wh ere_  fore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  E  H  and  B  D  is, rational) .  And  it 
is  applyedvnto  the  line  E  H  is  ra¬ 

tional!  and  commenfurable  in  lengthApSktlimB  D  „  Wherefore,  alfo  the  line  E  K  which  is 
commenfur able  in  length  to  the  fof  HE  is  .v-A  •••'. 

rational  and  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  - - - 

line  B  D  .Now for  that  as  the  line  C  D  is  to  b ^  AAA,  p  ,W,  c 

the  line  is  the  line  F  K  to  the  line  .  ,  £ 

E  K( for  it  was-  htfsrtprdmd  ,  thatas  t,  -•  — £ - - - — ' . 

is  toDB,fo  is  H  F  ft?  F  E, ,  and  as  H  F  ipidx  f  "  .  :  -  ■,  v.-;;- 

F  Efo  is  F  K  to  E  K)  but  the  lines  C  D  and 

DB  are  commenfiirabk  in  power  o0f}wherefore  ( by  the  1 0  ,cf the  tenth)  the  lines  F  K  and 
J£E  aredfo  fommmfiirable  in  power  onclf  And/or  that  as  theline  CD  is  to  theline  D  B, 
d  4  thefm  V  %  to  the  line  B  If  therefore  by  ‘contrary  proportion  rf/DB  Is  to  C  D,fo  is  EK 
toV  K^and  dlterpdiefy'ds  D  B  is  to,  E  Jx,Jp  tfC  D  to  F  K  /  but  the  lines  B  D  and  E  K  are 

beftif rotted)  .  Wherf ore  alfo  the  lines  C  D  and 
F  K  dre  Commenfurable  in  length. But  the  line  C  D  is  rationdl:  wherefore  alfo  the  line  F  K 
is  rationdl .  Wherefore  the  lines  F  K  and  E  K  are  rationdl  commenfurable  in  power  onely . 
Wherefore  the  line  F  E  is  a  refiduall  line: who fe  names  F  K  and  K  E  are  commenfurable  to 
the  names  G  t>  and'B  D  of the  binomidl  line  B  C  and  in  the  fame  proportion  as  isproued. 
I  fay  mor cotter  that  it  is  a  ref  dual!  line  of the felfe fame  or  der  that  the  binomial!  line  is .  Tor 
the ImsOD  is  in  power  more  then  the  lineB  D  either  by  the  fquare  of  a  tine  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  length  to  ttie  tine  C  D>  or  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length .  Now  if 
the  line  CD  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  BD  by  the  fquare  of  a  tine  commenfurable  in 
length  vnto  the  tine  C  D  .then  (by  the  13.  of the  tenth)  theline  F  K  is  in  power  more  then 
theline.  E  K  by  the fquare  of  a  tine  comen  fur  able  in  length  to  the  tine  F  YL.Andfo  if  the  tine 
Qj)be  c  omen  fur  able  in  legth  to  the'rationall  tine  put, the  line  F  K  alfo  fhalbe  comcnfurable 
imlegth  to  the  fame  rationall  tine  :wher fore  then  the  line  B  C  is  a  frfi  binomial l  line ,  dr  the 
UneB  E  is  likewife  afn ft  refiduall  line .  And  if  the  line  B  D  be  commenfurable  in  length  to 
the  rational! line  f  be  line  E  K Is  alfo  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame  ,and then  the  tine 
B  G  B  afecond  timomidl  line, and  the  tine  F  E  a  fecond  refiduall  line. ^And  if  neither  of  the 
lines  Q  D  nor  D  B  be  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  rationall  tine ,  neither  of  the  lines 
FK  wEIv  are  commenfurable  injength  vnto  the  fame,  and  then  theline  B  C  isathird 
binrni all  tine, &  the  tine  E  EisalMrdT0mUlm^4ndifiheline  C  D  he  in  power  more 
then  the  tine  B  D  ,by  the  fquare  of a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  C  D  ,the  line 
thdijrtf  £  by  the  fquare  of  a  line 

incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  tine  F  K .  And  foif  the  line  CD  be  commenfurable  in 
kngh  to  a  rationall  line  put, the  line  F  K  alfo  is  commenfurable  in  length 1 0  the  fame,  where¬ 
fore  the  line  B  C  is  a  fourth  binomial! line, and  the.  tine  F  E  is  a  fourth  refiduall  tine.  And  if 
the  tine  B  D  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationdl  tint ,  the  tine  E  K  is  likewife  com- 
menfurable in  length  to  the fame, and  then  the  tine  B  G  is  a fifth  binomial!  line  and  the  line 


E  F  a fifth  refduall  line  .And  if  neither  of  the  lines  C  D  nor  D  B  he  ccmmen fur  able  in 
length  to  the  rationall  line ,  neither  alfo  of  the  lines  F  K  nor  E  K  is  commenfurable  in- length 
to  the fame, and  then  the  line  B  C  is  a fixth  binomull  line,  and  the  line  FE* fxtfrefdmll 
line.  Wherf ore  the  line  F  E  is  a  refduall line, who fe  names, namely,!?  K  and E  K  are  Comme- 
furahlc  to  the  names  of the  binomall  line,  namely  ,to  the  names  C  D  and  D  B,and  arein  the 
felfe  fame  proportion ,  and  the  refduall  line  E  F  is  in  the felfe  fame  order  of  refduall  lines, 
that  the  binomall  line  B  C  is  of  binomall  lines .  Wherefore  the  future  of  a  rationall  line 
apply  ed  unto  a  binomiall  line  maketh  the  breadth  ( or  other fide )a  refduall  line, who  fe  names 
are  comrnenfurable  to  the.  names  of  the  binomiall  line,  and  in  the felfe fame  proportion ,  and 
moreouer  that  refduall  line  is  in  the  felfe  fame  order  of  refduall  lines ,  that  the  binomiall 
lint  is  of 'binomiall  lines  .-which  was  required  to  be  demonshaied. 


#  Here  is  the  Affumpt  (of  the  foregoing  Proportion)  confirmed. 


Now  let  vs  declare  how  as  the  line  Ft  Fist o  the  line  F  E,fo  to  make  the  line  F  K  to  the 
line  E  K  ,T  he  line  C  D  is  greater  then  the  line  F  D  by  fuppoftion  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line 
H  F  is  greater  then  the  line  F  E  (by  alternate  proportion, and  the  14.0-f the fifth ) .  From  the 
line  H  F  take  away  the  line  F  L  equall to  the  line  F  E .  Wherefore  the  line  remaining, name¬ 
ly, H  L,is  lefe  then  the  line  H  F,for  the  line  HE  ^  ;o  c 

is  equall  to  the  lines  H  Lfr  LF  .  c_As  H  L  is  to 

FI  F,fo  ( by  the  12. of  the fxt  )letFE  be  to  F  K.  H  l _ y _ e _ K 

Wherf  ore  by  contrary  proportion  ( by  the  Corolla¬ 
ry  of  the  4 .  of thefflh )  as  H  F  is  to  H  L,fo  is  F  K  to  F  E .  Wherefore  by  conuer fion  of  pro¬ 
portion  ( by  the  Corollary  of  the  /  9  .of the  fifth )  as  Ft  F  is  to  L  F,  that  is,  to  the  line  equall 
vnto  it, namely,  to  F  F,fo  is  the  line  F  K  to  the  line  E  K . 


Cmflruttion* 


Demwfird* 

tion. 


<JA.  D^ofthis  Aflitmpt,  maketh  (wofio that  is.* 
nsFcquifuely,)  a  Probleme  vniuerfall,  thus: 

Two  vnequallright  lines  being  propounded,  to  adioyne  vnto  the  lege, a  right  line, which  take  With  I  * 

the  lefe(  as  one  right  line )  fall  haue  the fame  proportion  ,to  the  line  adioyned,  which,  the  greater  of 
the  two  propounded,  hath  to  the  lefe. 

The conftru&ion  and demonfhration hereof, is worde for  wordet<j  be  taken,  ask 
ftandeth  here  before  :  after  thefe  wordes  :  The  line  HF  is  greater  then  the  line  F  E. 

«f[  A  Corollary  alfo  noted  by  I.  Dee , 

t'  • 

It  is  therefore euident,that  thus' are  three  right  lines  ( in  our  handling  J  in  continual ?  proportion : 

it  is  to  Weete,  the  greater,  the  lefe  and  the  adioyned,  make  thefirft,the  lefe  With  the  adioyned , 

make  the  fecotid :  and  the  adioyned  line  is  the  third. 

This  is  proued  in  the  beginning  ofthedemonftration, after  the  Affumpt  vfed. 

r:t  ■  .  j  •  ;  .  \4T  ii  h  •  -td  *  -  r  ’  ,  . .» -  ■  % .  , 

#  An  other  demonfiration  after  FluJJas. 

TakearationallIineA3andletGB  be abinomiall  line, whofe  greater  line  letbe  GD  :  and  vpon  ,  , 

the  line  G  B  apply  (by  the  45".  of  die  firft)  the  parallelograms  B  Z  equall  to  thefquare  of  the  line  A. and  Constrttctwta 
making  in  breadth  thelineGZ.  Likewife  vpon  the  line  D  B  (by  the  lame)  apply  the  parallelogram  me 
B I  equall  alfo  to  the  fquareofthe  line  A,  and  making  in  breadth  the  line  Dir  andput  the  line  GZT 
equal!  to  the  line  DI.  Then  I  fay,  thacGZisfuch  ardiduall  linens  is  required  in  the  Propofition. 

CEQJij.  Forafinuch' 


The  tenth  TSoo^e 


K 

i — 


A 


xj 


- — . — -t — 1 — » — 1 

* 

3 

n 


'Demonftu- 

tion. 


Here  Are  tbs 
folver  partes 
of  the  propcfi- 
tio  more  order 
l) '/  hadled  2*. 
then  in  the 
former  de- 
mo  fir  at  ion. 


4- 


Forafmuch  as  the  paralle- 
logrammesBZ  SaBI  are 
equall,  therefore  (  by  the 
i4.of  the  fixt)  reciprocal¬ 
ly  as  the  line  G  B  is  to  the 
line  B  D,  fo  is  the  line  D I 
or  the  line  G  T,(which  is 
equall  vnto  it  )  vnto  the 
line  G  Z  .  Wherefore  by 
diuifion,  as  the  line  G  D 
is  to  the  line  D  B,fo  is  the 
line  T  Z  to  the  line  ZG 
(by  the  17.  of  the  fifth). 

Wherefore  the  line  T  Z  is 
greater  then  the  line  Z  G  .(  For  the  line  GD  is  the  greater  name  ofthe  binomial!  line  GB) .  Vnto  the 
line  Z  G  put  the  line  Z  C  equall .  And  as  the  line  T  C  is  to  the  line  T  Z,  fo  (  by  the  11  .of  the  fixth  )  lee 
the  line  Z  G  be  to  the  line  Z  K  .  Wherefore  contrary  wife  (  by  the  Corollary  of  the  4.  of  the  fifth)  the 
line  T  Z  is  to  the  line  T  C,  as  the  line  Z  K  is  to  the  line  Z  G  .  Wherefore  by  conuerfion  of  proportion 
(by  the  19 .  of  the  fifth)  as  the  line  T  Z  is  to  theline  Z  C  (that  is,  to  Z  G,  which  is  equall  vnto  it)  fo  is 
thelineZ  Kto  the  line/C  G  .But  thelineT  Zisto  thelineZ  G,as  theline  GDIs  to  the  lineDB.Wher- 
fore(bythe  x  1.  of  the  fifth)  thelineZ  K  is  to  the  line  KG,  as  the  line  GD  istothe  lineDB.  Butthe 
lines  G  D  and  D  B  are  cotnmenfurable  in  power  onely.  Wherefore  alfo  the  lines  Z  K  and  K  G  are  com- 
menfurabie  in  power  onely,  by  the  lo.of  this  booke  .Farther,  forafmuch  as  theline  TZ  is  to  theline 
Z  G,as  the  line  ZK  is  to  the  line  K  G,  therefore  by  the  12. of  the  fifth,  all  the  antecedentes,  namely,  the 
whole  line  T  K  are  to  all  the  confequentes,namely,  to  theline  K  Z,  as  one  of theantecedentes,namely3 
the  line  Z  K  is  to  one  of  the  confequentes,namely,to  the  line  K  G. Wherefore  the  line  Z  K  is  the  meane 
propbrtionall  betwene  the  lines  T  K  and  K  G  .  And  therefore  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  2o.of  the  fixth) 
as  the  firil, namely,  the  line  T  K,  is  to  the  third,namely,to  the  line  K  G  :  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  T. If 
to  the  fquare  of  the  fecond,namely,  of  the  line  K  Z .  And  forafmuch  as  the  parallelogram eB  I  (  which 
is  equall  to  the  fquare  ofthe  rationall  line  A)  is  applied  vpon  the  rationall  line  DB,  it  maketh  the 
breadth  D I  rationall  and  commenfurablein  length  vnto  the  lineD  B,  by  the20.0fthetenth.And  ther- 
fore  the  line  G  T  (which  is  equall  vnto  the  line  DI )  is  cotnmenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame  line  DB. 
And  for  that  as  the  line  G  D  is  to  the  line  DB,fo  is  the  line  K  Z  to  the  line  KG,  but  as  the  line  KZ  is  to 
the  line  K  G,  fo  is  thelineT  K  to  theline  /(.Z,  therefore  (by  the  11.  ofthe  fifth)  as  the  line  GDis  to 
the  line  DB,fo  is  thelineT  Alto  the  line /CZ  .Wherefore  (by  die  22.  of  the  fixth)  as  the  fquare  of  the 
line  GDis  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  DB,fo  is  thefquarc  ofthe  line  T/C  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line /CZ. But 
the  fquare  of  the  line  GDis  cotnmenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  B  (for  the  names  G  D  and  D  B 
of  the  binomial!  line  G  B  are  commenfurable  in  power  )  .  Wherefore  the  fquare  ofthe  line  T  iC  fhall 
be  commenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  /C  Z,  by  the  10. of  this  booke .  But  as  the  fquare  of  the  line 
T /Cis  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line /CZ,fo  is  it  proued,that  the  right  line  T/Cis  to  the  right  line  /CG  .Wher 
fore  the  right  line  T  /Cis  commenfurablein  length  to  theright  line  /CG.  Wherefore  itisalfocommen- 
furable  in  length  to  the  line  T  G  (by  the  if  .of  the  tenth)  .  Which  line  T  G  is  (as  it  hath  bene  proued) 
a  rationall  line,  and  equall  to  the  line  D I .  Wherefore  the  lines  T  /Cand  /CG  are  rationall  commenfu¬ 
rable  in  length  .  And  forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued,  that  the  line  ZiCis  commenfurable  in  power 
onely  vnto  the  rationall  line  /CG ,  therefore  the  lines  Z  JCand  /CG  are  ratio-nail  commenfurable  int 
power  onely  .  Wherefore  the  line  G  Z  is  a  refiduall  line  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  rationall  line  T  G  is 
commenfurable  in  length  to  either  ofthefe  lines  D  Band /CG  .  Wherefore  the  lines  DB  &/CG  fhall 
be  commenfurable  in  length,  by  the  12.0F the  tenth .  But  the  line  Z  /Cis  to  the  line  /CG,  as  the  line 
G  D  is  to  the  line  D  B  .  Wherefore  alternately,  by  the  1 6. of  the  fifth,  the  line  /C  Z  is  to  the  line  G  D,as 
the  line  /C  G  is  to  the  line  D  B.  Wherefore  the  line  Z  iC is  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  G  D„ 
Wherefore  the  lines  Z  /Cand  /CG  ( the  names  of  the  refiduall  line  GZ)  are  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  lines  GD  and  DB,  which  are  the  names  of  the  binomial!  line  GB  :  and  the 
line  Z  /Cis  to  the  line  /CG  in  the  fame  proportion,  that  theline  GD  is  to  the  line  DB. 
Wherefore  if  the  whole  line  Z/Cbe  in  power  more  then  the  line  conueniently  ioyned  K.G  s 
by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  Z/C,  then  the  greater  name  GD  fhall 
be  in  power  more  then  the  leffe  name  DB,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  G  D,  by  the  14.01  the  tenth.  And  if  the  line  Z  /Cbe  in  power  more  then  the  line  /CG,  by  the  fquare 
of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  Z  /C,  the  linealfo  G  D  fhall  be  in  power  more  then  the 
line  D  B,  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  G  D  (by  the  fame  Propofiti- 
©n.)  .  And  if  the  greater  or  leffe  name  of  the  one  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  put, 
the  greater  or  Idle  name  alfo  of  the  other  fhall  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame  rationall  line;, 
(by  the  12. of  this  booke  ).  But  if  neither  name  of  the  one  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall 
line  put,  neither  name  ofthe  other  alfo  fhall  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  fame  rationall  line 
put  (by  the  13-  .ofthe  lamp ) .  Wherefore  the  refiduall  line  G  Z  fhall  be  in  thefelfe  fame  order  of  refidu¬ 
all  lines,  that  the  bi  normal!  line  G  Bis  of  binorniall  lines  (  by  the  definitions  of  refiduall  and  binomiall 

lines. 


cfSuclides  Element es.  FohyQj. 

lines.  The  fquare  therefore  ofarationaUlineappliedtoabinomiaillme.&c  :  which  was  required  to 
feeproued. 

f  The  89.  T heoreme.  T he  1 13.  T ropojtfton . 

T  he fquare  of a  rational  line  applied  lento  a  ref du  a  If  m  a  he  t  h  the  breadth 
cr  other  fide  a  binomial  linefivbofe  names  are  commen fur able  to  the  names 
of  the  rejiduall  line^  and  in  the  felfe  fame  proportion :  and  moreouer  that 
binomiall  line  is  in  the felfe fame  order  ofbinomiall  lynespthat  the  ref  dual 
line  is  of  refiduall  lynes . 

Vppofe  that  A  he  a  rationall  line, and  BW  a  refiduall  line.  And  unto  the  fquare 
1  of  the  line  A  let  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  B  D  and  K 11  be  equal. 
^Wherfore  the  fquare  of  the  rationall  line  A  applied  unto  the  refiduall  line  B  D 
I  maketh  the  breadth  or  other fideUC  H.T hen  I  fay  that  the  line  K  H  is  a  binomh 
all  line,  who  fe  names  are  commenfiurahle  to  A  , 

the  names  of  the  refiduall  line  B  D ,  and  in  3  v 

the  felfe  fame  proportion,  and  that  the  line  '  ~  '  f  '  ~ - - 

K  H  is  in  the  felfe  fame  order  of  binomiall  h  f  e  K 

lines, that  the  line  B  D  is  of  refiduall  lines.  $  ~  f 

Vnto  the  line  B  D  let  the  line  conueniently  '  — - 

ioyned  he  D  C.  Wh erf  ore  the  lines  B  C  and 

D  C  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  And  unto  the fquare  ofthelineA  let  the 
par allelogramme  contained  under  the  lines  B  C  and  G  be  e quail.  But  the  fquare  of  the  line  A 
is  rationall '.Whcrf ore  the parallelogramme  contained  under  the  lines  B  C  and  Gis  "alfo  ra¬ 
tional!  Wh  erf  ore  alfo  the  line  G  is  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  BC  (by 
the  20  .of the  tenth)  .Flow for afmuch  as  the parallelogramme  contained  under  the  lines  B 
C  and  G  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  under  the  lines  B  D  and  K  B,  therfore  ( by  the 
1 6. of  the fix t )as  the  line  B  C  is  to  the  line  B  B  fo  is  the  line  K  H  to  the  line  G.  But  the  line 
B  C  is  greater  then  the  line  B  D  .Wherfore  alfo  the  line  K  H  is  greater  then  the  line  G.  Vnto 
the  line  G  let  the  line  K  F  be  equall.Wherfore  the  line  I<  E  is  rationall  and  c  omen fur able  in 
length  to  the  line  B  C, as  alfo  the  line  G  was  ( by  the  12.  of  the  tenth)  And  for  that  as  B  Cisto 
B  D,fois  K  H  toK  E  Wherfore  by  couerfion  of proportiofby  the  corollary 'of y  ip.ofthefift) 
as  B  C  is  to  D  CfoisK  H,toFB.  isto  EH,fo  let  the  linet  H  be  to  the  line  EF  (how  this  tS 

to  be  do»e,we  will  decare  at  theende  of  this  demonfiration) .  Wherfore  therefidue  K  E  is  to 
the  refidne  F  B,as  the  whole  K  B  is  to  the  whole  B  E(by  the  19. of  thefift )thatis,asyhe  line 
BCis  to  the  line  CD. But  the  lines  B  C  and  CD  are  commenfurable  in  power  onely.  Where¬ 
fore  alfo  the  lines  K  F  and  F  B  are  commenfurable  in  power  only.  And for  that  as  K  B  is  to 
B  E,fo  is  K  F  to  F  B,but  as  K  B  is  to  B  E,fo  is  alfo  B  F  to  F  E,  therfore  as  K  F  is  to  F  B, 
fo  is  F  H  to  F  E.  Wherfore  ( by  the  corollary  of  the  19. of  the fixt)  as  thefirfi  is  to  the  third, 
f 7  is  the fquare  of  the  frfi,to  the fquare  of  the  fecond.  Wherefore  as  K  F  is  to  F  F,  fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  K  F  to  the fquare  of the  line  F  B,  but  thefe  fquare s  are  commenfurable, 
for  the  lines  K  F  and  F  B  are  commenfurable  in  power.  Wherfore  the  lines  K  F  and  F  E  are 
commenfurable  in  length .  Wherfore  ( by  the fecond  part  of  the  is.  of  the  tenth)the  lines  K  E 
and  E  F  are  commenfurable  in  length,  wherfore  ( by  the  fame )  the  lines  K  F  and  F  F  are 
commenfurable  in  length. But  tlx  line  K  E  is  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  B  C:  where  fore  the  line  K  F  is  alfo  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  leqth  to  the  line  BC. 
And  for  that  as  the  line  B  C  is  to  the  line  C  Dfiois  K  F  to  F  B,  therfore  alternately  ( by  the 
1 6. of  the fift )  as  B  C  is  to  K  Ffo  is  C  D  to  F  B.But  the  line  B  C  is  commenfurable  in  length 

fifi.  fifjiif  to 


Conttruttion, 


Bmonfira- 

tion. 


*rln  Affumpu 


A  o 

%. 

3- 


X. 


2. 


4* 

5* 


a 


B 


T> 


Q 


H 


P 


K 


4G  the  line  K  F.Wherf ore  the  line  CD  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  H.  But  the 
line  C  D  is  rationall.Wherfore  alfo  the  line  F  His  ra.tioncill.And  the  lines  B  C  and  C  D  are 
rational!  commenfurable  in  power  onely  Wherfore  the  lines  K  F  and  F 11  are  r at ionall  com¬ 
menfurable  in  power  onely  .Wherfore  the  line  K  Bis  a  binons  tall  line,  whofe  names  are  corn- 
men  fur  able  to  the  names  of  the  refiduall  line, and  in  the fame  proportion.1 fay  moreouer  that 
it  is  a  binomiall  of the felfefame  order  of  binomial  lines, that  the  line  B  D  is  of  ref  dual  lines . 
For  if  the  line  BC  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  C  D  by  the fquare  of a  line  commenfurable 
in  length  to  the  line  BC,  the  line  K  F  is  alfo  in  power  more  then  the  line  F  H  by  thsfqmrs 
cf  a  line  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  K  F(  by  the  14:  of  the  tenth  )  .  And  ij 
the  line  BC  be  commenfurable  in  length 
to  the  rat  ionall  line  put,  the  line  K F  is  alfo 
(by  the  12.  of  the  tenth )  commenfurable 
in  length  to  the  rationall  line,  and fo  the 
iyne  BD  is  a  firf  refiduall  lyne ,  and  the  r"~  ‘ — * 

line  KB  is  in  like  fort  afrfi  binomiall line. 

If  the  line  CI>  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rational  line, the  line  FB  is  alfo  cowmen* 
fir  able  in  length  to  the  fame  line,  and fo  the  line  B  D  is  a fecondrefdua.il line,  and  the  line 
K  H  a  fecond  binomiallline.  And  if  neither  of  the  lines  B  C  nor  C  D  be  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  ratimall  line, neither  alfo  of  the  lines  K  F  nor  F  FI  is  commenfurable  in  length 
to  the  fame, and fo  the  line  BD  is  a  third  refiduall  line,  and  the  line  KBa  third  binomiall 
line. But  if  the  line  BC  be  in  power  more  then  the  line  C  D  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommen 
fur  able  in  length  to  the  line  B  C,tbe  line  K  F  is  in  power  more  the  the  line  F  B  by  the  fquare 
of  a  line  incommenf arable  in  length  to  the  line  K  F  (by  the  i^-.of the  tenth )  And  iff  he  line 
B  C  be  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line  put,  the  line  K  F  is  alfo  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  length  to  the  fame  line, and fo  the  line  B  D  is  a  fourth  refiduall  line,  and  the  line  K  B 
a  fourth  binomiall  line.  And  if  the  line  C  D  be  come  fur  able  in  legth  to  the  rational  line ,  the 
line  F  B  is  alfo  come  fur  able  in  legth  to  the fame,  frfo  the  line  B  D  is  af.ft  refiduall  line,  & 
the  line  I<  B  afift  binomiall  line.  And  if  neither  of  the  lines  B  C  nor  CD  be  commenfurable 
in  length  to  the  rational!  line,  neither  alfo  of  the  lines  K  F  nor  F  B  is  commenfurable  in 
length  to  the  fame, and fo  the  line  B  D  is  afixt  refiduall  line, and  the  line  K  His  a fixt  bino¬ 
miall  line  Wherf  ore  K  Bis  a  binomiall  line, whofe  names  K  F  andF  B  are  commenfurable 
to  the  names  of the  refiduall  line  BD, namely,  to  BC  and  CD,  and  in  the felfefame  propor¬ 
tion, and  the  binomial!  line  K  B  is  in  thefelfe  fame  order  of binomiall  lines, that  the  refidu¬ 
all  B  D,is  of  re fduall  lines  .Wherefore  the fquare  of  a  rationall  line  applied  vnto  a  refiduall 
line,maketh  the  breadth  or  other fde  a  binomiallline ,  whofe  names  are  commenfurable  to 
the  names  of  the  refiduall  line, and  in  the fetfe fame  proportion ,  and  moreouer  the  binomiall 
line  is  in  the  felfefame  order  of  binomiall  tines,  that  the  refiduall  line  is  of  refiduall  lines  t 
which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 

The  AiTumpt  confirmed. 


r~r 


F 


K 


Now  let  vs 

declare  how ,  as  t  ■ 

the  line  K  H  is  to 

the  line  E II,  fo  V  N-  ,  ,s  ' 

to  make  the  line  B  F  to  the  line  F  E.  Adde  vnto  the  line  K  B  direlily  a  line  equal!  to  BE, 
and  let  the  whole  line  be  K  L,and(b y  the  tenth  of the  fixt)let  the  line  HE  be  deuided  as  the 

-  -  .  '  When* 

fan 


of Suclides  Elementeu 


Fo/.^qS. 


fore  as  the  line  K<H  is  to  the  line  Ti  L>  that  is,  to  the  line  &  E,  fo  is  the  line  UF  to  the 
line  F  E.- 

r ' '  •'  ■'/'  '  -V-  f  >  ;  "  -  .  l-V:.V  ;,'eV  ..  '•  " 


Ail  odierdewionftration  after  Flujfas. 


.  .  ,  .  v  '■■*4  '*  \  -J  -  '  t  *  v-  ‘  •  •  \  ■■  .  )  f 

Suppofe  that  A  he  a  rational!  line  ,  and  let  B  D  be  a  refidudl  line .  And  vpon  the  line  B  D  apply 
the  parallelogramrne  D  T  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  ^(by  the  45  -of  the  fifft)fnaking  in  breadth  the 
line  B  T.Then  I  fay  that  B  T is  a  binominall  line  fuch  a  one  as  is  required  in  the  propofition.Forafmuch 
as  B  D  isjxrefiduallline,kt  the  line  cquenieritly  ioyned  vnto  it  be  G  D.Wherfore  the  lines  B  C  and  G  D 
are  rationallcommenfurable  in  power  onely  V  Vpb'n  the  ration  all  line  B  G  apply  the  parallelogramrne 
'/equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  a  and  making  in  breadth  the  line  B  E.  Wherefore  the  line  B  Eds  ra- 
tionalland  commenfurablein  length. to  the  line  5  G(by  theio.ofthe  tenth).  Now  forafmuch  as  the  pa¬ 
rallelogram  mes  B  /  and  TDare  equall /for 

that  they  are  eche  equall  to  the  fquare  oT  the  T  .  _  1 

line  A) :  therfore  reciprokally  (by  the  i4.of the 
fixthjas  the  line  BT is  to  the  line  B  £,fo  is  the 
line  B  G  to  the  line  B  D  .  W herefore  by  con- 
uerfion  of  proportion  fby  the  corrollary  of  the 
19 .of the  fifth)as  the  line  BT  is  to  the  line  T  E, 
fo  is  the  lin  e  B  G  to  the  line  CD.  As  the  line 
B  G  is  to  the  line  G  D,  fo  let  the  line  T  Z  be  to 
the  line  2  E  by  the  corrollary  of  the  10 ,  of  the 
lixth.  Wherefore  by  the  11.  of  the  fifth  the  line 
B  T  is  to  the  line  T  E ,  as  the  line  T  Z  is  to  the 
line  Z  £.For  either  of  them  are  as  the  line  B  G 
is  to  the  line  G  D  .  Wherefore  the  refidue  R  2 
is  to  the  refidue  4  T, as  the  whole  B  T  is  to  the 
whole  T  E  by  the  19 .  of  the  fifth  .  Wherefore 
by  the  11.  of  the  fifth,  the  line  B  Z  is  to  the  line 
2  T  as  the  line  Z  T  is  to  the  line  z  E.  Wherfore 
the  line  /•£  is  the  meane  proportionall  be- 
twene  the  lilies  BZ  and  2  E .  Wherefore  the 


— — . — — - - - — — 

i 

_ _ , 

- 

An  ether  de¬ 
mon /Iratioaf 
terFluffas* 
Conilruetion, 

ra¬ 

tlin. 


fquare  of  the  firfi,namely,of  the  line  BZ,  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  fecond,  namely,  of  the  line  Z  T ,  as  the 
firft,namely,the line  B  Z,is  to  the  tnird,namely,to  the  line  £  Ef  by  the  corollary  of  the  30. of  the  fixth). 

And  for  that  as  the  line  B  Gis  to  the  line  G  D,  fois  the  line  T  Z  to  the  line  Z  E :  but  as  the  liner  Z  is  to 
the  line  £  £,fo  is  the  line  B  Z  to  the  line  z  T  -Wherefore  as  the  line  B  G  is  to  the  line  G  D  ,fo  is  the  line 
B  z  to  the  line  z  T (by  the  x  r  .of  the  fifth ),  Wherfore  the  lines  B  z  and  Z  T  are  commenfurable  in  pow;- 
er  orjd!y,asalfo  are  the  lines  B  G  and  G  £>(which  are  the  names  of  the  refiduall  line  B  D  )  by  the  10.  of 
this  booke.  Wherfore  the  right  Tines  B  z  and  2  £  are  comenfurable  in  length,  for  we  haue  prOued  that 
they  are  in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  z  and  z  T  are.  And  therefore  (by  the  co¬ 
tollary  of  the  if  .of  this  booke)the  refidue£  E  (  which  isarationallline)is  commenfurable  in  length 
vnto  the  fame  line  B  £.W herefore  alfo  the  line  B  G  (which  is  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line 
B  £)fhall  alfo  be  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  fame  line  £  Z  (  by  the  12 .  of  the  tenth  ) .  And  it  is 
proued  that  the  line  BZ  is  to  the  line ZT  commenfurable  in  power  onely .  Wherefore  the  right  lines 
BZ  and  £  f  are  rationall  commenfurablein  power  onely.  Wherefore  the  whole  line  BT  is  a  binomiall  j 

linefby  the  .yS.  of this  booke) .  And  for  that  as  the  line  B  G  is  to  the  line  G  D  ,  fo  is  the  line  B  z  to  the 
|ine  .?X:  therefore  alternately(by  the  nJ.ofthefifth)the  liiieJ  G  is  to  the  line  B  2,  as  the  line  G  D  is  to 
the  line  Z  T  .Rut  the  line  B  G  is  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  line  B  z  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  10.  of 
this  bo6ke)thefine  G  D  is  commenfurablein  length  vnto  the  line  z  T .  Wherefore  the  names  B  G  and  2» 
-G  D  of  therefid'  all  line  BDa.ro  commenfurablein  length  vnto  the  names  B  z  and  ZT  of  the  binomi¬ 
alline  5T:ind.the.line  B  z  is  to  theline^Tin  the  fame  proportion  that  the  line  B  G  is  to  thelineGZ?  3» 
.asbeforeit  was  more  mar.ifofl.And  that  they  are  of  one  and  the  felfe  fame  order  is  thus  proued .  If  the  4* 

greater  orlcKe  name  of  the  refiduall  line,namely, the  right  lines  B.  G  or  G  D  be  cdmenfurable  in  length 
to  any  rationall  line  put:  the  greater  name  alfo  or  lefTe,namely,£  £  or  ZT  fhalbe  commenfurablein 
length  to  the  fame  rationall  line  put  by  the  12. of  this  booke.  And  ifneither  of  the  names  of  the  refidu¬ 
all  line  be  commenfurablein  length  vnto  therationa3Hineput,neitherofthe  names  of  the  binomial! 
line  fhalbe  commenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  fame  rationall  line  put  (  by  the  13 .  of  the  tenth  )  .  And  if 
the  greater  name  B  G  be  in  power  more  thentheleffe  name  by  the  fquare  of  aline  commenfurablein 
length  vnto  the  line  B  G,the  greater  name  alfo  B  Z  fhalbe  in  power  more  then  the  lefle  by  the  fquare  of 
a  line  commenfurablein  length  vnto  the  line  2?  Andif  the  one  be  in  power  more  by  the  fquare  of  a 

h  ne  i  nco  m  Ufenfu  ra  ble  in  length,the  other  alfo  fhalbe  in  power  more  by  the  fquare  of  a  line  incommen- 
furable  in  length  by  the  14.0?  this  booke  .The  fquare  therefore  of  a  rational!  line.  5<c.whieh  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  proued. 


Tbit  is  in  a 
man er  the  can 
mrf e  of  both 
the  former  pro-’ 
pofniomfoynt 
lyf  " 


,  ■  r  „  \  The  tenth  s fofy 

f  The  yo.  T beor eme.  ■  :TJ?er- li+fyofofititw*  •• 

If  a  parallelogram  be  cotamed  louder  a  rejiduall  line  &  a  binomiall  lyne, 
Tohofe  names  are  eommenfurable  to  the  names  of therefiduall  line 3  and  in 
the felfe fame,  proportion ;  the  lyne  ~%>hich  contajneth  in  power  that  fuper * 
ficies  is  rationall. 


A  0  t  ■  3 

F 

:  : 

‘  ,'r  *  ~~ 

c  '  •  '■ 

E 

h--~ - 

- - — » 

H  ' 

- - 1 — \ - f - 

K  I, 

* - <  -  ■■ 

M 

the  lejfe  name  be  E  D,and  let  the  names  of the  binomiall  line,  namely ,  C  E  and 
ED  be  eommenfurable  to  the  names  of  the  refduall  line- , namely  ,to  A  F  and  F 
B,and  in  the  felft  fame  proportion  .  And  let  the 
line  which  containeth  in  power  that  parallelo¬ 
grams  be  G.TheJ fky  that  the  line  G  is  ratio¬ 
nale ake  a  rational  line, namely  ,H .  And  vnto 
Construction.  *he  line  C  D  apply  a  parallelograms  equal  toy 
fquare  of  the  line  H,  and  making  in  breadth 
the  line  K  L.  Wherefore  (by  the  it  2.  of  the 
Demon  fra-  tenth )  I<  L  is  a  refduall  line, who fe  names  let 
tion.  be  K  M  and M  L, which  are  ( by  the  fame )  co- 

men fur  able  to  the  names  of the  binomiall  line,  that  is  to  C  E  and  F  D ,  and  are  in  the  felfe 
fameproportio.  Bui  by  p  oft ion  the  lines  C  F  and  ED  are  comen  fur  able  to  the  lines  A  F  and 
F  B,an.d.are  in  the  felfe  f  ame proportion.Wherfore  (by  the  i2.of the  tenth) as  the  line  A  F  is 
to  i he  line  F  Bfo  is  the  line  K  M  to  the  line  M  L  Wherfore  alternately  (by  the  16. of  the p  ft) 
as  the  line  A  F  is  to  the  line  K  Mfo  is  the  line  BF  to  the  line  LM. Wherfore  the  ref  due  A  B 
' is  to  the  reftdue  K'L,ds  the  whole  A  F  is  to  the  whole  KM. Bui  the  line  A  F  is  commenfura- 
ble  to  theline  K  M for  either  of  the  lines  A  F  and  KM  is  eommenfurable  to  the  line  C  E. 

■  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  A  Bis  eommenfurable  to  the  line  K  L.  And  as  the  line  A  Bis  to  the 
line  K  L,fo  (by  thefrsl  of the fxt )  is  the  parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  D 
and  AB  to  the  parallelogramme  contained vnder  the  lines  C  D  and  K  L.  Wherfore  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  D  and  A  B  is  eommenfurable  to  the,  parallelo  ¬ 
gramme  contained vnder  the  lines  C  D  and  K  L. But  the  parallelogramme  contained vnder 
the  lines  C  D  and  K  L  is  e  quail  to  the fquare  of  the  line  H .  Wherfore  the  parallelograme  co- 
tained  vnder  the  lines  CD  &  A  Bis  comenfurable  tothe fquare  of  the  line  H.But  the  paral¬ 
lelogram  e  contained  under  the  lines  C  D  and  A  Bis  equall  to  the fquare  of the  line  G.  Wher¬ 
fore  the fquare  of  the  line  H  is  eommenfurable  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  G.  But  the fquare  of 
the  line  H  is  rationall.Wherfore  the  fquare  of the  line  G  is  alfo  rationall.  Wherfore  alfo  the 
line  G  is  rational,and  it  containeth  in  power  the parallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  B  and  C  D.lftherfore  a  parallelogramme  be  contained  vnder  a  refduall  line  and  a  bino¬ 
miall  line, wh  of  e  names  are  eommenfurable  to  the  names  of  the  refduall  line, and  in  the felfe 
fame  proportion, the  line  which  containeth  inpower  that fuper feiesjs  rationally  which  was 
required  to  be pr cued. 


fCorollary. 

Hereby  it  is  mantfejl 3  that  a  rationall parallelogramme  may  be  contained 
lender  irrationall  lines. 

An 


ofSuclides  Elementes.  Fol.^op. 

IT  An  other  demonftration  after  F tufas. 

Suppofethat  the  fuperfides  d  e  becontayned  vnder  a  refiduall  line  a  b  ,  and  a  binomiallline 
ad  i  who  fe  names  ae  and  e  d  let  be  coramenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  names  oftherefiduall  line 
a  e,  which  let  be  af  and  fb  .  And  letthe  line  ae  be  to  theline  ED,in  the  fame  proportion  that 
theline  a  f  is  to  the  line  fe  .  And  let  the  right  line  x  contayne  in  power  the  fuperfides  d  e  .  Then 
I  lay,  that  theline  i  is  a  rationall. line.  Take  a  rationall  line,  which  let  be  g.  Andvpon  theline  ad 
defcribc  (by  the  45'. of  the  firil)  a  parallelogramme  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  g,  and  making  in 
breadth  the  line  d  c  .  Wherefore  (by  the  112.  ofthisbooke)  c  d  is  a  refiduall  line,  whofe  names 
(whichletbe  c  o  and  o  D)fhalibecomenfurablein  legth  vnto  the  names  a e  andE  c,and  the  line  c  o 
fhall  be  vnto  the  line  o  d, in  the  fame  pro¬ 
portion  that  the  line  ae  is  to  the  line  e  d. 

Butas  the  line  ae  is  to  theline  ED,foby 
fuppofition,  is  the  line  af  to  the  line  f  b  . 

Wherfore  as  the  line  c  o  is  to  theline  o  d, 
fo  is  theline  af  to  theline  fb  .  Where¬ 
fore  thelines  c  o  and  o  d  are  commenfu- 
rable  with  the  lines  a  f  and  f  b  (by  the  12. 
ofthis  boke).  Wherfore  the  refidue, name¬ 
ly,  theline  cd  istotherefidue,name!y,to 
theline  a  B,as  theline  c  o  is  to  theline  a  f 
(by  the  19. of  the  fifth)  .But  it  is  proued,  that 
theline  c  o  is comenfurable  vnto  theline 
a  f  .  Wherefore  theline  cd  is  commen- 
furable  vnto  the  line  a  e  .  Wherefore  (  by 

the  firft  of  the  fixth)  the  parallelogramme  c  a  is  eommenfurable  to  the  parallelogramme  d  b.  But  the 
parallelogramme  c  a  is  (by  confirudion)  rationall  (for  it  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  rationall  line  g)„ 
Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  b  d  is  alfo  rationall .  Wherefore  the  line  1  which  by  fuppofitionco-* 
taynedx  in  power  the  fuperfides  b  d,  is  alfo  rationall.  If  therforeaparallelograme  becontayned.&c: 
which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


f  The  91.  T heoreme.  T be  i  is.  Tropojition. 

Ofamediall  line  are  produced  infinite  in ationall  lines  ,  of  'tyhich  none 
is  of  the felfe fame  kinde  "frith  any  of  thofe  that  Utere  before . 

Vppofe  that  A  be  a  mediall  line .  *F  hen  I  fay,  that  of  the  line  A  may  be  produced 
infinite  irr ationall  lines,  of  which  none  fall  be  of  the felfe fame  kinde  with  any 
of  thofe  that  were  before .  T ake  a  rationall  line  B .  And  vnto  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  A  and  B  let  the fquare  of  the  line  C  be  equall  ( by  the  14. 
of  the  fecond  )  .  Wherefore  the  line  C  is  irrationall .  For  a  fuperfides 
contained  vnder  a  rationall  line  and  an  irrationall  line,  is  ( by  the  Af-  f- — , 

fumpt following  the  38  .of the  tenth  )  irrationall:  and  the  Ime  which  b 
containeth  in  power  an  irrationall fuperfciesfis  ( by  the  Ajfumpt  going  '  1  ’ 

before  the  2 1. of  the  tenth )  irrationall .  And  it  is  not  one  and  the felfe  £ _ 

fame  with  any  of  thofe  thirtene  that  were  before .  For  none  of  the  lines 

that  were  before  applied  to  a  rationall  line  maketh  the  breadth  mediall.  - - - — • 

Againe  vnto  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  and  C,  let  the 
fquare  of  D  be  equall  .Wherefore  the  fquare  of  D  is  irrationall .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  J> 
is  irrationall  and  not  of  the fe  If  fame  kinde  with  any  of thofe  that  were  before.  For  the fquare 
of  none  of the  lines  which  were  before, applied  to  a  rationall  line, maketh  the  breadth  the  line 
C .  In  like  fort  alfo  fall  it  fo  followe,  if  a  man proceede  infinitely .  Wherefore  it  is  manifeff, 
that  of  a  mediall  line  are  produced  infinite  irrationall  lines, of which  none  is  of  the felfe  fame 
kinde  with  any  of  thofe  that  were  before :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


ConftruBkn • 

D  era  onf da¬ 
mn. 


Demnttra~ 
tion . 


An 


T'betenthTiooke 

An  other  demonftration. 

UnnUrit-  .  Smofethit  ACle  a  mediall  line .  T hen  l fay, that  of  the  line  A  C  may  be  produced  in* 
mouftratio  a.  faty*  irrationall  lines ,  of  which  none pall  be  of  the felfe fame  kinds  with  any  of  thofe  irra- 
tiondl  lines  before  named .  Fnto  the  line  A  C  and  from  the  point  A,  draw  (  by  the  it.  of  the 
frf)  aperpedicular  line  A  B,  and  let  A  B  be  a  rationall  line, and  make  perfect e  the parallelo- 
gramme  B  C.  Wherefore  B  C  is  irrationality  that  which  was  declared  and prouedfn  maner 
of  an  Aflumpt )  in  the  end  of  the  demonf ration  of  the  3  8  :  and  the  line  that  containeth  it  in 
power  is  alfo  ir rat  ion  all .  Let  the  line  C  D  con¬ 
tains  in  power  the  fuperfcies  B  C .  Wherefore 
C  D  is  irrationall  &  not  of  the felfe fame  kind 
with  any  of  thofe  that  were  before  :  for  the 
fquare  of  the  line  C  D  applied  to  a  rationall 
line, namely,  A  B,maketh  the  breadth  a  mediall 
line, namely,  A  C.  But  the  fquare  of  none  of  the 
forefaid  lines  applied  to  a  rationall  line  maketh 

the  breadth  a  mediall  line .  Againe,  make  perfecle  the  parallelogramwe  E  D .  Wherefore  the 
parallelogramme  F,  D  is  alfo  irrationall  (by  the fayd  Affumpt  in  the  end  of  the  38.  his  de¬ 
monf ration  briefly  proued  )  and  the  line  which  containeth  it  in  power  is  irrationall:  let  the 
line  which  containeth  it  in  power  be  D  F .  Wherefore  D  F  is  irrationall  and  not  of  the  felfe 
fame  kinde  vo  Ah  any  of  the forefaid  irrationall  lines .  For  the fquare  of none  of the forefay  d 
irrationall  lines  applied  vnto  a  rationall  line,  maketh  the  breadth  the  line  C  D  .  Wherefore 
of  a  mediall  line  are  produced  infinite  irrationall  lines,  of  which  none  is  of  the  felfe  fame 
kinde  with  any  of  thofe  that  were  before :  which  was  required  to  be  demonflrated. 

f  The  92.  Theoreme.  The  irf.Tropofition. 

flow  let  Its  prone  that  in  fiquare figures^  the  diameter  is  incommenfuralle 
in  length  to  the  fide. 

Fppofe  that  A  B  C  D  be  a  fquare,  and  let  the  diameter  they  of  be  AC.  ‘T hen  I 
fay  that  the  diameter  AC  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the fide  A  B .  For  if 
'it  be pofiblejet  it  be  comenfurable  in  legth.  J fay  that  the  this  will follow ,  that 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  nuber pall  be  both  an  euen  number  &  an  odde  number. 
Wipoflibiinie.  jt  is  manifest  (by  the  4-j.ofthefrH )  that  the fquare  of  the  line  AC  is  double  to  the  fquare 
of  the  line  A  B .  And  for  that  the  line  AC  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  A  B  (by fup~ 
pofition),  therf ore  the  lynet^AC  hath  vnto  the  line  AB  A  b 

that  proportion  that  a  number  hath  to  a  number  ( by  the 
9.  of the  tenth ) .  Let  the  lyne  A  C  haue  vnto  the  line  A  B 
that  proportion  that  the  number  EF  hath  to  the  num¬ 
ber  G.And  let  E  F  and  G  be  the  leaf  numbers  that  haue 
one  and  the  fame  proportion  with  them  IWher fore  F  F  is 
not  vnitie.  For  ifEFbe  vnitie, and it  hath  to  the  mm - 
her  G  that  proportion  that  the  line  A  C  hath  to  the  lyne 
A  B,and  the  line  A  C  is  greater  then  the  lyne  A  B.Wher 
fore  vnitie  E  F  is  greater  then  the  number  G,  which  is 
impophle.  Wherfore  F  F  is  not  vnitie,  wherfore  it  is  a  F 
number  .And for  that  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  ACis  to  G  ■  •  • 
the  fquare  of  the  lyne  A  B,fo  is  the fquare  number  of  the  number  F  F,to  the  fquare  number 

ofths 


Ttemonllratio 
leading  to  an 


H' 


•  •  •  M  •  •  • 


of Suclides  Element es, 

efi the  number  Gfor  in  eche  is  the  proportion  of their fides  doubled  (by  the  corollary  of the  20 
of the fixt  and  1 1  .of the  eight ):  and  the  proportion  of  the  line  A  C  to  the  line  A  B  doubled, is 
equal  tG  theproportioofthe  nuber  E  F  to  the  number  G, doubled, for  as  the  line  A  C  is  to  the 
line  A  B,fo  is  the  nuber  EF  to  the  number  G.  But  thefquare of the  line  AC  is  double  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  B  Wherf  ore  the  fquare  number  produced  of  the  number  EF  is  double 
to  the  fquare  number  produced  of the  number  G.  Wherefore  thefquare  number  produced  of 
E  F  is  an  euen  m?nberWherfore  E  F  is  alfo  an  euen  number. For  if  E  F  were  an  odde  mint - 
her, the fquare  number  alfo  produced  ofit,jhould  (  by  the  23 . and  2  f. of  the  ninth)  be  an  odds 
number.  For  if odde  numbers  how  many foeuer  be  added  together,  and  if  the  multitude  of 
the  be  odde, the  whole  alfo  Jhal  be  odde. Wherf ore  E  F  is  an  euen  number. Deuide  the  number 
E  F  into  two  equall partes  in  H.And forafmuch  as  the  numbers  E  F  and  G  are  the  left  num¬ 
bers  in  that  proportion, therfore(  by  the  24.  of  the feuenth )  they  are  prime  numbers  the  one 
to  the  other.  And  E  F  is  an  euen  number  .Wherf ore  G  is  an  odde  number. For  if  G  were  an  e- 
iten  number, the  number  two  jhould  meafure  both  the  number  E  F  and  the  number  G  ( for  e- 
itery  euen  nuber  hath  an  halfmart  by  the  definition )  but  thefe  numbers  E  F  dr  G  are  prime 
the  one  to  the  other  Wherf  ore  it  is  impoffible  that  they  (houldbe  meafured  by  two  or  by  any 
other  number  befdes  vnitie. Wherf  ore  G  is  an  odde  number.  And forafmuch  as  the  number 
E  F  is  double  to  the  number  E  U,iherfore  the fquare  number  produced  ofE  F  is  quadruple 
to  the  fquare  number  produced  ofE  H.And  the  fquare  number  produced  of E  F  is  double  to 
the fquare  number  produced  ofG.  Wherf  ore  thefquare  number  produced  of  G  is  double  to 
the  fquare  number  produced  of E  H  .Wherf ore  the  fquare  number  produced  ofG  is  an  euen 
number  Wherf ore  alfo  by  thofe  thinges  which  haue bene  before fpoken,  the  number  Gis  an 
euen  number , but  it  is proued  that  it  is  an  odde  number , which  is  impofible.  Wherefore  the 
line  AC  is  not  cSmmenfurabk  in  length  to  the  line  A  B, wherf  ore  it  is  incommenfurable . 

An  other  demonftration. 

We  may  by  an  other  demonstration proue,  that  the  diameter  of  a fquare  is  incommenfu¬ 
rable  to  the fide  thereof.  Suppofe  that  there  be  a fquare ,  whofe  diameter  let  be  A  and  let  the 
fide  thereof  be  B.T hen  1 fay  that  the  line  A  is  incommenfurable  in  length  to  the  Line  B .  For 
if  it  bepojfible  let  it  be  commenfurable  in  length .  <Wnd  agayne  as  the  line  A  is  to  the  line  B 
fo  let  the  number  E  F  be  to  the  number  G  :  and  let  them  be  the  leall  that  haue  one  and  the 
fame  proportion  with  them :  wherefore  the  numbers  E  F  and 
G,  are prime  the  one  to  the  other .  Fir  SI  1 fay  that  G  is  not  v- 
nitie .  Forifitbepoffibleletitbe  vnitie.  And  for  that  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  the fquare  of the  line  B  ,as  the fquare 
number  produced  of  Si  F  is  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of 
G  (  as  it  was  proued  in  the  former  demonftration  )  but  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  is  double  to  the fquare  of  the  lineE.Wher 
fore  the fquare  nuber  produced /EF  «  double  to  the fquare 
number  produced  ofG.  And  by  your fuppofition  G  is  vnitie. 

Wherefore  the fquare  number  produced  ofE  F  is  the  number 
two  which  is  impoffible  .Wherefore  G  is  not  vnitie .  Wherefore  it  is  a  number .  And  for  that 
as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  thefquare  of  the  line  B  ,fo  is  the fquare  number  produced  of 
E  F  to  the  fquare  number  produced  of G  .  Wherefore  the fquare  number  produced  ofE  F  is 
double  to  the  fquare  number  produced  ofG .  Wherefore  the  fquare  number  produced  of  G 
meafureth  thefquare  number  produced  ofE  F  .  Wherefore  alfo  (  by  the  14. of  the  eight )  the 
number  G  meafureth  the  number  E  F  :and  the  number  G  alfo  meafureth  it  felfe.  Wherefore 
the  number  G  meafureth  thefe  numbers  E  F  and  G ,  when  yet  they  are  prime  the  one  to  the 

RR.i.  other 


<An  ether  de& 
wonUration 
leading  to  an 
mpophUim • 


The  tenth  Booke 

mhtr:  which  is  impoffiblt » Wherefore  the  diameter  A  is  not  commenfurable  in  length  to  th $ 
fide  B  Wherefore  it  is  incommenfurablciwhich  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

An  other  demonftration  after  Flujfas , 

Stippofe  that  vppon  the  line  A  B  be  defcribed  a  fquare 
whofe  diameter  let  be  the  line  A  C  .  Then  I  fay  that  the  fide 
A  B  is  incommenfurable  in  length  vnto  the  diameter  A  C.For- 
afmuch  as  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  equall }  therefore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  C  is  double  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  by 
the  47. of  the  firft.Take  by  the  i.of  the  eight  nubers  how  many 
foeuer  in  continuall proportion  fro  vnitie,  and  in  the  proporti¬ 
on  of  the  fquaresofthe  lines  A  Band  AC  .  Which  let  be  the 
numbers  D,E,F,G.  And  forafmuch  as  the  firft  from  vnitie  name 
ly  E  is  no  fquare  number ,for  that  it  is  a  prime  number ,  neither 
is  alfo  any  other  of  the  fayd  numbers  a  fquare  number  except 
the  third  from  vnitie  and  fo  all  the  reft  leuing  one  betwene,by 
the  r  o.of  the  ninth .  Wherefore  D  is  to  E,or  E  to  F,or  F  to  G, 
in  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  is  to  a  number  not 
fquare  .W  herefore  by  the  corrollary  of  the  zj  .of  the  eight, they 
are  not  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  a  fquare 
number  is  to  a  fquare  number .  Wherefore  neither  alfohaue 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  A  Cfwhich  are  in  the  fame  pro¬ 
portion)  that  porportion  thata  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 
number fW  herefore  by  thejt.of  this  booke  their  fides,namely, 
the  fide  A  Band  the  diameter  AC  are  incommenfurable  in 
length  theone  to  the  otherwhich  was  required  to  beproued. 

This  demonftration  I  thought  good  to  adde,forthat  the  former  demonftradons 
feme  not  fo  full,and  they  are  thought  of  forne  to  be  none  o!£Theons9asSL\(o  thepropofi- 
tion  to  be  none  o£Euclides » 

Here  followeth  an  inftru&ion  by  fome  ftudious  and  fkilfull  Grecian 
(perchance  Theon )  which  teacheth  vs  of  farther  vfe  and 
fruite  ofthefeirrationall  lines. 

Seing  that  there  are  founde  out  right  lines  incommenfurable  in  length  the  one  to  the  el 
■t her,  as  the  lines  A  and  B ,  there  may  alfo  be  founde  out  many  other  magnitudes  hauing  legth 
and  breadth  ( fuch  as  are  playm fuperfcieces )  which  Jhalbe  incommefurable  the  one  to  the  0- 
ther.For  if( by  the  13  .of  the fixth )  betwene  the  lines  A  and  B  there  be  taken  the  meane pro~ 
portionall  line, namely  C ,  then  ( by  the fecond  corrollary  of  the  20 .  of  the fixth )  as  the  line  A 
is  to  the  line  Rfois  thefgure  defcribed  vpon  the  line  A  to  thefgure  defcribed  vpon  the  line 
C,  being  both  like  and  in  like  fort  defcribed,  that  is,  whether  they  be  fquares  ( which  are  al- 
wayes  like  the  one  to  the  other), or  whether  they  he  any  other  like  relliline figures,  or  whether 
they  be  circles  aboute  the  diameters  AandC.  Forcir- 

fleshauethat  proportion  the  one  to  the  other ,  that  the  £ - - - - ► 

fquares  of  their  diameters  haue{by  the  2. of  the  twelfth).  c 

Wherfore  ( by  the  fecond part  of  the  10.  of  the  tenth )  the  * - * 

figures  deficribed  ■ vpon  the  lines  A  and  C  being  like  and  $ _ 

in  like  fort  deficribed  are  incommenfurable  the  one  to  the 

other  Wherfore  by  this  meanes  there  are  founde  out  fuperfcieces  incommenfurable  theone 
to  the  other.  In  like fort  there  may  be founde  outfgures  come  fur  able  the  one  to  the  other, if  ye 
put  the  lines  A  and  B  to  be  comenfurable  in  legth  the  one  to  the  other.  And  feing  that  it  is  fo, 
now  let  vs  alfo  proue  that  euen  in  folifles  alfo  or  ho  dyes  there  are  fome  commenfurable  the 
one  to  the  other, and  other  fome  incommenfurable  the  one  to  the  other .  For  if  from  echo 
of  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  and  B*  or  from  any  other  rcffiline  figures  equal  to  thefe  fquares 


8  x 


D  . 

E  .. 

F  .... 
G.... 


ofEuclides  Elementcs.  Fohy.  i. 

he  erected  folides  of  e  quail  altitude,  whether  thofe folides  be  compofd of  equidistant fuperf- 
cieceSiOr  whether  they  btpwafrtids >or prifmes,  thofe folides  fdereffedfhaibe  inthatproportio 
the  one  to  the  other  that  theyr  bafes  are( by  the  3  2. of  the  eleuenth  and $. and  6. of  the  twelfth ) 
Howbeit  there  is  no  fuch  prop  of iion  -concerning frifnes .  t_And fo  if  the  bafes  of  the folides 
be  cowmen  fur  able  the  one  to  the  other,  the folides  alfo  fall  be  commenfurable  the  one  to  the 
other, ayqdjf the  bafes  be  imommen fur  able  the  one  to  the  other, the folides  alfo  fhall  be  w  ceru¬ 
men  fur  able  the  one  to  the  otfer\by  the  10. of fhi  tenth )  I  And  if  there  be  two  circles  A  and  Br 
and  vpon  echo  of  the  circles  be  ereffef Cones  or  CiUndehi  of  equal  altitude, thofe  Coner&Ch 
binders  [hall  bemthat  proportion  the  onepa  the  other  that. the  circles  are,which  are  their  ba¬ 
fes  (  by  the  1 1  ,of the  twelfth )  rand- ft  if  the  circles  he,  cbrnmenfur able  the  one  to  the  other ,  the 
Cones  and  Cilinders  alfo  fhallbe  commenfurable  thOyone  to  the  other .  But  if  the  circles  be  in - 
tomenfur able  the  one  to  the  other ,  the  Cones  alfo  and  Cilinders jhalbe  incomen  fur  able the 
me  to  the  other,  {by  they  0  .of  the  tenth )  .  Wherefore it  is  manifejl-that  not  onely  in  lines  and 
ftperfcieces, but alf  in folides' or  bodye sis founti Icommen fttrabilitk or  incommenfurability * 

3X3IT  :  :  .  It  £  oJ  Z& .anil  £  ’  v;  t  S  '  V-  ) 

Although  this  propofition  were  by  Euc tide  to  this  booke  alotted.f as  by  the  auncient  greqan  pub** 
lifted  vnder  the  name  of AripotelesJlifi  «T^v-^o^®y^\^tddfeine  to  be,and  alfo  the  property  of 
the  farae,agreableitQ  the  matter  of  this  booke,and  th£propofitionitfelfe,'fo  famous  in  Philofdphy  and 
logicke,as  it  \vas,wouidin-  maneperauq  his  elemetalplaee0itj  this  teth  boke)yetth6  dignitie  &  perfec- 
tionjof  Mathematical!  Method  can  not  allow  it  here :  as  in  due  order  following:  But  moil  aptly  after  the 
9  •  propofitio  of  this  booke,as  a  Corrollary  of  the  lift'  part  thereof  And  vndoubtedly  the  propofitio  hath 
for  this  2ooo.yeares  bene  notably'  regarded  among  the  greke  -Philofophers  :  and  before  Artftetles  time 
was  concluded  with  the  very  fameinconuenience  to  the*  gaynefayer.*:  that  thejirft  tfemonliration  here 
induceth ,nameiy,o*M?  number  to  he  eqaall  to  euen :  as  may  appeare  in  Annettes  worke ,  named  AnA'tuw 
prima,  the  firft  booke  and  40.  chapter  .But  els  in  very  many  places  of  his  workes  he  maketh  mention  of 
the  propofition  .Euident  alfo  it  is  that  Euclide  was  about  krififUa  time , and  in  that  age  the  nloft  excel- 
lent  Geometrician  among  the  Grekes.Wherefore3feiiig  it  was  ft  publike' in  His  time,fo  famous, and  fo* 
appertayning  to  the  property  of  this  booke:  it  is  moll  likely,  both  to  be  knowne  to  Eucltde ,  and  alfo  to 
haue bene  by  him  in  apt  order  placed  .But  of  the  difordringof  it,  can  remayner.odoubt ,  ifyeconfider 
in  Zamherts  tranflation  ,two  other  prop  ofi  t  ions  going  next  beforeipfo  farre  mifplace.d,  that  where  they 
Hie,  word  for  wordftefore  duely  placed, being  the  105. and  roe.yet  here(after  the  booke  ended) ,  they, 
are  repeated  with  the  numbers  of  n6.and  117. propofition  .  Zambert  therein  was  more  fay thfiill  to  fol¬ 
low  as  he  found  in  his  greke  example,than  he  was  f  kilfull  or  carefull  to  doe  what  was  neceflary, 
Yeaandfomegreke  written  auncient  copyes  haue  them  not  fo  :  Though  in  deede  they  be*” ' 
well  demonftrated,  yet  truth  diforded,is  halfe  difgraced  ■  efpecially  where  the  patterns 
of  good  order,by  profei'fion  isauouched  to  be.But  through  ignoraunce,arrogan- 
cy and  temeritie  of  vnfkilfull  Methode Mafters.many  thinges remayne 

yet ,  in  thefe  Geometricall  Elementes,  vnduely  tumbled  in: 

•  though  true ,  yet  with  difgrace  :  which  by  helps  offo 

many  wittes  and  habilitie  of  fuch,as  now  may 
tr  haue  good  caufe  to  be  fkilfull  herein, 
will(i  hope)ere  long  be  taken  a~ 
way :  and  thinges  of  impor- 
i  tance  ( wanting)  fup- 

plied.  ' 


CYd  t *  JJ  *riu  *  ■'L'.:.  'id  -■ 

QrJbuclidexKle^a  - 


The  argument 

off  he  eleventh 

booke. 


0 4 point  the  be- 
ginning  of  all 
quant!  tie  con- 

tint!  all. 

T  he  methode 
fyfedbj  Eucltde 
in  the  ten  for¬ 
mer  booses. 
Ttrfl  books. 
Second  books. 


Third  books- 
Fourth  books. 

Fiueth  booke . 


Sixth  books * 


Seuenth  books 
Eight  books- 
Ninth  books « 


Tenth  books- 


What  is  entrt-i 
ted  of  in  the 
fae  books1  fol¬ 
lowing- 

Fine  regular  bo¬ 
dies.!  he  fintill 
ends  S3  f  :0pe  °f 
Euchdss  Geo¬ 
metrical  Ele- 
tnentes. 
Comparifon  of 
the  firft  books 
and  this  eleueth 
books  together. 


elides  Elementes. 


IT  HER  TO  HATH  ETC  LID  B  IK  THBSE 
former  bookes  with  a  wonderful!  Methode  and  order 
entreated  of  fuch  kindes  of  figures  fuperficial,which  are 
l  or  may  be  described  in  a  fuperficies  or  plaine.  And  hath 
taught  and  fet  forth  their  properties,  natures,  generati¬ 
ons,  and  productions  enen  from  the  firft  roote,ground, 
rfj;  and  beginning  of  them; :  namely, from  a  point,which  al- 
though  it  be  indiuifible,  yet  is  it  the  beginning  of  all 
*'  quantitie,andofitandofthemotion  and  flowing  ther- 
of  is  produced  a  line,and  confequently-  all  q n antitie  co- 
tinuall,  as  all  figures  playne  and  folide  what  fo  euer,£«- 
elide  therefore  in  his  firft  booke  began  with  it ,  and  from 
thence  went  he  to  a  line,  as  to  a  thing  moft  Ample  next 
vntoa  point, theiftd  a  fuperficies, and  to  angles,and  fd  through  the  whole  firft  booke, 
*  •  1  n — In'the  fecond  booke  he  entrea 


ted  further, and  went  vnto  more  harder  matter,and!  taught  of dSuifions  oflines,and  of 
the  multiplication  oflines,  and  of  their  partes,  andoftheir  paffions  and  properties. 
And  for  that  rightlined  figures  are  far  diftant  in  nature  and  propertie  from  round  and 
circular  figures,  in  the  third  bookehe  inftrudeth  the  reader  of  the  nature  and  conditio 
of  circles.  In  the  fourth  booke  he  compareth  figures  of  rightlines  and  circles  together, 
and  teacheth  how  to  deferibe  a  figure  of  right  lines  with  in  or  about  a  circle:  and  con- 
a  circle  with  in  or  about  a  re&iline  figure .  In  the  fifth  booke  he  fearcheth  out 
the  nature  of  proportion  (a  matter  of  wonderfull  vfie  and  deepe  confideration),for  that 
otherwife  he  could  notcompare  figure  with  figure,  or  the  fides  of  figures  together. 
For  whatfoeuer  is  compared  to  any  other  thing,  is  compared  vnto  it  vndoubtedly  vn» 
der  feme  kinde  of  proportion.  Wherefore  in  the  fixth  booke  he  compareth  figures  to¬ 
gether, one  to  an  other,likewife  their  fides.  And  for  that  the  nature  of  proportion,  can 
not  be  fully  and  clearely  fenc  without  the  knowledge  of  number,  whereinitis  firftand 
chiefely  found.-in  the  feuenth,eight,and  ninth  bookes,  heentreateth  of  number,  &of 
the  kindhs  and  properties  thereof.  And  becanfe  that  the  fides  of  folide  bodyes,  for  the 
moft  part  are  of  fuch  fo££,that  compared  together ,  they  haue  fuch  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other,which  cannot  be  expreffed  by  any  number  certayne,an4  therefore  are  cal¬ 
led  irrational  lines,  he  in  the  teth  boke  hath  writte  &  taught  which  lines  are  comefura- 
ble  or  incomefurablethe  one  to  the  othcr,and  of  the  diuerfitie  of  kindes  of  irrationall 
lines  with  all  the  conditions  &  proprieties  of  them.  And  thus  hath  Eucltde  in  thefe  ten 
forefayd  bokes,fully  &  moft  pletcouffy  in  a  meruelous  order  taught,whatfoeuer  femed 
neceffary,and  requifite  to  the  knowledge  of  all  fuperficiall  figures, of  what  fort  &forme 
foeuertheybe.  Nowin  thefe  bookes  following  heentreateth  of  figures  of  an  other 
kinde,namely,of  bodely  figures:as  of  Cubes,Piramids, Cones,  Columnes,  Cilinders, 
Parallelipipecion  ^Spheres  and  fuch  others  tandfheweth  the  diuerfitie  of  the,  the  gene¬ 
ration, and  produdion  of  them, and  demonfirateth  with  great  and  wonderful!  art,their 
proprieties  and  paffion  s,with  all  their  natures  and  conditions ,  He  alfo  compareth  one 
of  them  to  an  other ,  whereby  to  know  the  reafon  and  proportion  of  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther,  chiefely  of  thefiue  bodyes  which  are  called  regular  bodyes  .  And  thefe  are  the 
things  of  all  other  entreated  of  in  <3edfnetrie ,  mofif worthy  and  of  greateft  dignitie, 
and  as  it  were  the  end  and  finall  entent  of  the  whole  are  of  Geometrie ,  and  forwhofc 
caufe  hath  bene  written,  and  fpokeh  whatfoeuer  hath  hitherto  in  the  former  bookes 
bene  fayd  or  written.  As  the  firft  booke  was  a  ground  ,  apda  neceffary  entrye  to  all  the 
reft  following,  fo  is  this  eleuenth  booke  a  neceffary  entrie  and  groundto  thereft  which 
follow .  And  as  that  contayned  the  declaration  of  wordes ,  and  definitions  of  thinges 

requifite 


oj-Suclides  Elementes .  FoL  yi* 

fequifite  to  the  knowledge  of  fuperficial  figures, and  entreated  of  lines  (and  of  their  dl- 
pifioDS  and  fedions )  which  are  the  terrnes  and  limites  of  -fuperficiali  figures :  fo  in  this 
booke  is  fet  forth  the  declaration  6f  wordes  and  definitions  of  thinges  pertayrtingto 
folide  and  corporal!  figures:and  alfo  of  fuperficieces  which  are  the  tetmes  &  limites  of 
folides  :i»oreouer  ofthe  diuifionand  interfe&ion  ofthenn,  and  diners  other  thinges, 
Without  which  the  knowledge  of  bodely  and  folide  formes  cannot  beattayned  vnto. 
And  firftis  fet  the  definitions  as  folioweth. 

! Definitions . 

A  folide  or  body  is  that  "Which  bath  length -3  breadth }  and  thicknes 3  and  the 
terme  or  limite  of a folide  is  a fuperficies. 


There  are  three  kindes  of  continuall  quantities  line,  a  fuperficies,and  a  folide  or  body :  the  begin  ¬ 
ning  of  all  which  (as  before  hath  bene  fayd  )  isapoynt,  which  is  indiuifible.Two  of  thefe  quantities, 
namely,  aline  and  a  fuperficies ,  were  defined  of  Euclide  before  in  his  firft  booke  .  But  the  third  kinde, 
namely,  a  folide  or  body  he  there  defined  not,as  a  thing  which  pertayned  not  then  to  his  purpofe :  but 
here  in  this  place  he  fetteth  the  definitio  therof,  as  that  which  chiefely  now  percayneth  to  his  purpofe, 
and  without  which  nothing  in  thefe  thinges  can  profitably  be  taught .  4 folide  (fayth  he  )  is  that  which 
hath  le?j h Jsreadth ,andthid^ies }or  depth.  There  are  ( as  before  hath  bene  taught )  three  reafons  or  meanes 
of  meafuring,which  are  called  comonly  dimenfions,  namely,  length,breadth,  and  thicknes .  Thefe  di¬ 
menfions  are  aferibed  vnto  quantities  oneiy.By  thefe  are  all  kindes  of  quantitie  defined,  &  are  counted 
perfect  or  imperfedpaccording  as  they  are  pertaker  of  fewer  or  more  of  them  .  As  Euclide  defined  a  line, 
aferibing  vnto  it  ondy  one  of  thefe  dimenfions,  namely,  length  :  Whereforea  line  is  the  imperfedieft 
kinde  of  quantitie. In  defining  of  a  fuperficies,he  aferibed  vnto  it  two  dimenfions,  namely,  length,  and 
breadth :  whereby  a  fuperficies  is  a  quantitie  of  greater  perfe&ion  then  is  a  line,  but  here  in  the  defini- 
cio  of  a  folide  or  body.  Euclide  attributed!  vnto  it  ail  the  three  dimenfios,legch, breadth,  and  thicknes. 
Whcrfore  a  folide  is  the  moil  p-rfecteft  quantitic,which  wanteth  no  dimenfion  at  all,paffing.a  lyne  by 
two  dimenfions, and  paffinga  fuperficies  by  one.  This  definition  of  a  folide  is  without  any  defignation 
of  forme  or  figure  eafiiy  vnderftanded,onely  concerning  in  minde,or  beholding  with  the’eye  a  piece  of 
timber  or  ftone,or  what  matter  foeuerels,whofe  dimenfions  let  be  equall  or  vnequall.  For  example 
let  the  length  therof  be  f. inches, the  breadth  4.  and  the  thicknes  2.  if  the  dimenfions  were  equall,  the 
reafon  is  like, and  all  one, as  it  is  in  a  Sphere  and  in  a  cube.For  in  that  refpedt  and  confederation  onely, 
that  itis  long, broade,and  thickest  bearcth  the  name  ofa  folide  or  body,and  hath, the  nature  and  pro¬ 
perties  therof.There  is  added  to  the  ende  of  the  definition  ofa  folide,that  the  terme  and  iimite  ofa  fo- 
Ticle  is  a  fuperficies. Of  thinges  infinitie  there  is  no  Arte  or  Science.All  quantities  therfore  in  this  Arte 
entreated  of, are  imagined  to  be  finite, and  to  haue  their  endes  and  borders  as  hath  bene  (hewed  in  the 
iirir  booke,  that  the  Iimites  and  endes  of  a  line  are  pointes,  and  the  limites  or  borders  ofa  fuperficies 
are  iir.es,fo  now  he  faith  that  the  endes,limites, or  borders  of  a  folide  are  fuperficiecggfc  ‘As  the  fide  of 
any  fquare  piece  of  timber,or  ofa  table,or  die,or  any  other  like,are  the  terrnes  and  limites  of  them . 


dr  amen  l)pon  the  ground plaine fuperficies. 


Suppofe  that  vpon  the  grounde  plaync  fuperfi¬ 
cies  cdef  from  the  pointe  s  be  erefted  a  right  line, 
namely,  b  a,  fo  that  let  the  point  a  be  a  loft  in  theayre. 
Drawe  alfo  from  the  peynte  b  in  the  playne  fuperficies  c- 
d  e  f,  as  many  right  lines  as  ye  lift,  as  the  lines  b  c, 
b  d,  b  e,  b  f,  b  0,  b  k,  b  h,  and  Bt.  if  the  ere&ed  line 
b  a  with  all  thefe  lines  drawen  in  the  fuperficies  c  d  e  p 
make  a  right  angle,  fq  that  all  thefe  angles  ab  c,  a  b  d, 
.a  b  e,  ab  f,ab  g,  a  b  k,  a  b  h,  a  b  l,  andfo  ofothers,he 
right  angles,  then hy  this  definition,  the  line  ab  is  a  line 
erected  vpon  the  fuperficies  cdef:  it  is  alfo  called  com¬ 
monly  a  perpendicular  line  or  a  plumb  line, vnto  or  vpon  a 
fuperficies. 


h 

< 

t*  ■ 

It 

B  Tf 

A 

\  "" 

\ 

dare 


K 


F 


RR.iij. 


3  A 


Firfi  diffink 
Um 


folide  tbs 
tnoft  perfect 
teitquantitfe* 


N 0  f dents  of 
thinges  mg- 
trite. 


Second  difs* 
nitkn* 


- 


of 8uelid.es  Element es*  FoL  yz. 

reqmfitc  to  the  knowledge  of  fuperficial  figures, and  entreated  of  lines  (and  of  their  du 
uifions  and  fedions )  which  are  the  termes  and  limites  of  fitperficiali  figures :  £b  in  this 
booke  is  fet  forth  the  declaration  of  wordes  and  definitions  of  thinges  pertayrtingto 
folide  and  corporall  figures:and  alfo  of  fuperficieces  which  are  the  termes  &  limites  of 
folides  :  moreouer  of  the  diuifionand  interfedion  of  them..,  and  diners  other  thinges. 

Without  which  the  knowledge  of  bodely  and  folide  formes  cannot  beattayned  vnto. 

An d  fir  ft  is  fet  the  definitions  as  folioweth. 

1 'Definitions . 

A  folide  or  body  is  that  "frhich  hath  lengthy  breadth }  and  thkknes t  and  the  &r£  difjlnU 
terme  or  limite  of a folide  is  a fuperficies,  *«?« 

There  are  three  kindes  of  continuall  quantitie,?.  line,  a  fuperficies,and  a  foltde  or  body :  the  begin¬ 
ning  ofall  which  (  as  before  hath  bene  fayd  )  is  apoynt ,  which  is  indiuifible.Two  of  thefe  quantities, 
namely,  a  line  and  a  fuperficies ,  were  defined  of  Euclidc  before  in  his  firft  booke  .  But  the  third  kinde, 
namely,  a  folide  or  body  he  there  defined  not,as  a  thing  which  pertayned  not  then  to  his  purpofe :  but 
here  in  this  place  hefetteth  the  definitio  therof,  as  that  which  chiefely  now  pertayneth  to  his  purpofe, 
and  without  which  nothing  in  thefe  thinges  can  profitably  be  taught .  A foltde  (fayth  he  )  is  that  which 
hath  legs h, breadth, xndthicknes^r  depth.  There  are  ( as  before  hath  bene  taught )  three  reafons  or  meanes 
of  mcafuring,' which  are  called  comonly  dimenfions,  namely,length,breackh,  and  thicknes  .  Thefe  di- 
raenfions  are  aferibed  vnto  quantities  oneiy  .By  thefe  are  all  kindes  of  quantitie  defined,  &  are  counted 
perfed  or  imperfed,  according  as  they  are  pertaker  of  fewer  or  more  of  them  .  hsEuclide  defined  a  line, 
aferibing  vnto  it  oneiy  one  of  thefe  dimenfions ,  namely,  length  :  Wherefore  a  line  is  the  imperfedeft 
kinde  of  quantitie  .In  defining  of  a  fuperficies,he  aferibed  vnto  it  two  dimenfions,  namely,  length,  and 
breadth :  whereby  a  fuperficies  is  a  quantitie  of  greater  perfedion  then  is  a  line,  but  here  in  the  defini  - 
cio  of  a  folide  or  body.  Euclidc  attributed!  vnto  it  ail  the  three  dimenfi6s,legth,breadth,  and  thicknes. 

W-hcrfore  a  folide  is  the  moll  perfedeft  quantitie, which  wanteth  no  dimenfion  at  alhpafiing  ?  lyne  by  *  , 

two  dimenfions, and  paffinga  fuperficies  by  one.  This  definitionofafblideis  without  any  defignation  ty^/°ude  the 
of  forme  or  figure  eafily  vnderftanded,onely  concerning  in  minde,or  beholding  with  the  eye  a  piece  of  mofl  petfec-* 
timber  or  ltone,or  what  matter  fo  euer  els,whofe  dimenfions  let  be  equall  or  vnequall.  For  example  teSl  quantitie  v 
.let  the  length  therof  be  s'. inches, the  breadth  4.  and  the  thicknes  * .  if  the  dimenfions  were  equall,  the 
Veafon  is  like,and  all  one.as  it  is  in  a  Sphere  and  in  a  cube.For  in  that  refped  and  conlideration  oneiy, 
tha  t  it  is  long, broade,and  thickest  beareth  the  name  ofa  folide  or  body,and  hath, the  nature  and  pro- 
"perties  therof.Thereis  added  to  the  ende  of  the  definition  ofafolide,that  the  termeand  limite  of  a  fo- 
Tide  is  a  fuperficies.Of  thinges  infinitie  there  is  no  Arte  or  Science.All  quantities  therfore  in  this  Arte 
entreated  of, are  imagined  to  be  finite, and  to  haue  their  endes  and  borders  as  hath  bene  fliewed  in  the  No  ( eietttg  of 
firft  booke, that  the  Iimites  and  endes  of  a  line  are  pointes,  and  the  limites  or  borders  ofa  fuperficies  thinga  inf 
are  iines,fo  now  he  faith  that  the  endes,limites,or  borders  of  a  folide  are  fuperficiecj#  As  the  fide  of  *'  " 1 

any  fquare  piece  of  timber,or  ofa  table,or  die,or  any  other  like, are  the  termes  and  limites  of  them . 


2  A  right  Vine  is  then  ereEled  perpendicularly  to  a  plaine fuperficies  yfrhe 

the  right  line  maketh  right  angles  "frith  all  the  lines  which  touch  itymd are  Sef?Mdrifk , 
draiven  frpon  the  ground  plaine fiuperfiries. 


Suppofe  that  vpon  the  grounde  plaync  fuperfi¬ 
cies  c  d  e  f  from  the  pointe  b  be  erefted  a  right  line, 
namely,  b  a,  fo  that  let  the  point  a  be  a  loft  in  theayre. 
Drawe  alfo  from  the  poynte  b  in  the  playne  fuperficies  c- 
d  e  f,  as  many  right  lines  as  ye  lift,  as  the  lines  b  c, 
b  d,  b  e,  b  f,  b  g,  b  k,  b  h,  and  b  l  .  If  the  erected  line 
b  a  with  all  thefe  lines  drawen  in  the  fuperficies  cdbj 
make  a  right  angle,  fo  that  all  thefe  angles  ab  c,  a  b  d, 
.a  b  e,  a  b  f,ab  g,  a  b  k,  a  b  h,  a  b  l,  and lo  of others,be 
right  angles,  then  by  this  definition,  the  line  ab  is  a  line 
ereefted  vpon  the  fuperficies  cdef;  it  is  alfo  called  com¬ 
monly  a  perpendicular  line  or  a  plumb  line, vnto  or  vpon  a 
fuperficies. 


c  e  3 


Third  iiffini- 
tion. 


Two  difftni 
Siam  included 
in  this  dijfi -  ^ 
ration. 
Deilaratio  of 
thefifip&rt. 


Declaration 
of  the  fecund 
part* 


Fwtth  difft- 
tmm* 


3  ji  plaine  fuperficies  is  then  Tpright  or  ere  fifed  perpendicularly  to  a 
plaine fuperficies  ,Tvhen  all  the  right  lines  drawen  in  one  of  the  plaine  fit * 
perficieces  lento  the  common  feciion  of  thofe  two  plaine  fuper faeces ,  ma* 
king  therwith  right  angles ,  do  alfo  make  right  angles  to  the  other  plaine. 
Juperficies .  Inclination  or  leaning  of  a  right  line3  to  a  plaine  fuperficies, 
is  an  acute  angle ,  contained  lander  a  right  line  falling  from  a  point  abode 
to  the  plaine fuperficies ,  and  Imder  an  other  right  line  from  the  lower  end 
of  the  fay  d  linefi  letdowne)  drawen  in  the  fame  plaine  fuperficies ,  by  a 
certaine  point  afligned, inhere  a  right  line  from  the firft point  alone, to  the 
fame  plaine  fuperficies  falling  perpendicularly joucheth. 


In  this  third  definition  are  included  two  definitions :  the  firft  is  - 
pendicularly  vpon  a  plaine  fuperficies  .  The  fecond  is  ofthe  inclinac: 
a  fuperficies :  of  the  firft  take  this  example.  Suppofe  ye  haue  two  ftipei 
which  let  the  fuperficies  C  D  E  F  be  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies,  and 
refted  vnto  it,  and  let  the  line  CD  be  a  common  terme  orin- 
terfeflion  to  them  both,  that  is,  let  it  be  the  end  or  bound  of 
eicher  of  them.,  &  be  drawen  in  either  of  them  :  in  which  line 
note  at  pleafure  certaine  pointes,as  the  point  G,  H.  From 
which  pointes  vnto  the  line  C  D,  draw  perpendicularjines  in 
the  fuperficies  ABCD,  which  let  be  G  L  and  H  K,which  fal¬ 
ling  vpon  tire  fuperficies  CDEF,if  they  caufe  right  angles 
with  itjthat  is,  with  lines  drawen  in  it’from  the  fame  pointes 
G  and  H,  as  if  the  angle  L  G  M  or  the  angle  L  G  N  comayned 
vnder  the  line  L  G  drawen  in  the  fuperficies  eredted,and  vnder 
the  G  M  or  G  N  drawen  in  the  ground  fuperficies  C  D  E  F  ly¬ 
ing  fiat,  be  'a  right  angle, then  by  this  definition,the  fuperficies 
ABCD  is  vprigbt  or  eredted  vpon  the  fuperficies  C  D  E  F .  It  is  alfo  commonly  called  a  fuperficies 
perpendicular  vpon  or  vnto  a  fuperficies. 

For  the  fecond  part  ofthis  definition,  which  is  ofthe  inclination  ofa  right  line  vnto  a  plaine  fu- 
perficies,take  this  example .  Let  ABCD  be  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies,  vpon  which  from  a  point 
beingaloft,  namely,  the  point  E,  fuppofe  a  right  line  to  fall,  which  let  be  the  line  EG,  touching  the 
plaine  fuperficies  A  B  C  D  at  the  poynt  G .  Againe,from  the  point  E,  being  the  toppe  or  higher  limite 
and  end  of  the  inclining  line  E  G,let  a  perpendicular  line  fall  vnto  the  plaine  fuperficies  A  B  C  D,  which 
let  be  the  line  E  F,  andletF  be  the  point  where  EF  toucheth  the  plaine  fuperficies  ABCD.  Then 
from  the  point  of  the  fall  of  the  line  inclining  vpon  the  fuperficies  vnto 
the  point  of  the  falling  ofthe  perpendicular  line  vpon  the  fame  fuper-  • 
ficies,  that  is,  from  the  point  G  to  the  point  F,  draw  fright  line  GF. 

Now  by  this  definition,  the  acute  angle  E  G  F  is  the  inclination  of  the 
line  EG  vnto  the  fuperficies  AB  CD  .Becaufeitiscontayned  ofthe 
inclining  line,  and  of  the  right  line  drawen  in  the  fuperficies,  from  the  , 
point  oi  the  fall  of  the  line  inclining  to  the  point  of  the  fall  of  the  per-  , 
pendicular  line  :  which  angle  muft  of  neceffitie  be  an  acute  angle  .  For 

the  angle  E  F  G  is  by  conftrudtion  a  right  angle,and  threeangles  in  a  triang  lit 

angles  .  Wherefore  the  other  two  angles,namely,  the  angles  E  G  F,  and  G .  at 

angle.Wherfore  either  of  them  is  lefte  then  a  right  angle.  Wherfore  theangl 


4  Inclination  of a  plaine fuperficies  to  a  plaine fuperficies,  is  an  acute  an * 
gle  contayned  lender  the  right  lines,  Tvhich  being  drawen  in  either  of  the 
plaine fuperficieces  to  one  &  the felf fame  point  of the  comon fefiion,  mah 
Tilth  the fefifion  right  angles . 


Suppofe 


of  Suclides  Elements . 


PoLffi* 


:Suppofe  that  there  be  two  fuperficieces  ABCD&rEFG  H,  ■ 
and  let  the  fuperficies  A.B  C  D  be  fuppofed  to  be  ere&ed  not  -c* 
perpendicularly,butfomewhat  leaning  and  inclining  vtno  the  • 
plaine  fuperficies  EF  GH,  asm  uchoraslitle  as  ye  will  :  the 
comonterme  or  fe&ioft  ofwhich  two  fuperficieces  let  be  the 
lineC  D  .From  fome  one  point,as  from  the  point  M  affigned 
in  the  common  fedtion'ofrhe  two  fuperficieces,namely,in  the 
line  C  D,  draw  a  perpendicular  line  in  either  fuperficies. In  the 
ground  fuperficies  E  F  G  H  draw  the  line  M  K,  and  in  the  fu¬ 
perficies  ABCD  draw  the  line  M  L  .  Now  ifthe  angle  L.M  K 
be  an  acute  angle,  then  is  that  angle  the  inclination  of  the  fu¬ 
perficies  ABCD  vnto  the  fuperficies  E  F  G  H,  by  this  defini¬ 
tion,  becaufe  it  is  contained  of  perpendicular  lines  drawen  irt 
either  of  the  fuperficieces  to  one  and  the  felf  fame  point  being 
the  common  feftion  of  them  both. 

s-.~i  «t>  ’  ■  '  <•  •  '  V, 

s  Blaine fuperficieces  are  in  like  fort  inclined 

the  fityd  angles  of  inclination  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other . 


a ;  r. 


■  t. 


'n  Fifth  dijfinl* 

ticft. 


This  definition  needeth  no  declaration  atall,butis  moftmanifeft  by  the  definition  Iafi  going  before. 
For  in  confidering  the  inclinations  of  diners  fuperficieces  to  others,  if  the  acute  angles  contaynedvn- 
der  the  perpendicular  lines  drawen  in  them  from  one  point  affigned  in  ech  of  their  common  fe&ioris 
be  equal],  as  if  to  the  angle  lm  k  in  the  former  example  be  geuen  an  other  angle  in  the  inclination  of 
two  other  fuperficieces  equal!,  then  is  the  inclination  of thefe  fuperficieces  like,  and  are  by  this  defini¬ 
tion  fayd  in  like  fort  to  incline  the  one  to  the  other. 

Tbeedofius  geucth  an  other  definition  of  like  inclination  ofplaine  fuperficieces  the  one  to  the  other, 
after  this  rnaner  .  One  pl.‘ine  fuperficies  is  Itbg  inclined  to  an  other,  as  ait  other  fuperficies  is  to  an  other ,  when  ” 
in  either  of  the  plame  fuperficieces  right  lines  being  dravren,dnd  making  right  angles  with  their  common  fell  ion, 
cont nine  m  the  fame  point es  epuall angles  .  This  definition  is  in  fubfiance  the  fame  with  that  geuen  of 
Eucltde,  and  is  an  elucidation  of  it .  For  example  let  a  b  c  d  be  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies,  vnto  which 
let  the  fuperficies  ihj  incline  and  leane  .  And  let  the  common  fedfion  of  thefe  two  fuperficieces  be 
the  line  e  f  .Then  draweinecheofthefe  fuperficieces  right  lines  to  fome  one  point  of  the  common 
fediion  s  f,  which  let  be  the  point  g  :  with  which  fedtion  let  them  make  right  angles .  As  in  the  fuper¬ 


ficies  abcd  draw  the  line  h  g,  which  in  the  point  G  let  it  make  with  the  common  fedfio  a  right  angle 
h  g  f  or  h  g  e  .  Alfo  in  the  fuperficies  efik  draw  the  line  l  g,  which  in  the  point  g  together  with 
the  common  fedlion  b  f  let  make  alfo  a  right  angle  l  gf,  or  the  right  angle  igi. 

Now  alfo  let  there  be  an  other  ground  plaine  fuperficies, namely,the  fuperficies  m  n  o  p,  vnto  whom 
alfo  let  leane  and  incline  the  fuperficies  q_r  s  T,andletthe  common  fedlionorfegmentofthembethe 
line  .  And  draw  in  the  fuperficies  m  n  o  p  to  fome  one  point  of  the  comon  fedtion  as  to  the  point 
x  the  line  v  x,  making  with  the  common  fedtion  right  angles,  namely,  the  angle  vxR,or  the  angle: 
r  x  q~:  alfo  in  the  fuperficies  s-t  draw  the  right  line  t  x  to  thefame  point  x  in  the  common  fedti- 
on,  making  therwith  right  angles, as  the  angle  y  x  r,  or  the  angle  r  x  <^.  Now  (asfayth  the  definition) 
ifthe  angles  contayned  vnder  the  rightlines  drawen  in  thefe  fuperficieces  &  makingright  angles  with 
the  common  fedtion,bein  thepointes,thatis,in  thepointes  ofrheir  meting  in  the  common  fedtion,e- 
quail :  then  is  the  inclination  of  the  fuperficieces  equall.  As  in  this  example,  if  the  angle  t  g  h  con¬ 
tayned  vndertheline  l  g  being  in  the  inclining  fuperficies  uef  and  vnder  the  line  h  g  being  in 
the  ground  fuperficies  ab  c  d,  be  cquall,to  the  angle  r  xv  contayned  vndertheline  vx  being  in  the 

RR.iiij.  ground 


Third  diffwi- 
tion. 


Two  dijftni 
Horn  included 
in  this  dijfi-  b 
tiition. 
DecUratio  of 
the fi'Jl  pare* 


Declaration 
of  the  fecond 

part* 


IFmnh  difft- 
tatim* 


3  A  plaine  fuperficies  is  then  Tprighi  or  ereEled  perpendicularly  to  4 
plaine  fuperficies ,  K>hen  all  the  right  lines  drawen  in  one  of  the  plaine  Jit * 
perficieces  hmto  the  common  fe Elion  of  thofe  two  plaine  fuperficieces ,  ma* 
king  therwith  right  angles ,  do  alfo  make  right  angles  to  the  other  plaine 
jnperficies .  Inclination  or  leaningof a  right  line,  to  a  plaine  fuperficies , 
is  an  acute  angle,  contained  Tnder  a  right  line  falling  from  a  point  abode 
to  the  plaine  fuperficies,  andlmderan  other  right  line, from  the  lower  end 
of  the  fayd  line  ( let  downe  )  drawen  in  the  fame  plaine  fuperficies ,  by  a 
certaine point  afiigned, Cohere  a  right  line  from  the firft  point  aboue,to  the 
fame  plaine  Jnperficies  falling  perpendicularly, touchetb. 


In  this  third  definition  are  included  two  definitions :  the  firft  is  of  a  plaine  fuperficies  eredled  per¬ 
pendicularly  vpon  a  plaine  fuperficies  .  The  fecond  is  of  the  inclination  or  leaning  of  a  right  line  vnto 
a  fuperficies :  of  the  firft  cake  this  example.  Suppofe  ye  haue  two  fiiperficieces  A  B  C  D  and  C  D  E  F.  Of 
which  let'the  fuperficies  C'DEF  be  agroundplaine  fuperficies,  and  let  the  fuperficies  ABCD  bee- 
redied  vnto  it,  and  let  the  line  CD  be  a  common  terme  orin- 
terfedlion  to  them  both,  thatis,  letit  be  the  end  or  bound  of 
either  ofthem^,  &  be  drawen  in  either  of  them  :  in  which  line 
note  at pleafure  certaine  pointes,  as  the  point  G,  H.  Prom 
which  pointes  vnto  the  line  CD,  draw  perpendicular  lines  in 
the  fuperficies  ABCD,  which  let  be  G  L  and  H  K, which  fal¬ 
ling  vpon  the  fuperficies  CDEF,  if  they  caufe  right  angles 
With  it, that  is,  with  lines  drawen  initfrom  the  fame  pointes 
G  and  H,  as  if  the  angle  L  G  M  or  the  angle  L  G  N  contayned 

vnder  the  line  L  G  drawen  in  the  fuperficies  eredted,and  vnder  ~  - - — - - - 

theG  M  or  G  N  drawen  in  the  ground  fuperficies  CDE  F  ly-  M  J? 

ing  fiat,  be  a  right  angle, then  by  this  definition, the  fuperficies 
ABCD  is  vpright  or  eredted  vpon  the  fuperficies  CDEF.  It  is  alfo  co 
perpendicular  vpon  or  vnto  a  fuperficies. 

For  the  fecond  part  of  this  definition,  which  is  of  the  inclination  of  a 
perficies,take  this  example .  Let  A  B  C  D  be  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies, 
being  a  loft,  namely,  the  point  E,  fuppofe  a  right  line  to  fall,  which  let  be 
plaine  fuperficies  A  B  C  D  at  the  poynt  G .  Againe,from  the  point  E,  bein 
and  end  of  the  inclining  lineE  G,let  a  perpendicular  line  fall  vnto  the  plain 
let  be  the  line  EF,  andletF  be  the  point  where  EF  toucheth  the  plaine 
from  the  point  of  the  fall  of  the  line  inclining  vpon  the  fuperficies  vnto 
the  point  of the  falling  of  the  perpendicular  line  vpon  the  fame  fuper¬ 
ficies,  that  is,  from  the  point  G  to  the  point  F,  draw  a  right  line  G  F. 

Mow  by  this  definition,  the  acute  angle  EGF  is  the  inclination  of  the 
line  EG  vnto  the  fuperficies  AB  CD  .Becaufeitis  contayned  ofthe 
inclining  line,  and  of  the  right  line  drawen  in  the  fuperficies,  from  the 
point  ofthe  fall  ofthe  line  inclining  to  the  point  of  the  fall  of  the  per¬ 
pendicular  line  :  which  angle  mull  of  neceffitie  be  an  acute  angle  .  For 
the  angle  EFGis  by  conftrudtion  a  right  angle,and  three  angles  in  a  triangle  are  equall  to  two  right 
angles .  Wherefore  the  other  two  angles,namely,  the  angles  EGF,  and  G  E  F,  are  equall  to  one  right 
angle.Wherfore  either  of  them  is  lefte  then  a  right  an  gle.Wherfore  theangle  E  G  F  is  an  acute  angle. 


4  Inclination  of  a  plaine fuperficies  to  a  plaine fuperficies ,  is  an  acute  an * 
gle  contayned  lender  the  right  lines,  "Which being  drawen  in  either  of  the 
plaine  fuperficieces  to  one  &  the  felffame point  of  the  ernon  fe Elion,  mah 
"With  t  he  fe Elion  right  angles. 


Suppofe 


of  SuclulesElementes* 


and  let  the  fuperficies  A.B  C  D  be  fuppofed  to  be  ereded  not  . 
perpendicularly, but  fomewhat  leaning  and  inclining  vnto:  the 
plaine  fuperficies  E  F  G  H,  as  much  or  as  litfe  as  ye  will  :  the 
coraon  terme  or  fedion  ofwhich  two  fuperficieces  letbe  the 
lineC  D  .From  fome  one  point,as  from  the  point  M  affigned 
in  the  common  feed  on  oft  he  two  fuperficieces, namely, in  the 
line  C  D,  draw  a  perpendicular  line  in  either  fuperficies. In  the 
ground  fuperficies  E  F  G  H  draw  the  line  M  K,  and  in  the  fu¬ 
perficies  ABCD  draw  the  line  M  L .  Now  if  the  angle  L  M  K 
be  an  acute  angle,  then  is  that  angle  the  inclination  of  the  fu¬ 
perficies  ABCD  vnto  the  fuperficies  E  F  G  H,  by  this  defini¬ 
tion,  becaufe  it  is  contained  of  perpendicular  lines  drawen  in 
either  of  the  fuperficieces  to  one  and  the  felf  fame  point  being 
the  common  fe<ftion  of  them  both. 


s  Blaine  fuperficieces  are  in  like  fort  inclined  the  one  to  the  other ,  lihen  Fifth  difrl- *, 
the  fayd  angles  of  inclination  are  equaU  the  one  to  the  other .  ti0n* 


This  definition  needeth  no  declaration  at  all, but  is  moftmanifeft  by  the  definition  Iall  going  before. 
For  in  confidering  the  inclinations  of  diuers  fuperficieces  to  others,  if  the  acute  angles  contayned  vn- 
der  the  perpendicular  lines  drawen  in  them  from  one  point  affigned  in  ech  of  their  common  fedions 
be  equal! ,  as  if  to  the  angle  lm  k  in  the  former  example  be  geuen  an  other  angle  in  the  inclination  of 
two  other  fuperficieces  equall,  then  is  the  inclination  ofthefe  fuperficieces  like,  and  are  by  this  defini¬ 
tion  fayd  in  like  fort  to  incline  the  one  to  the  other. 

Theedojius  geucthan  other  definition  of  like  inclination  ofplaine  fuperficieces  the  one  to  the  other, 
after  this  maner  .  One pla  'tne  fuperficies  is  Iske  sneisned  to  an  other ,  as  an  other  fuperficies  is  to  an  other ,  when  33 
in  esther  of  the  plaine  fuperficieces  right  lines  being  draveen,and  making  right  angles  with  their  common  feftton,  33 
containe  sn  the  fame  pointes  equall  angles  .  This  definition  is  in  fublhmce  the  fame  with  that  geuen  of 
Eudtde,  and  is  an  elucidation  of  it .  For  example  let  a  b  c  d  be  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies,  vnto  which 
let  thefuperficies  efik  incline  and  leane  .  And  let  the  common  fedion  of  thefe  two  fuperficieces  be 
the  line  2  f  .  Then  drawe  in  eche  of  thefe  fuperficieces  right  lines  to  fome  one  point  of  the  common 
fedion  s  f,  which  let  be  the  point  g  :  with  which  fedion  let  them  make  right  angles .  As  in  the  fuper- 


A 


F 


<5  H" 


B 


Of 


M  N 


ficies  abcd  draw  the  line  h  g,  which  in  the  point  G  letit  make  with  the  common  fedio  a  right  angle 
h  g  f  or  h  g  e  .  Alfo  in  the  fuperficies  efik  draw  the  line  1  g,  which  in  the  point  g  together  with 
the  common  fedion  hf  let  make  alfo  a  right  angle  t  g  f,  or  the  right  angle  lge. 

Now  alfo  let  there  be  an  other  ground  plaine  fuperficies, namely,the  fuperficies  m  n  o  p,  vnto  whom 
alfo  letleane  and  incline  thefuperficies  q_r  s  t,  and  letthe  common  fedion  or  fegmentofthembethe 
line  q_r  .  And  draw  in  the  fuperficies  m  n  o  p  to  fome  one  point  of  the  comon  fedion  as  to  the  point 
x  the  line  V  x,  making  with  the  common  fedion  right  angles,  namely,  the  angle  v  x  k,  or  the  anglfc 
▼  x  q_  :  alfo  in  the  fuperficies  st  q_r  draw  the  rightline  t  x  to  thefame  point  x  in  the  common  fedi- 
on,  making  thenvith  right  angles,as  the  angle  y  x  r,  or  the  angle  y  x  q_.  Now  (as  fayth  the  definition) 
if  the  angles  contayned  vnder  the  right  lines  drawen  in  thefe  fuperficieces  &  makingright  angles  with 
the  common  fedion,be  in  the  pointes,that  is,  in  thepointes  of  their  meting  in  the  common  fedion,e- 
quail :  then  is  the  inclination  of  the  fuperficieces  equall .  As  in  this  example,  if  the  angle  lgh  con¬ 
tayned  vnder  the  line  t  g  being  in  the  inclining  fuperficies  ikef  and  vnder  the  line  h  g  being  in 
the  ground  fuperficies  esc  d,  be  equall,to  the  angle  nr  contayned  vnder  the  line  n  being  in  the 

RR.tiij,  ground 


Sixth  difm- 
tm. 


Stnenth  diffi- 
mtkth 


Eighth  difft' 
mtion. 


Ninth  diffc 
vtimn*, 


ground  fuperficies  mnop  and  vnder  the  line  r  x  beingin  the  inclining  fuperficies  sTq.s:  then  13 
the  inclination  of  the  fuperficies  ikbf  vnto  the  fuperficies  uc  d,  like  vnto  the  inclination  of  the 
fuperficies  tTq.11  vnto  the  fuperficies  m  w  op  .  And  fo  by  this  definition  thefe  two  fuperficieces  are 
fayd  to  be  in  like  fort  inclined.  ■  • 

6  Tarallell plaine fuperficieces  are  tbofe/tohkb  being  produced  or  exten • 
ded  any  "fray  neuer  touch  or  concurre  together. 

Neither  needeth  this  definition  any  declaration,but  is  very  eafie  to  be  vnderttanded  by  the  defini¬ 
tion  ofparallell  lines  :  for  as  they  being  drawen  on  any  part3neuer  touch  or  come  together:  fo  parallel 
plaine  fuperficieces  are  fuch3which  admitte  no  touch,thatis,  being  produced  any  way  infinitely  neuer 
mcete  or  come  together. 

7  Like folide  or  bodily  figures  are  finch y  Tvbich  are  contained  lender  like 
plaine  fuperficieces }  and  equall  in  multitude. 

What  plaine  fuperficieces  are  called  like,  hath  in  the  beginning  of  the  fixth  booke,  bene  fuffidently 
declared  .  Now  when  folide  figures  or  bodies  be  contained  vnder  fuch  like  plaine  fuperficieces  as  there 
are  defined3and  equallin  number,  that  is,  that  the  one  folide  haue  as  many  in  number  as  the  other ,iu 
their  fides  andiimites  :  they  are  called  like  folide  figures,  or  like  bodies. 

8  Equall  and  like  folide  (or  bodely)  figures  are  thofie  lehich  are  contained 
lender  like  fuperficieces }and  equall  both  in  multitude  and  in  magnitude. 

In  like  folide  figures  it  is  fufficient,that  the  fuperficieces  which  contains  them  be  like  and  equal!  in 
number  onely,but  in  like  folide  figures  and  equall,it  is  necefiary  that  the  like  fuperficieces  contaynyng 
them, be  alfo  equal  in  magnitude.So  that  befides  the  likenes  betwene  thcm,they  bef  echc  being  com¬ 
pared  to  his  correfpondent  fuperficies^  of  one  greatnes,and  that  their  areas  or  fieldes  be  equal.  Whea 
fuch  fuperficieces  contayne  bodies  or  folides,then  are  fuch  bodies  equall  and  likefolides  or  bodies. 

9  yl folide  or  bodily  angle 0  is  an  inclination  of  mo e  then  two  lines  to  all  the 
lines  ivbkb  toucb  themfelues  mutually 3  and  are  not  in  one  and  the  fielfie 
fame  fuperficies. 


Or  els  thus :  y[ folide  or  bodily  angle  is  that  *tohicb  is  contaynedlvnder  m® 
then  two  playne  angles ynot  being  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  plaine  fup 
ciesjbut  confining  all  at  one  point „ 


Of  a  folide  angle  doth  Euclide  here  geuetwo  feuerall  definitios.The  firft  is  geuen  by  the  concurfe 
and  touch  of  many  lines.Thefecond  by  the  touch  &  concurfe  of  many  fuperficiall  angles.  And  both 
thefe  definitions  tende  to  one,  and  are  not  much  different,for  that  lynes  arc  the  limittes  and  termes  of 
fuperficieces.  But  the  fecond  geuen  by  fuperficiall  angles  is  the  morenaturall  definition,becaufe  that 
fuperficieces  are  the  next  and  immediate  limites  of  bodies,and  fb  are  not  lines.  An  example  of  a  folide 
angle  cannot  wel  and  at  fully  be  geue  or  deferibed  in  a  plaine  fuperficies.But  couchyng  this  firft  defini- 
tio,  lay  before  you  a  cube  ora  die,and  cofider  any  of  the  corners  or  angles  therof,fo  fhal  ye  fee  that  at 
euery  angle  there  concurre  thre  lines  (for  two  lines  eoeurring cannot  make  a  folide  angle )  namely,the 
line  or  edge  ofhis  breadth,ofhis  legth,and  ofhis  thicknes.which  their  fo  inclining  &  eoeurring  toge¬ 
ther, make  a  folide  angle, and  fo  of  others.And  now  cocerning  the  fecond  definitio,what  fuperficial  or 
plain  angles  be, hath  bene  taught  before  in  the  firii  boke,namely,that  it  is  the  touch  of  two  right  lines. 
And  as  a  fuperficiall  or  playne  angle  is  caufed  &  cotamed  of  right  lines  ,fo  is  a  folide  angle  caufed  &  co« 
tayned  of  plaine  fuperficiall  angles.  Two  right  lines  touching  together,  make  a  plaine  angle ,  but  two 
plaine  angles  ioyned  together  can  not  make  a  folide  angle,  butaccordir.g  to  the. definitio, they  mull  be 
moc  the  two,as  three,foure,fiue,or  moe :  which  alfo  mull  not  be  in  one  &  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies? 
but  mull  be  in  diuers  fuperficieces,meeting  at  one  point.This  definition  is  not  hard,but  may  eafily  be 
coceiued  in  a  cube  or  a  die/where  ye  fee  three  angles  of  any  three  fuperficieces  ©r  fides  of  the  die  con- 
curre  and  meete  together  in  one  point, which  three  playne  angles  fo  ioyned  together,  make  a  folide 
anglc.Likewife  in  a  Pyramis  or  a  fpire  of  a  ileple  or  any  other  iuch  thingsali  the  fides  therof  ceding  vs>- 

war  4 


'ententes. 


FoLy¥ 


©rtoppetherofj  in  onepoint.So  all  their  angles  there  ioyned  toge* 
ther,make  a  folide  angle.  And  for  the  better  light  thereof;  I-hauefet 
here  a  figure  wherby  ye  fhall  more  eafily xonceiue  it;  the  bafe  of  the- 
figure  is  a  triangle  , namely,  A  B  C,if  on  euery  fide  of  the  triangle  A  B 
C,ye  rayfe  vp  a  triangle, as  vpon  the  fide  AB,yeraife  vp  the  triangle 
A  F  B,and  vpon  the  lide  A  C  the  triangle  A  F  C,  and  vpon  the  fide  B 
C,the  triangle  B  F  C,and  fo  bowing  the  triangles  raifed  vp,thac-their 
toppes, namely,  the  pointes  F  meece  and  ioyne  together  in  onepoint, 
ye  fhal  eafily  and  plainly  fee  how  thefe  three  fuperficiall angles-  AF  B  7 

B  F  C,C  F  A,ioyne  and  clofe  together,touching  the  one  the  other  in 
the  point  F,andfo  make  a  folide  angle. 

to  jiTyr amis  is  a  folide  figure  contained  lender  many  playne  fuperficieces  Tenth  Sffinh 
fet  Import  one  playne fuperficies, and  gathered  together  to  one  point.  tion* 


Two  fuperficieces  rayfed  vpon  any  ground  can  not  make  a  Pyramis,  forthat  two  fuperficiall  angles, 
ioyned  together  in  the  toppe,cannctf  as  before  is  fay dj make  a  folide  angle.  Wherfore  whe  thr  e,foure, 
fiue3or  moe(how  many  foeuer)fuperficieces  are  raifed  vp  fro  one  fuperficies  being  the  ground3or  bale, 
and  euer  afeeding  diminilh  their  breadth, till  at  the  legth  all  their  angles  cocurre  in  one  point,  making 
there  a  folide  angle  :  the  folide  indofed3bounded3and  terminated  by  thefe  fuperficieces  is  called  a  Py-* 
ramis3asye  fee  in  a  taper  offourefides3and  in  afpire  of  a  towre  which  contained  many  fides3either  of 
Which  is  a  Pyramis. 

And  becaufe  that  all  the  fuperficieces  of  euery  Pyramis  afeend  from  one  playne  fuperficies  as  from 
the  bafe3and  tende  to  one  poynt,it  mull  of  necefiirie  come  to  paffe,that  all  the  fuperficieces  of  a  Pyra¬ 
mis  are  trianguler,except  the  bafe,which  may  be  of  any  forme  or  figure  except  a  circle.  For  if  the  bafe 
be  a  circle3then  it  afeendeth  not  with  fides3or  diuers  fuperficieces, but  with  one  round  fuperficies3and 
hath  not  the  name  of  a  Pyramis3but  is  called  f as  hereafter  fhall  appeared  a  Cone. 

Of  Pyramids  there  are  diuers  kindes  .  For  according  to  the  varietie  of  the  bafe  is  brought  forth  the 
variede  and  diuerfitieofkindes  of  Pyramids.  If  the  bafe  ofa  Pyramis  be  a  triangle,  then  is  it  called 
a  triangled  Pyramis  .  If  the  bafe  be  a  figure  of  fower  angles,  it  is  called  a  quadrangled  Pyramis. 
If  the  bafe  be  a  Pentagon,  then  is  it  a  Pentagonall  or  fiueangled  Pyramis .  And  fo  forth  according 
to  the  increafe  of  the  angles  of  the  bafe  infinitely  .  Although  thefi- 

'  '  ’  - "  nr  i  .  -  -  -  A 


the  definition  ofa  folide  angle,  and  by  the  figure  here  fet,  if  ye  ima¬ 
gine  the  point  A  together  with  the  lines  AB,  AC,and  AD,  to  be 
eleuated  on  high  .  And  yet  that  the  reader  may  more  clerely  fee  the 
forme  ofa  Pyramis,  I  haue  here  fet  two  fundry  Pyramids  which  will 


F  of  ech  triangle  may  in  euery  Pyramis  concurre  in-  one  point,  and 
make  a  folide  angle  :  oneofwhichhathto  his  bafe  a  fower  fided  fi¬ 
gure,  and  the  other  a  fiue  fided  figure .  The  forme  ofa  triangled  Pyra¬ 
mis  ye  may  before  beholde  in  the  example  ofa  folide  angle .  Andby 
thefe  may  ye  eonceauc  of  all  other  kindes  of  Pyramids. 


il 


•V 


'ententes. 

ward  narower  and  narower,»t  length  ends  their  angles(atthe  heigth 
ortoppe  thcrofj  in  onepoint.So  all  their  angles  there  ioyned  toge° 
ther,make  a  folide  angle,  j  And  for-the  better  fight  thereof^ 
here  a  figure  wherby  ye  fhall  mare  eafily  concerned  the  b\ 
figure  is  a  triangle, namely,A  B  C,if  on  euery  fide  of  the  trial 
C,ye  rayfe  vp  a  triangle, as  vpon  the  fide  A  B,ye  raife  vp  the 
A  F  B,and  vpon  the  fide  A  C  the  triangle  AFC,  and  vp»n  t 
C,the  triangle  B  F  C,and  fo  bowing  the  triangles  raifea  vp,thacti 
toppes, namely, the  pointes  F  meete  and  ioyne  together  in  one  poi 
ye  fhal  eafily  and  plainly  fee  how  thefe  three  fuperficialfangles.  A-] 

B  F  C,C  F  Ajioyne  and  clofe  together,touching  the  one  the  other  in 
the  point  F,and  fo  make  a  folide  angle. 

so  jt^yramis  is  a  folide  figure  contained  lender  man 
fet  Ispon  one  playne fuperficies 3and gathered  together 


the 


V 


mem 


Tenth  dfffitsk 
non • 


Two  fuperficieces  rayfed  vpon  any  ground  can  not  make  a  Pyramis,  for  that  rm  .drficiall  angles 
ioyned  together  in  the  toppe,cannotf  as  before  is  fay dj make  a  folide  angle.Wherfdv~Avhe  thr  e,foure* 
fine, or  moe(how  many  foeuer)fuperficieces  are  raifed  vp  fro  one  fuperficies  being  the  ground,or  bafe, 
and  euer  afcedingdiminifh  their  breadth,tili  at  the  legth  all  their  angles  cocurre  in  one  point,  making 
there  a  folide  angle  :  the  folide  inclofed,bounded,and  terminated  by  thefe  fuperficieces  is  called  a  Py-“ 
ramis,as  ye  fee  in  a  taper  of foure  fides,and  in  a  fpire  of  a  towre  which  con  taineth  many  fides,eicher  of 
Which  is  a  Pyramis. 

And  becaufe  that  all  the  fuperficieces  of  euery  Pyramis  afcend  from  one  playne  fuperficies  as  from 
the  bafe,and  tende  to  one  poynt,it  mull  of  necelfitie  come  to  pafie,that  all  the  fuperficieces  of  a  Pyra¬ 
mis  are  trianguler  ,except  the  bale,  which  may  be  ofany  forme  or  figure  except  a  circle.  Forif  the  bafe 
be  a  circle,then  it  afeendeth  not  with  fides,or  diuers  fuperficieces, but  with  one  round  fuperficies,and 
hath  not  the  name  of  a  Pyramis,but  is  called  f as  hereafter  Ihall  appeared  a  Cone. 

Of  Pyramids  there  are  diuers  kindes .  For  according  to  the  varietie  of  the  bafe  is  brought  forth  the 
varietie  and  diuerfitieofkindes  of  Pyramids .  If  the  bafe  of  a  Pyramis  be  a  triangle,  then  is  it  called 
a  triangled  Pyramis  .  If  the  bafe  be  a  figure  of  fower  angles,  it  is  called  a  quadrangled  Pyramis. 
Ifthe  bafe  be  a  Pentagon,  then  is  it  a  Pentagonall  or  fiueangled  Pyramis .  And  fo  forth  according 
to  theincreafe  of  the  angles  of  the  bafe  infinitely  .  Although  the  fi¬ 
gure  of  a  Pyramis  can  not  be  well  expreflfed  in  a  playne  fuperficies,  ® 

yet  may  yefufticiently  conceaue  of  it  both  by  the  figure  before  fet  in 
the  definition  ofaiblide  angle,  and  by  the  figure  here  fet,  if  ye  Ima¬ 
gine  the  point  A  together  with;  the  lines  A B,  A  C,  and  A  D,  to  be 
eleuated  on  high  .  And  yet  that  the  reader  may  more  clerely  fee  the 
forme  of  a  Pyramis,  I  haue  here  fet  two  fundry  Pyramids  which  will 
appeare  bodilike,  if  ye  erecle  the  papers  wherin  are  drawen  the  trian¬ 
gular  fidcs  of  eche  Pyramis,  in  fuch  lort  that  the  pointes  of  the  angles 
Fofech  triangle  may  in  euery  Pyramis  concurre  in.  one  point,  and 
make  a  folide  angle  :  one  of  which  hath  to  his  bafe  a  fower  fided  fi¬ 
gure,  and  the  other  a  fiue  fided  figure .  The 
mis  ye  may  before  beholde  in  the  example 
thefe  may  ye  conceaue  of  all  other  kindes  o] 


1 1  _ 


'ementm 

ward  narower  and  narower,at  length  ends  their  angles(at>the  heigtfc 
or  toppetheroty  in  one  point. So  all  their  angles  there  ioyned  toge- 
ther,make  a  folide  angle. .  And  for  the  better  fight  thereof}  I  haue  fet 
here  a  figure  wherby  ye  ihall  more  eafily  conCeiue  it,  the  bafe  of  the 
figure  is  a  triangle,namely,A  B  C,if  on  euery  fide  of  the  triangle  A  B 
C,ye  rayfe  vp  a  triangle,as  vpon  the  fide  A  B,ye  raife  vp  the  triangle 
A  F  B,and  vpon  the  fide  A  C  the  triangle  A  F  C,  and  vpen  the  fide  B 
C3the  triangle  B  F  C,and  fo  bowing  the  triangles  raifed  vp,that  their 
toppes,namely,the  pointes  F  raeete  and  ioyne  together  in  onepoint, 
ye  Ihal  eafily  and  plainly  fee  how  thefe  three  fuperfic -all .angles  A-F  B 
B  F  C,C  F  A,ioyne  and  clofe  together3touching  the  one  the  other  in 
the  point  F3and  fo  make  a  folide  angle. 


Foil 


w* 


. . 

so  Jfjramis  Is  a folide  figure  contained  V>nder  many  playne  fuperficieces 
fet  'Vpon  one  plajne fuperficies }and gathered  together  to  one  point. 

Two  fuperficieces  rayfed  vpon  any  ground  can  not  make  a  Pyramis,  forthat  two  fuperficiall  angles 
ioyned  together  in  the  toppe,cannotf  as  before  is  fay  dj  make  a  folide  angle. Wherfore  whe  thr  e,foure, 
fiue3or  moe(how  many  foeuer)fuperficieccs  are  raifed  vp  fro  one  fuperficies  being  the  ground3or  bafe* 
and  euer  afeeding  diminilh  their  breadth3till  at  the  legth  all  their  angles  eocurre  in  one  point,  making 
there  a  folide  angle  :  the  folide  indofed,bounded,and  terminated  by  thefe  fuperficieces  is  called  a  Py-“ 
ramis3as  ye  fee  in  a  taper  of foure  fides3and  in  a  lpire  of  a  towre  which  contained  many  fides3either  of 
which  is  a  Pyramis. 

And  becaufe  that  all  the  fuperficieces  of  euery  Pyramis  afeend  from  one  playne  fuperficies  as  from 
the  bafe3and  tende  to  one  pbynt,it  muft  of  neceflirie  come  to  paffe,that  all  the  fuperficieces  of  a  Pyra¬ 
mis  are  trianguler3except  the  bafe,  which  may  beofanyformeorfigureexceptacircle.  For  if  the  bafe 
be  a  circle3then  itafeendeth  not  with  fides,ordiuers  fuperficieces3butwith  one  round  fuperficies3and 
hath  not  the  name  of  a  Pyramis,but  is  called  as  hereafter  lhall  appeared  a  Cone. 

Of  Pyramids  there  are  diners  kindes .  For  according  to  the  varietie  of  the  bafe  is  brought  forth  the 
varietie  and  diuerfitieofkindes  of  Pyramids.  If  the  bafe  ofa  Pyramis  be  a  triangle,  then  is  it  called 
a  triangled  Pyramis  .  If  the  bafe  be  a  figure  of  fower  angles,  it  is  called  a  quadrangled  Pyramis. 
If  the  bafe  be  a  Pentagon,  then  is  it  a  Pentagonall  or  fiueangled  Pyramis .  And  fo  forth  according 
to  the  increafe  of  the  angles  of  the  bafe  infinitely  .  Although  the  fi¬ 
gure  ofa  Pyramis  cannot  be  well  expreffed  in  a  playne  fuperficies, 
yet  may  ye  fufSciently  conccaue  of  it  both  by  the  figure  before  fet  in 
the  definition  ofa  folide  angle,  and  by  the  figure  here  fet,  if  ye  ima¬ 
gine  the  point  A  together  with;  the  lines  AB,  AC,  and  AD,  to  be 
eleuated  on  high  .  And  yet  that  the  reader  may  more  clerely  fee  the 
forme  ofa  Pyramis,  I  haue  here  fet  two  fundry  Pyramids  which  will 
appeare  bodilike,  if  ye  erecte  the  papers  wherin  are  drawen  the  trian¬ 
gular  fides  of  eche  ftramis,  in  fitch  fort  that  the  pointes  of  the  angles 


F  of  ech  triangle 
make  a  folide  anj 
gure,  and  the  oi 
mis  ye  may  b 
thefe  may  ye 


kin  euery  Pyramis  concurre  in  one  point, and 
\ne  of  which  hath  to  his  bafe  a  fower  fided  fi- 
toc  fided  figure .  The  forme  of  a  triangled  Pyra- 
\de  in  the  example  of  a  folide  angle .  And  by 
all  other  kindes  of  Pyramids. 


Tenth  difpnh 
tion . 


m 


mm . 


This  diffmki- 
agreetb  t& 
the  gene  rail 
name  of  a 
prefme,  which 
aljb  may  be 
app  lied  to  Pa~ 
raltilepedons 
(at  may  ap¬ 
pears  m  the 
iiibsakgfol* 
low  mg  &  lo* 
pmpofitiojm 
demft&ratio) 
and  to  him  a- 
ther  ho  die 
like  wife. 


0.1 . . 


~7E 


F|fu 
ike 
es, 
Ul- 

ii- 


An  other  dif- 
finkion  of  a 
prifme,  which 
is  a  fpeciall 
definition  of 
a prifme.-as  it 
is  commonly 
called  and 
T fed. 


n  Apyifwie  is  afoMfOr:dh6My  Wder  many  plaine 

frperfickfesy  of -which  the  two  fuperficieces  mhich  are  oppofite,  are  equall 
and  like^nd parallelism  all  the  other fiperfcieces  are  parallelogr dines. 

sraastti  O'  .-‘0,  .  o <  .  Uj  S7C"  -T  ? 

Although  you  may  in  a  plaine?fuperfi- 
des  by  this  figure  here  let ,  without  any 
hardnes  conceaue  whataprifineisj  name-  •  .1 
ly,ifyqdmagine  the  fuperficies  AB  DiG  to 
be  the  ground  &  bafe  of  the  folide,  and  the  ;h 
two  Ihperficieces^  narneiyTTiie  fuperficies 
AE  F  Bj  and  the  fuperficies  C  EE  D  to  be 
ereded  vpon  the  fides  ofthe  bafe, thq  one 
on  the  one  fide,  namely, on.  the  line  A33,  • 

.  and'  the  other  on  the  other  fide,  namely ,.011  / 
the  line  D  G,  ri  ot  ..perpendicularly  ,but*in‘- 
clining  and  bending  the  one  to  the  other,till 
they  meete  in  the  toppe, namely,  on  the  line  r  - 

E  P  .  For  fo  ye  fee  that  this  folide  figure  is  .  :  '  d 

contained  vnder  many  plaine  fuperficieees,  of  which  two,namely,  the  fuj 
perfieies  B  F  D ,  which  are  the  endes  of  the  folide,and  oppofice  the  one  t 
and  paraikls,and  all  the  otherfuperfideces,namely,the  bafe  A  B  G  D,&  t 
that  is,- the  fuperficies  AE  F  B,  and  the  fuperficies  CEFD  are.parallelo 
ding,  to  make  the  thing  more  clere  vnto  the  reader,  I  haue  here  feta  Prifmi 

like, if  you  erede  bending  wifethe 
papers  wherein  are  drawen  the  pa- 
rallelogrames  A  BE  F,  &  C  D  E  F, 
that  they  may  concurre  in  the  line 
;EFirlthe.topp.e,andfo  eredthepa-  ‘ 

pers  wherein  are  drawen  the  trian¬ 
gles  ACE  and  B.D  F,  that  the  fide  _ _ _ _ 

AJ  of  the  one-triangle  may  exactly  c  ^ 

agree  with  thefide  A  E  of  the  one  parallelogramme.A  B  E  F ,  and 
-  the  fide  C  E  of  the  fame  triangle,  with  the  fide  C  E  of  the  parallelo- 
gramme.C  DEF:  and  moreouer,  the  fide  B  F  ofthe  other  triangle, 
with  thefide  D  F  of  the  parallelogramme  C  D  E  F  :  and  finally,  the 
fide  BF  ofthe  lame  triangle,  with  the  fide  BF  of  the  parallelo- 
gramme  A  B  E  F.  And  fo  fball  youmoll  eafilie  fee  the  forme  of  a- 
Prifme  :  that  itconfifteth  of  two  equall,like,and  parallell  triangular 
fuperficieces,and  of  three  parallelogrammes :  wherof  the:  one  is  the 
bafe,  and  die  other  two  are  ereded  bending  wife .  Here  alfo  be- 
holde  the  forme  thereof  as  it  is  by  arte  deferibed  i.n  a  plaine  to  ap- 
peare  bodilike.  ii 

Fluff  sherd]  noteth  that  Theon  and  Campane  dilagree  indefi- 
ningaPrifme,and  he preferreth the  definitiongeuenof  Campane 
before  the  definition  geuen  of  Euchde  (  which  becaiife  he  may  feme  with  out  lefle  offence  to  reied,he 
calleth  it  Tbeons  definition Jand  following  Campane  he  geiieth  an  other  definition,which  is  this. 

A  Vrifme  ts  a  folide figure, \ which  is  contayncd  “vnder fine  playne fuperftcitces  ,  of  which  two  are  triangles, 
li^e^uali, and. parallels, and  the  reft  are  parallelogrammes.  \ 

The  example  before  fet  agreeth  likewife  with  this  definition ,  and  manifeftly  declareth  the  lame. 
For  in  it  v/ere  fiue  fup,|rfieieces,the  bafe,the  two  eroded  fuperficieces,and  the  two  endes:  of  which  the 
two  endes  are  triangles  like, equall  and  paralle!s,an3  all  the  other  are  parallelogrammes  as  this  definiti¬ 
on  requireth  .  The  caufe  why  he  preferreth  the  definion  of  Campane  before  the  definition  of  Theon  (  as 
he  calleth  it,but  in  very  deede  it  is  Eucltdes  definition's  certainely ,  as  are  all  thofe  which  are  geuen-of 
him  in  the  former  bookes,neither  is  there  any  caufe  at  all,why  it  ftiould  be  doubted  in  this  one  defini¬ 
tion  more  then  in  any  ofthe  other )  as  he  him  felfe  alledgeth,is,for  thatitis(ashefayth)  to  large,  and 
comprehendeth  many  mo  kindes  of  folide  figures  befides  Prifmes ,  as  Columnes  hauingfides,  and  ali 
Parallelipipedons,  which  a  definition  fhould  notdoo;  butfhould  be  aonuertible  with  the  thing  defi- 
ned,ancfdeclare  the  nature  of  it  onely,and  ftretch  no  farther* 

Methinketh  Elujfas  ought  not  to  haue  made  fo  much  a  doo  in  this  matter,  nor  to  haue  benefo 
fharoe  in  fight  and  fo  qtiicke  as  to  fee  and  efpy  out  fuch  faultes,which  can  of  no  man  that  will  fee  right¬ 
ly  without  affedion  be  efpyedfor  fuch  great  faultes  .For  it  may  well  be  aunfwered  that  thefe  faultes 
which  he  noteth  (if  yet  they  be  faultes)are  not  to  be  found  in  this  definion  .It  may  be  fayd  that  it  exten- 
deth  it  felfe  not  farther  then  it  fhould,but  declareth  onely  the  thing  defined, namely,  a  Prifme.  Neither 

doth 


ofSuclides  Elmentes. 


FoLyiy. 


doth  it  agree  (as  Flufias  cauilleth)with  all  Parallelipipedons  arid  Columnes  hauing  fides .  All  Parallel^ 
pipedons  what  fo  euer  right  angled ^or  not  right  angled  which  are  defcribed  of  equidiftant  fides  or  fu- 
perficieces,haue  their  fides  oppofit.So  that  in  any  of  them  there  is  no  one  fide,  but  it  hath  a  fide  oppo- 
fit  vnto  it.So  likewife  is  it  of  eue  fided  Columnes,  eche  hath  his  oppofite  fide  diredly  agaynftit,whicfa 
agreeth  not  with  this  definition  of  Euclsde.  Here  it  is  euidently  fayd,that  of  all  the  fuperficieces,the  two 
which  are  oppofite  are  eqnall,like,and  parallels,meaning  vndoubtedly  onely  two  &  no  moe.  Which  is 
manifeft  by  that  which  foiloweth.The  other(fayth  he  Jare  parallelogram  mes,  fignifiing  moll  euidently 
that  none  of  the  reft  befides  the  two  aforefayd ,  which  are  equall,  like ,  and  parallels,  are  oppofite :  but 
two  of  neceflitie  are  rayfed  vp ,  and  concurre  in  one  common  line ,  and  the  other  is  the  bafe.So  rjbat  it 
contayneth  not  vnder  it  the  figures  aforefayd,  that  is  fided  Columnes,&  al  Parallelipipedons, as  Flufias 
hath  not  fo  aduifedly  noted. 

Agayne  where  Flufias  fetteth  in  his  definition,  as  an  eflentiall  part  thereof,  that  of  the  flue  fuperfi-  . 
cieces,of  which  a  Prifme  is  contayned ,  two  of  them  muil  be  triangles,  that  vndoubtedly  is  not  of  ne- 
cefiitie,they  may  be  offome  other  figure.  Suppofe  that  in  the  figure  before  geuen  that  in  the  place  of 
the  two  oppofite  figures,which  there  were  two  trianglesywere  placed  two  pentagos:  yet  fhould  the  fi¬ 
gure  remayne  a  Prifme  ftii!,and  agree  with  the  definition  of  Euclide ,  and  falleth  not  vnder  the  definiti¬ 
on  of Flujjfds.  So  that  his  definitio  femeth  to  be  to  narrow  and  ftretcheth  not  fo  farre  as  it  ought  to  do, 
nor  declareth  the  whole  nature  of  the  thing  defined.  Wherefore  it  is  not  to  be  preferrd  before  Euchdes 
definition's  he  woulde  haue  it.This  figure  of  Euclide  called  a  Prifme, is  called  of  Campane  and  certayne 
others  FiguraJerratilis for  that  it  reprefeteth  in  fome  maner  the  forme  of  a  Sawe.And  of  fome  others,  it  This  bodie 
is  called  C«we«/,thatis,a  Wedge,becaufe  it  beareth  the  figure  of  a  wedge.  called  FisurA 

Moreouer  although  it  were  fo,that  the  definitio  of  a  Prifme  fhould  be  fo  large, that  it  fhould  cotaint  Semitilts. 
all  thefe  figures  noted  of  Flufias  as  fided  Columnes,&  all  Parallelipipedons :  yet  fhould  not  Flufias  haue 
fo  great  a  caufe  to  finde  fo  notably  a  fault ,  fo  vtterly  to  reiedt  it .  It  is  no  rare  thing  in  all  learninges, 
chiefcly  in  the  Mathematicalls,to  haue  one  thing  more  generall  then  an  other  .Is  it  not  true  that  euery 
Ifofceles  is  a  triangle,but  not  euery  triangle  is  an  Ifofceles?And  why  may  not  likewife  aPrifme  be  more 
generail,then  a  Parallclepipedon,  or  a  Columne  hauing  fidesfand  contayne  them  vnder  it  as  a  triangle 
cotayneth  vnder  it  an  Ifofceles  and  other  kinds  of  triangles)  .So  that  euery  Prallelipipedon,  or  euety  fi¬ 
ded  Columne  be  a  Prifme.but  not  euery  Prifme  a  Parallelipipedo  or  a  fided  Columne.  This  ought  not 
to  be  fo  much  offenfiue.  And  indeede  it  femeth  manifeftly  of  many,  yea  &  of  the  learned  fo  to  be  take, 
as  clearely  appeareth  by  the  wordes  of  P fellas  in  his  Epitome  of  Geometrie,  where  he  entreateth  of  the 
production  and  conftitution  of  thefe  bodyes.His  wordes  are  thefe .  All  refliltne figures  being  eretted^pen  V fellas « 
their  plajnes  or  bufies  bj  right  angles  snake  Vrifmes.  Who  perceaueth  not  but  that  a  Pentagon  e  reded  vpo 
his  bafe  offiue  fides  maketh  by  his  motion  a  fided  Columne  of  flue  fides?Likewifean  Hexagon  ereded 
at  right  angles  produceth  a  Columne  hauing  fixe  fides:  and  fo  of  all  other  redliline  figures  .  All  which 
foliaes  or  bodyes  fo  produced, whether  they  be  fided  Columnes  or  Parallelipipedons,  be  here  in  moll 
plaine  words(of  this  excelletand  auncient  Grekeauthor  P fellas ^called  Prifmes.  Wherfore  if  the  defini¬ 
tio  of  a  Prifme  gcue  of  Euclide  Should  extend  it  felfe  fo  largely  as  Flufiasi  magineth,  and  Ihould  enclude 
fuchfiguresor 'bodyes,ashenoted:heoughtnotyet  forallthatfo  much  to  be  offended,  andfona- 
rowly  to  haue  fought  faultes.For  Euchde  in  fo  defining  mought  haue  that  meaning  &  fenfe  ofa  Prifme 
which  P fellas  had. So  ye  fee  that  Euclide  may  be  defended  either  of  thefe  two  wayes,either  by  that  that 
the  definition  extendeth  not  to  thefe  figures, and  fo  not  to  be  ouer  generall  nor  ftretch  farther  then  it 
ought:or  ells  by  that  that  if  it  fhould  ftretch  fo  far  it  is  not  fo  haynous.For  that  as  ye  fe  many  haue  take 
it  in;  that  fenfe  .In  deede  comonly  a  Prifme  is  taken  in  that  fignificatio  and  meaningin  which  Campanus 
Flufias  and  others  take  ic.In  which  fenfe  it  femeth  alfo  that  in  diuers  propofitions  in  thefe  bookes  fol¬ 
lowing  it  ought  of  neceflitie  to  be  taken . 

12  fit  Sphere  is  a  figure  “Which  is  made,  when  the  diameter  of a femicircle  Twefaetb  dip 

abiding  fixed,  the femicircle  is  turned  round  about pmtill  it  returne  Tmto  faitm* 
the felfe fame  place from 1 whence  it  began  to  be  moued. 

To  the  end  we  may  fully  and  perfectly  vnderftand  this  definiti¬ 
on,  how  a  Sphere  is  produced  of  the  motion  ofa  femicircle,  it  fhall 
be  expedient  to  cofider  how  quantities  Mathematically  are  by  ima¬ 
gination  conceaued  to  be  produced,by  flowing  and  motion,as  was 
fomewhat  touched  in  the  beginning  of  the  firftbooke  .  Euer  the 
lefle  quantitie  by  his  motion  bringeth  forth  the  quatitie  nextaboue 
it .  Asa  point  mouing,  flowing,  or  gliding,  bringeth  forth  aline, 
which  is  the  firft  quantitie,  and  next  to  a  point.  A  line  mouing  pro¬ 
duceth  a  fuperficies,  which  is  the  fecond  quantitie,  and  next  vnto  a 
line  .  And  lalf  of  all,  a  fuperficies  mouing  bringeth  forth  a  folide  or 
body,  which  is  the  third  &  laft  quantitie .  Thefe  thinges  well  mar¬ 
ked,  it  fhal!  not  be  very  hard  to  attaine  to  the  right  vnderftanding 
of  this  definition .  Vpon  the  line  A  B  being  the  diatneter,defcribe  a 

femitird* 


Ekuenthdiffi 

union* 


Tbhdifjtnki- 
on  agreetb  to 
thegeneraU 
name  of  a 
prifme,  which 
alfo  may  he 
apjiiiedtaPa- 
ralkkpedons 
( n  may  ap- 
peats  m  the 
izMohpfoU 
la  whig  &  Iq„ 
pmpofitiQjnt 
demonBratio) 
and  to  feme  ti¬ 
the?  bodie 
litre  wife. 


An  other  de¬ 
finition  of  a 
prifme ,  which 
it  a  fpeciaU 
dijfmition  of 
a prifme:  as  it 
is  commonly 
called  and 
yfed* 


-  ■  pi 

: 

N: 

;:-.o 

mid"'".  "•  f  ;  .'i  : 

N  - 

j 

/ 

/  *  _*\  »  ' \  |  * 

"I  M 


i  i  \Aprifm  is  a folide  or  a  bodily  figure  Writained  'bride?  many  plaint 

fuperfickcesy  of ivhicb  tbe  two  fuperficims  mmrn  are  oppofite y  are  ecx 
and  like^nd parallelism  fill  the  other fiperffietOS  are  par allelogr hies. 

■  ,  ■  '  '  . 

Although  you  may  in  a  plainerfUf*rft- :  ncqv . .  .  t0>  .  .•  . 

eies  by  this  figure  here  ‘let,  without; any  . 
harclnes  conceaue  what  a  prifme  is,  name- ;  ■ 
ly,if  yalmagine  the  fuperficies  A  B  D.  G  to 
be  the  ground  &  bafe  of  the  folide,  and  the 
two- iliperficieces-,  nanrelyrthe  fuperficies 
AE  FB,  and  the  fuperficies C EF D  to  be 
erebled  vpon  the  fides  of  the  bafe,  the  one 
on  the  one  fide,  namely,  .on  the  line  A3, 
and'  the  other  on  the  other  fide,  namely,  on, 
the  line  D  C,  hot  perpendicularly ,  but  in¬ 
clining  and  bending  the  one  to  the  other,till 
they  meete  in  the  toppe, namely,  on  the  line 
EF .  For  fo  ye  fee  that  this  folide  figuteis 
contained  voder  many  plaine  fuperficieees,  of  which  two,namely,  the  fuperficies  A  E  C ,  and  the  fu- " 
perficiss  BFD,  which  are  the  e^des  of  the  folide,and  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other,  are  equal!  like 
and  parallels,and  all  the  other  fuperficieces,namely,the  bafe  ABG  D,&  the  two  eredted  fuperficieees, 
that  is,- the  fuperficies  A  EFB,  and  the. fuperficies  CE.FD  are  paraJlelogrammes .  Yet  notwithflan- 
ding, to  make  the  thing  more  clere  vnto  the  reader,  I  haue  here  feta  Prifme  which  will  appeare  bodi- 

like,if  you  eredte  bending  wife  the 
papers  wherein  are  drawen  the  pa-  A 
ralielogram es  ABEF, &  CDEF, 
that  they  may  concurre  in  the  line 
E  F  in  the  topp.e,and  fo  ered't  the  pa¬ 
pers  wherein  are  drawen  the  trian¬ 
gles  ACE  and  B  D  F,  that  the  fide 
AE  of  the  one  triangle  may  exactly 
agree  with  thefide  AE  of  the  one  pat 
the  fide  CE  of  the  fame  triangle,  with  th 
gramme  C  D  E-F :  and  moreouer,  the  fi< 
with  the  fide  D  F  of  the  parallelograran 
.  fide  BF  of  the  fame  triangle,  with  the 
gramme  A  B  EF .  Andfo  fhallyoumof^j 
Prifme  :  that  iticonfifteth  of  two  equall,lii 

fuperficieces,and  of  three  parallelogrammes :  wherof  throne  is  the 
bafe,  and  die  other  two  are  eredted  bending  wife  .  Here  alfo  be- 
holde  theforme  thereof  as  it  is  by  arte  deferibed  in  a  plaine  to  ap¬ 
peare  bodilike.  ,  -  .  ;  . 


t; 


ike,an3.parallell  triangular 


Tlujfas  here;  noteth  that  Theon  and  Campane  dilagree  in  defi¬ 
ning  a  Prifme,  and  he  preferreth  the  definition  geuen  of  Campane 
before  the  definition  geuen  of Euchde  (  which  becaufe  hemay  feme  with  out  Ieffe  offence  toreiedl,he 
calleth  it  Tbeons  definition Jand  following  Campane  he  geueth  an  other  definition,which  is  this. 

A  Vrifme  is  a  folide fgure, which  is  contained  ‘vnder fiue  playne  fuperficieees  ,  of  which  two  are  triangles , 
like, equall, and parallels, and  the  ref  are  parallelogrammes.  ' 

The  example  before  fet  agreeth  likewife  with  this  definition ,  and  manifellly  declareth  the  fame.' 
For  in  it  were  fiue  fuperficieees,  the  bafe,  the  two  er-edted  fuperficieces,and  the  two  endes:  of  which  the 
two  endes  are  triangles  like,equall  and  parallels,ana  all  the  other  are  parallelogrammes  as  this  definiti¬ 
on  requireth  .  Thecaufe  why  he  preferreth  thedefinion  oi  Campane  before  the  definition  of  Theon  (  as 
he  calleth  it,but  in  very  dcecie  it  is  ZucUdes  definition's  certainely ,  as  are  all  thofe  which  are  geueri-of 
him  in  the  former  bookes,neither  is  there  any  caufe  at  all,why  it  fhould  be  doubted  in  this  one  defini¬ 
tion  more  then  in  any  of  the  other )  as  he  him  felfe  alledgeth,is,for  that  it  is(as  he  fayth)  to  large,  and 
comprehendeth  many  mo  kindes  of  folide  figures  befides  Prifmes ,  as  Columneshauing  fides,  and  all 
Parallelipipedons,  which  a  definition  Ihould  notdoo:  but  Ihould  be  conuertible  with  the  thing  defi- 
ned,and'declare  the  nature  of  it  onely,and  ftretch  no  farther* 

Me  thinketh  Tlujfas  ought  not  to  haue  made  fo  much  a  doo  in  this  matter,  nor  to  haue  benefb 
iharpein  fight  and  fo  quicke  as  to  fee  and  efpy  out  fuch  faultes,which  can  of  no  man  that  will  fee  right¬ 
ly  without  affe&ionbe  efpyed  for  fuch  great  faultes.  For  it  may  well  be  aunfwered  that  thefe  faultes 
which  he  noteth (ifyet  they  befaultes)are  not  to  be  found  in  this  definion.lt  may  be  fayd  thatitexten- 
deth  it  felfe  not  farther  then  it  fhould,but  declareth  onely  the  thing  defined, namely,  a  Prifme.  Neither 

doth 


Ekumbdift 

mm . 


This  diffmiti- 
m  agreeth  to 
the  getter all 
name  of  a 
prifme ,  which 
alfo  may  he 
applied  to  Fa-. 


rdWelehedons 
(auruy  ap¬ 
pears  in  the 
li.hnokefd  - 
looting  &  io» 
pwpQfitioJm 
demskSlratio) 
and  to  fame  Hi¬ 
ther  bo  die 


i  i  \A prifme  is  a  Jjnder  many  plaint 

fuperfickces ,  of 'iobicbtbe  twofuperfemes  itobicb  are  oppofitey  are  equall 
and  lifajdnd parallelogrames. 


~7E 


A 

B 

D 

c 

An  other  de¬ 
finition  of  a 
prifme,  which 
is  a  fpedall 
diffimtion  of 
a  prifme:  as  it 
is  commonly 
called  and 
yfed. 


J  \  til  if £iCii )  '  rh  qv  -;i  .‘i  A  atyl 

Although  you  may  in  a  plaine  sfuperfi-  acf/ . .  .  <  «  .  •. r 

cies  by  this  figure  here  let,  without. any  i 

hardnes  conceaue  what  a  prifme  is,  name-"  ’ 

Iy,ifyq>imagine  the  fuperficihs  AB  DrG  to  j.j. 
be  the  ground  &  bafe  of  the  folide,  and.  the  :b 
two-  fuperficieces-,  namely7the  fuperficies 
AE  F'B,  and  the  fuperficies  C  E  F  D  to  be 
erefted  vp  on  the  fides  of  the  bafe,thq  one 
on  the  one  fide,  namely, .on  the  line  AB, 

.  anefthe  other  on  the  other  fide,  namely,  on, 
the  line  D C, riot  perpendicularly, butili'- 
clining  and  bending  the  one  to  the  other, till 
theymeeteinthetoppe,namely,ontheiifl.e  t 
EF.  For fo yc fee  that  this  folide  figureis 
contained  vxider  many  plaine  fupcrficieees,  of  which  two,namely,  the  furl’ 
perficies,  BED.,  which  are  the  endes  of  the  folide,and  oppofite  the  one  t 
and  paraileis,and  all  tire  other  fuperficieces,namely,the  bafe  A  B  G  D,&  t 
thatisjthe  fuperficies  AE  FB,  and  the  fuperficies  CEFD  are;parallelo 
ding, to  make  the  thing  more  clere  vnto  the  reader,  I  haue  here  feta  Prifirn 

,  like,ify.o:u  eredte  bending  wife' the 
papers  wherein  are  drawen  the  pa¬ 
rallelogram  es  A B E F, &  C D Eg 
that  they  may  concurre  inj3>- 
E  F  in  thetoppe,and  fo<G 
pers  wherein  are  drawen 
gles  ACE  and  B.D  F,  that  the  n 
AE  of  the  onetrianglemay  exactly 
agree  with  thefide  AE  of  the  one  par 
the  fide  C  E  of  the  fame  triangle,with  th 
gramme  C  D  EF :  and  moreouer,  the  fit 
with  the  fide  D  F -of- the  parallelogram  n 
fide  BF  of  the  fame  triangle,  with  the 
grammq  A  Bdj  F .  And  fo  fhall  you  too 


Prifme  :  that  it  confifleth  of  two  equall,li£e^and  parallell  triangular 
fuperfkieces,and  of  three  parallelogrammes :  Wherof  the,  one  is  the 
bafe,  and  the  other  two  are  eredted  bending  wife  .  Here  alfo  be- 
holde  the  forme  thereof  asit  is  by  arte  deferibed  in  a  plaine  to  ap- 
peare  bodilike<ti. 

1  •  '';7/oi  j;  :  .  I  i  ;i- .  ; 

Thtffas\\trc\  noteth  that  Theon  and  Campane  dilagree  indefi- 
ninga  Prifme, and  he preferreth the  definition geuen of  Campane 
before  the  definition  geuen  of Eucltde  (  which  becaufe  he may  feme  with  out  leflfe offence  to  reie&jie 
calleth  it  rtnw  definition Jand  following  Campane  he  geiieth  an  other  definition,which  is  this. 

A  Prifme  is  a  folide  figure  fvbich  is  contayncd  binder  fiue  plajne  fuperpcitces ,  of  which  two  are  triangle!, 
like, eejuaft, and  parallels  And,  the  reft  are  parallelogrammes.  s 

The  example  before  fet  agreeth  likewife  with  this  definition ,  and  manifeftly  declareth  the  fame. 
For  in  it  we  re  fine  fup^rficieces,the  bafe,the  two  er-edted  fuperficieces,and  the  two  endes:  of which  the 
two  endes  are  triangles  like,equall  and  parallcls,anaall  the  other  are  parallelogrammes  as  this  definiti¬ 
on  requireth  .  The  caufe  why  he  preferreth  the  definion  of  Campune  before  the  definition  of  Theon  (  as 
he  calleth  it,buf  in  very  deede  it  is  Euclides  definition^  certainely ,  as  are  all  thofe  which  are  geuen-of 
him  in  the  former  bookes,neither  is  there  any  caufe  at  all, why  it  fhould  be  doubted  in  this  one  defini¬ 
tion  more  then  in  any  of  the  other  J  as  he  him  felfe  alledgeth,is,for  thatitis(as  he  fayth)  to  large,  and 
comprehendeth  many  mo  kindes  of  folide  figures  befides  Prifmes  ,  as  Columneshauingfides,  and  all 
Parallelipipedons,  which  a  definition  fhould  not  doo:  but  fhould  be  aonuertible  with  the  thing  defi- 
ned,and  declare  the  nature  of  it  onely,andftretch  no  farther. 

Me  thinketh  Tlujfas  ought  not  to  haue  made  fo  much  a  doo  in  this  matter,  nor  to  haue  benefo 
fharpe  in  fight  and  fo  quicke  as  to  fee  and  efpy  out  fuch  faultes,which  can  of  no  man  that  will  fee  right¬ 
ly  without  affedfionbe  efpyed  for  fuch  great  faultes.  For  it  may  well  be  aunfwered  that  thefe  faultes 
which  he  notethfifyet  they  befaultes)are  not  to  be  found  in  this  definion  .It  may  be  fayd  that  it  exten¬ 
ded  it  felfe  not  farther  then  it  ihould,but  declareth  onely  the  thing  defined,namely ,  a  Prifme.  Neither 

doth 


Abatis  to  he 
taken  heedeof 
in  tbs  dtffini - 
tion  of  a  fpbere 
geuen  by  fo- 
bannefds  Sa- 
m  Buffo, 


Theodofjui 
definition  of  a 
fpbere • 


The  cmumfe - 
pence  of  a 
fpheye* 

Galens  defi¬ 
nition  of  a 
fphtrr* 

The  dtgnitie 
efa '.fpbere. 


*Xheeleuenth<Bool$e 


femicircle  A  CB,  whofe 
centre  let  be  D  :  the  dia¬ 
meter  AB  being  fixed 
on  his  endes  or*  pointes, 
imagine  the  whole  fu- 
perficies  of  the  femicir¬ 
cle  to  moue  round  from 
fome  one  point  affigned, 
till  it  returne  to  the  fame 
point  againe.  Sofhallit 
produce  a  perfect  Sphere 

or  Globe, the  forme  whereofyou  fee  in  a  ball  Or  bowle  .  And  it  is  fully 
round  and  folide,  for  that  it  is  defcribed  of  a  femicircle  which  is  per¬ 
fectly  round,  as  our  countrey  man  Johannes  de  Sacro  Bufco  in  his  booke 
ofthe  Sphere,  of  this  definition  which  he  taketh  out  of  Euclide,  doth 
wellcolledte  .  But  it  is  to  be  noted  and  taken  heede  of,  that  none  be  deceaued  by  the  definition  of  a 
sphere  geuen  by  Johannes  de  Sacro  Bufco  ;  A  Sphere  (fayth  he)  is  the  paf  age  or  mossing  of  the  circumference 
bf  a  femicircle ,  till  it  returne  'into  the  place  vs  here  it  beganne,  which  agreeth  not  with  Euclide .  Euclide  plain¬ 
ly  fayth,that  a  Sphere  is  the  paffage  or  motion  of  a  femicircle,  and  not  the  paflage  or  motion  ofthe  cir¬ 
cumference  ofa  femicircle:  neither  can  it  be  true  that  the  circumference  of a  femicircle, which  is  a  line, 
fhould  deferibe  a  body .  It  was  before  noted  that  euery  quantitie  moued,  deferibeth  and  produceth  the 
quantitie  next  vnto  it .  Wherefore  aline  moued  can  riot  bring  forth  a  body,  but  a  fuperficies  onely.  A.s 
if  ye  imagine  a  right  line  fattened  at  one  of  his  endes  to  moue  about  from  fome  one  point  till  it  returner 
to  the  fame  againe,  it  lhall  deferibe  a  plainc  fuperficies,namely,a  circle  .So  alfo  if  ye  likewife  conceaue 
of  a  crooked  line,fach  as  is  the  circumference  of  a  femicircle,  that  his  diameter  fallen  ed  on  both  the 
endes  it  fhould  moue  from  apqintaffigrled  till  it  returne  to  the  fame  againe,  it  fhould  deferibe  &pro- 
duce  a  round  fuperficies  onely,  which  is  the  fuperficies  and  limite  of  the  Sphere,  and  fhould  not  pro¬ 
duce  the  body  and  foliditie  ofthe  Sphere ,  But  the  whole  femicircle,  which  is  a  fuperficies,by  his  moti¬ 
on,  as  is  before  fa  id,  produceth  a  body,that  is,  a  perfeCt  Sphere  .  So  fee  you  the  errour  of  this  definiti¬ 
on  ofthe  author  ofthe  Sphere  :  which  whether  it  happened  by  the  author  him  felfe,  which  I  thinks 
not :  or  that  that  particle  was  thruttin  by  fome  one  after  him,  which  is  more  likely, it  it  nctcertaine. 
But  it  is  certaine,  that  it  is  vnaptly  putin,  and  maketh  an  vntrue  definition  :  which  thing  is  nothere 
fpoken,  any  thing  to  derogate  the  author  of  the  booke,  which  affuredly  was  a  man  of  excellent  know¬ 
ledge  :  neither  to  the  hindrance  or  diminifhing  ofthe  worthines  of  the  booke,  which  vndoubtedly  is  a 
very  neceflary  books,  then  which  I  know  none  more  meete  to  be  taught  and  red  in  fcholes  touching 
thegroundesand  principles  of  Attrcnomie  and  Geographic  :  but  onely  to  admonifhe  the  young  and 
vnfkilfull  reader  ofnot  falling  into  errour .  Theodofus  in  his  booke  De  Sphericis  (  a  booke  very  necefia- 
ry  for  all  thofe  which  will  fee  thegroundesand  principles  of  Geometric  and  Altronomie,  which  alfo  I 
haue  tranllated  into  our  vulgare  tounge,  ready  to  the  prelfe  )  defineth  a  Sphere  after  thys  maner: 
A  Sphere  is  a  folide  or  body  contained  binder  one fuperficies ,  in  the  midle  n>  her  of  there  is  a  point ,  fro  which  all  lines 
drawers  to  the  circumference  are  equa/l .  This  definition  of  Theodofus  is  more  effentiall  and  naturall,then 
is  the  other  geuen  by  Euclide  .The  other  did  not  fo  much  declare  the  inward  nature  and  fubftanc'e'of  x 
Sphere,  as  it  fhewed  the  induftry  and  knowledge  of  the  producing  of  a  Sphere,and  therfore  is  a  caufall 
definition  geuen  by  the  caufe  efficient,  or  rather  a  defeription  then  a  definition  .  But  this  definition's 
very  effentiall,  declaring  the  nature  and  fubfrance  of  a  Sphere .  As  if a  circle  fhould  be  thus  defined,  as 
it  well  may  :  Acircle  tsthepafageor  mossing  of  a  line  from  a  point  till  it  returne  to  the* fame  point  againe  t 
it  is  a  caufall  definition,fhewing  the  efficient  caufe  wherofa  circle  is  produced,  namely,  of  the  motion 
of  a  line  .  And  it  is  a  very  good  defeription  fully  fhewing  what  a  circle  is .  Such  like  defeription  is  the ' 
definition  ofa  Sphere  geuen  of  Euclide  by  the  motion  of  a  femicircle.  But  when  a  circle  is  defined  to 
beaplaine  fuperficies,  in  the  middell  wherof  is  a  point,  from  which  all  lines ’drawen  to  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  therof,are  equal! :  this  definition  is  effenrialland  formall,  and  declareth  the  very  nature  ofa  cir¬ 
cle  .  And  vnto  this  definition  ofa  circle,  is  correfpondent  the  definition  ofa  Sphere  geue  by  Theodofus,, 
faying  :  that  itis  a  folide  or  body,  in  the  middeif  whereof  there  is  a  point,  from  which  all  the  lines 
drawen  to  the  circumference  are  equally  So  fee  you  the  affinicie  betwene  a  circle  and  a  Sphere. For  what 
a  circle  is  in  a  plaine,that  is  a  Sphere  in  a  Solide  .  The  fulnes  and  content  of  a  circle  is  defcribed  by  the 
motion  of  a  line  moued  about :  but  the  circumference  therof,  which  is  the  limite  and  border  thereof^ 
isdeferibed  of  the  end  and  point  of  the  fame  line  moued  about.  So  thefulnes,content,and  bodyofa 
Sphere  or  Globe  is  defcribed  of  a  femicircle  moued  about.  But  the  Sphericall  fuperficies,which  is  the 
limite  and  border  ofa  Sphere,  is  defcribed  of  the  circumference  of  the  fame  femicircle  moued  about. 
And  this  is  the  fuperficies  meat  in  the  definition,  when  it  is  fayd,  that  it  is  contained  vnder  one  fuper¬ 
ficies,  which  fuperficies  is  called  of  Johannes  de  Sacro  Bufco  &  others, the  circumference  of  the  Sphere. 

Galene  in  his  booke  de  dtffnitionibus  medicis, geueth  yet  an  other  definitio  ofa  Sphere,by  his  proper- 
tie  or  com  on  accidece  of  mouing,which  is  thus.  A  sphere  is  afgure  mof  apt  to  all  motion, as  hasting  no  bafe 
whereon  to  fay. This  is  a  very  plaine  and  witty  definition, declaring  the  dignitie  thereofaboue  all  figures 
generally. All  other  bodyes  orfolide$,as  Cubes, Pyramids,  and  ethers  haue  fides,  bafes,and  angles,  aj| 
which  are  flay  es  to  rdf  vpon,  or  impediments  and  lets  to  motion  .  But  the  Sphere  hailing  no  fide  or 

bafe 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


Fq/^i6. 


bafe  to  flay  one,nor  angle  to  let  the  courfe  thereof, but  onely  in  a  poynt  touching  the  playne  wherein  it 
flandcth,moueth  freely  and  fully  with  out  let.  And  for  the  dignity  and  worthines  thereof,  this  circular 
and  Sphericall  motion  is  attributed  to  the  heauens ,  which  are  the  moil  worthy  bodyes  .  Wherefore 
there  is  afcribed  vnto  them  this  chiefe  kinde  of  motion.  Thisfoliae  or  bodely  figure  is  alio  commonly 
called  a  Globe. 


A  fphere  cat* 
led  a  Globe . 


<  13  The  axe  of  a  Sphere  is  that  right  line  nhicb  ahideth  fixed ,  about  Thirtenth  dif 

lohich  the  femicircle  leas  moued.  putt  on. 

As  in  the  example  before  geuen  in  the  definition  of  a  Sphere,  the  line  A  B,  about  which  his  endes 
being  fixed,the  femicircle  was  moued  (  whicbline  alfo  yet  reraayneth  after  the  motion  ended  )  is  the 
axe  of  the  Sphere  defcribed  of that  femicircle  .  Theodofus  defineth  the  axe  of  a  Sphere  after  this  maner. 

T  he  axe  of  a  Sphere  is  a  certayne  right  line  drawen  bj)  the  centre ,  ending  on  either Jide  in  the  fuperfctesof  the  TheodofluS 
sphere, about  which  being fixed  the  Sphere  is  turned. As  the  line  A  B  in  the  former  example.  There  nedeth  to  t tiffinition  of 
this  definition  no  other  declaration ,  but  onely  to  confider ,  that  the  whole  Sphere  turneth  vpon  that  the  axe  of  n 
line  A  B,which  pafleth  by  the  centre  D,and  is  extended  one  either  fide  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Sphere,  fphere. 
wherefore  by  this  definition  of  Theodofiusk  is  the  axe  ol  the  Sphere.  * 


14  T  he  centre  of  a  S phere  is  that  poynt  1 vhicb  is  alfo  the  centre  of  the fe*  fourte„tb 
micircle.  dijfimim* 

This  definition  of  the  centre  ofa  Sphere  is  geUen  as  was  the  other  definition  of  the  axe ,  namely, 
hauing  a  relation  to  the  definition  ofa  Sphere  here  geuen  of  Nuclide:  whereitwas  fayd  that  a  Sphere  is 
made  by  the  reuolution  of  afemicircle,wbofe  diameter  abideth  fixed.  The  diameter  ofa  circle  and  ofa 
femicrcle  is  all  one.  And  in  the  diameter  either  ofa  circle  or  of  a  femicircle  is  contayned  the  center  of 
either  of  them, for  that  the  diameter  of  eche  euer  palfeth  by  the  centre .  Now  (layth  Euclid 'e )  the  poynt 
which  is  the  center  of  the  femicircle, by  whofc  motion  the  Sphere  was  defcribed ,  is  alfo  the  centre  of 
the  Sphere.  As  in  the  example  there  geuen,  the  poyn  tD  is  the  centre  both  of  the  femicircle  &  alfo  of  the 
Sphere  .Theodofus  geueth  an  other  definition  of  the  centre  of  a  Sphere  which  is  thus  .The  centre  of  a 
Sphere  is  a  fojnt  with  in  the  Sphere, f  cm  wh/ch  all  lines  drawen  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Sphere  are  equall .  As  in 
a  circle  being  a  playne  figure  there  is  a  poyn  t  in  the  middeft,from  which  all  lines  drawen  to  the  circum- 
frence  are  equall ,  which  is  the  centre  of  the  circle  :  fo  in  like  maner  with  in  a  Sphere  which  is  a  folide 
and  bodely  figure, there  mull:  be  conceaued  a  poynt  in  the  nuddelt  thereof, from  which  all  lines  drawen 
fo  the  fuperficies  thereof  are  equal!. .  And  this  poynt  is  the  centre  of  the  Sphere  by  this  definition  of 
T  heodofi us.  Fluf, as  in  defining  the  centre  of  a  Sphere  comprehendeth  both  thofe  definitions  in  one,after 
this  fort .  T  he  centre  ofa  Sphere  is  a  psjnt  affgned  in  a  Spherefrcm  which  all  the  lines  drawen  to  the  fuperfi¬ 
cies  are  equall, and.  it  is  thefame  which  was  alfo  the  centre  of  the femicircle  which  defcribed  the  Sphere.  This  defi¬ 
nition  is  fuperfluous  and  contayneth  more  the  nedeth.For  either  part  thereof  is  a  full  and  fufficient  de¬ 
finition, as  before  hath  bene  {hewed.  Or  ells  had  Euclide  bene  infufficient  for  leaning  out  the  one  part, 
gvT kendo f  us Cov\czmn<g  out  the  other .  Paraduenture  Flujfasiidk  for  the  more  explication  of  either, 
that  the  otie  part  might  open  the  other. 


Tbeodo/iut 
diffinition  of 
the  center  of  a 
fphere • 


fluffasdif- 
nit  ion  of  the 
center  of  4 
fphere . 


is  The  diameter  of  a  Sphere  is  a  cert  dyne  right  line  drawen  by  the  cetre ?  Fiuetenthdip 
and  one  eche  fide  ending  at  thefiuperficies  of  the  fame  Sphere.  finition 


This  definitio  alfo  is  not  hard,butmay  eafely  be  couceaued  by  the  definitio  of  the  diameter  ofa  cir¬ 
cle  .Tor  as  the  diameter  of  a  circle  is  a  right  line  drawne  fro  one  fide  of  the  circufrence  of  a  cirtle  to  the 
other,paifing  by  the  centre  of  the  circle:  fo  imagine  you  a  right  line  to  be  drawen  from  one  fide  of  the 
fuperficies  ofa  Sphere  to  the  o:her,pafling  by  the  center  of  the  Sphere,  and  that  line  is  the  diameter  of  Difference  be* 
the  Sphere.  So  it  is  not  all  one  to  fay, the  axe  ofa  Sphere ,  and  the  diameter  of  a  Sphere .  Any  line  in  a  (fg^g  (fa 
Sphere  drawen  from  fide  to  fide  by  the  centre  is  a  diameter  .But  not  eueryline  fo  drawen  by  the  centre  ,  &  d%e, 

is  the  axe  of  the  Sphere,  but  onely  one  right  line  about  which  the  Sphere  is  imagnined  to  be  moued,  ,  V  . 

So  that  the  name  of  a  diameter  ofa  Sphere  is  more  general, then  is  the  name  of  an  axe  .For  euery  axe  in  °J 
a  Sphere  is  a  diameter  of  the  fame:  but  not  cuery  diameter  of  a  Sphere  is  an  axe  of  the  fame.  And  there¬ 
fore  Ituffas  fetteth  a  diameter  in  the  definition  of  an  axe  as  a  more  generall  word  in  this  maner.  T  he  axe 

ssjf  of 


T  he  eleuenth  $  oofy 


efa  Sphere, is  that  fixed  diameter  about  which  the  Sphere  is  moued  *  A  Sphere  (as  alfo  a  drcle)may  haue  inB- 
nice  diametersjbut  it  can  haue  but  onely  one  axe. 


Seucntenth 

definition. 


16  jfcone  is  a  folide  or  bodely figure  which  is  made, when  one  of  thefides 
of  a  re  ft  angle  triangle,  namely ,  one  of  the /ides  yphich  contayne  the  right 
angle, abiding  fixed, the  triangle  is  moued  about fivntill  it  returne  Tmto  the 
jelfe  fame  place from  whence  it  began fir  ft  to  be  moued .  ISLow  if the  right 
line  yvhich  abideth  fixed  be  e quail  to  the  other  fide  lohich  is  moued  about 
and  containeth  the  right  angleithen  the  cone  is  a  reffiangle  cone. 'But  if  it  be 
leffe,then  is  it  an  obtufe  angle  cone.  And  fit  be  greater ,  the  is  it  an  a  cute * 
angle  cone, 


Firtt  kinde 
of Cones. 


1  his  definition  ofa  Coneisofthe  nature  and  condition  that  the  definition  of  a  Sphere  was,  for 
either  is  geuen  by  the  motion  ofafuperficies.  There,as  to  the  production  of  a  Sphere  was  imagined  a 
femicircle  to  rnoue  round,  from  fome  one  point  till  it  returned  to  the  fame  point  againe  :  fo  here  mull 

ye  imagine  a  reCtangle  triangle  to  moue  about  till  it  come  againe  to  the  place  where  it  begannc  .  Let 

a  b  c  be  a  reCtangle  triangle  ,  hauing 
the  angle  a  b  c  a  right  angle ,  which  let 
be  contained  vnder  the  lines  AsandB  c. 

Now  fuppofe  the 
fide  a  b  ,  namely, 
one  of  the  lines 
which  cotainethe 
right  angle  a  b  c 
to  be  fattened,  and 
about  it  fuppofe 
the  triangle  ajc  3 

to  be  moued  from 
fome  one  poynt 
afiigned  till  it  re¬ 
turne  to  the  fame 

agayne  (as  vppon  the  diameter  in  the  definition  of  a  Sphere  ye  imagined  a  fe- 
micircle  to  moue  about)  :fo  ihall  the  folide  or  body  thus  defcribed  be  a  perfeCk 
Cone  .  As  you  may  imagine  by  this  figure  here  fet .  And  the  forme  of  a  Cone 
you  may  fufficiently  conceaue  by  the  figure  fet  in  the  margent .  There  are  of 
Cones  three  kindes,  namely,  a  reCtangle  Cone,  an  obtufeangle  Cone,  and  an 
acute  angle  Cone,all  which  were  before  in  the  former  definitio  defined:  Name- 
ly,the  firlt:  kinde  after  this  maner. 

If  the  right  line  which  abideth fixed,  be  equall  to  the  other  fide  which  moueth  round 
about,  and  containeth  the  right  angle, then  the  Cone  is  a  reCtangle  Cone. 

Asfuppofein  the  former  example,  that  the  line  a  b  which  is  fixed,and  about  which  the  triangle 
was  moued,  and  after  the  motion  yetremayneth,  be  equall  to  the  line  b  c,which  is  the  other  line  con- 
tayning  the  right  angle,which  alfo  is  moued  about  together  with  the  whole  triangle :  then  is  the  Cone 
defcribed,  as  the  Cone  ad  c  in  this  example,  a  right  angled  Cone  :  fo  called  for  that  the  angle  at  the 
toppe  of  the  Cone  is  a  right  angle  .  For  forafinuch  as  the  lines  a  b  and  b  c  of  the  triangle  a  b  c  are  e~ 
quail,  the  angle  b  a  c  is  equall  to  the  angle  b  c  a  (by  the  y.of  the  firft) .  And  eche  ofthern  is  the  halfe 
ofthe  right  angle  a  b  c  (by  the  32.ofthefirlV)  .  In  like  fort  may  it  be  fhewed  in  the  triangle  ab  d, 
that  the  angle  bda  is  equall  to  the  angle  bad,  and  that  eche  of  them  is  the  halfe  of  a  right  angle. 
Wherefore  the  whole  angle  c  a  d,  which  is  compofed  of  the  two  halfe  right  aug!es,namcly ,  d  a  b  and 
c  a  b  is  a  right  angle  .  And  fo  haue  ye  what  is  a  right  angled 
Cone. 

But  f  it  be  leJJejhen  is  it  an  obtufeangle  Cone  .  As  in  this  ex¬ 
ample,  the  line  a  b  fixed  is  leffe  then  the  line  b  c  moued  a- 
boiit.  Wherefore  the  Cone  defcribed  of  the  circumuohui- 
on  of  the  triangle  abc  about  the  line  a  b-,  is  an  obtufean¬ 
gle  Cone,  for  that  the  angle  at  the  toppe  d  a  c  is  greater  D 
then  a  right  angle  .  Wherefore  it  is  an  obtufeangle*  And 
therefore  the  Cone  is  called  an  obtufe  angle  Cone. 

sind 


ofShctides  Ekmntef; 


57- 


And  if  it  be  greater, then  is  it  an  acuteangle  Conc.hs  in 
this  figure,  the  line  AB  fattened,  is  greater  then  the 
line  BDC  moued  about  .  Wherefore  the  Cone  de¬ 
fcribed  by  the  motion  and  turning  of  the  triangle 
ABC  about  A  B  is  an  acuteangle  Gone,  hauing  the 
angle  at  the  toppe  B  A  C  atl  acute  angle  .  [Of  whome 
the  Cone  is  called  all  acuteangle  Cone.  For  the  ea- 
fier  fight  Sc  cofideration  of  all  thefe  kindes  of  Cones, 
and  a!fo  for  the  plainer  demonflration  of  the  varie¬ 
ties  of  their  angles  in  theirtoppes,Ihaue  defcribed 
them  all  three^in  one  playne  figure ,  of  which  the 
Cone  ACB  is  a  right  angled  Cone,hauyng  his  fix¬ 
ed  fide  CF  equall'to  the  line  FB,  and  hys  angle 
AC  B  a  right  angle  ;  the  Cone  A  E  B  is  an  obtufe 
angle  Cone,  and  AD  B  an  acuteangle  Cone. 

By  which  figure  ye  may  eafily  demonfrrate 
(by  the  ii .  of  the  firft)  that  the  angle  A  D  B 
of  "the  Cone  AD  B,  whofe  fixed  line  D  F 
is  greater  then  the  fide  FB,isleife  then  the 
rip  ht  angle  A  CB,andfo  is  an  acute  angle.' 

And  alfo  (by  the  fame  ax. of  thefirfl)  ye 
fhall  with  like  facilitie  perceaue  how  the 
ancle  AEB  of  rhe  Cone  A  EB  whofe  fix- 
edtine  E  F  is  leife  then  the  fide  FB,is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  right  angle  ACB:  and  there¬ 
fore  is  an  obtufe  angle.  •  . 

This  figure  of  a  Cone  is  of  Canipatie,  of 
yitellto,  and  of  others  which  haue  written  in 
thefe  latter  times,  called  a  round  Pyramis, 

•which  is  not  fo  aptly  .  Fora  Pyramis,  and  a 
Cone,  are  farre  diftant,  &  offundry  natures. 

A  Cone  is  a  regular  body  produced  of  one 

circumuolution  of  a  rediangle  triangle ,  and  limited  and  bordered  with  one  onely  round  fuper- 
ficies  .  But  a  Pyramis  is  terminated  and  bordered  with  diuers  fuperficieces  .  Therefore  can  not 
a  Cone  by  any  iuit  reafon  beare  the  name  ofa  Pyramis.  This  folide  of  many  is  called  Turbo, which  to  our 
purpofe  may  be  Englifhed  a  Top  or  Ghjg  :  and  moreouer,  peculiarly  c^w^wecalleth  a  Cone  the  Py¬ 
ramis  ofa  round  Co:umne,namely  ,of  that  Columne  which  is  produced  of  the  motion  of  a  parallelo- 
gramme  (contained  of  the  lines  AB  andB  C)  moued  about,the  line  A  B  being  fixed  .  Of  which  Co-* 
lumnes  lhall  be  fhewed  hereafter,.  ...... 

"  1 1  ’ '  ‘  J  1  "  ‘  un;,  to  T/.E  \.  m 


..  -  -  .  v.  • 

f  I  \  J  -i  J 


17  , .  The  axe  ofa  Cone  is  that  line ,  yphich  abidetb  fixed ,  about  t ohich  the 
triangle  is  moued .  j And  the  bafe  of  the  C one  is  the  circle  Hebich  is  defcribed 
by  the  right  line  lahich  is  moued  about,  .  ,7  ,  * .....  < 


DT 1  •  >  , 


As  in  the  example  the  line  A  B  i$  {up- M 
poled  to  be  the  line  . about  which  the 
right.an.gled  triangle  ABC  (to  the  pro¬ 
duction  of  the  Cone )  was  moued  :  and 
that  line  is  here  of  Euchde  called  the  axe 
ofthe  Cone  defcribed  .  The  bafe  of  the 
Cone  is  the  circle  which  is  defcribed  bji  the ,  . 

right  line  which  is  moued  about .  As  the 
line  AB  was  fixed. and  flayed  , fo  was 
the  line  B  C  ( together  with  the  whole 
triangle  ABC  )  moued  and  turned  a- 
bout .  A  line  moued,  as  hath  bene  fayd 
before,producethafuperficies  •  andbe- 
caufe  the  line  B  C  is  moued  about  a 
point, namely,  the  point  B,  being  the  :  ( 

end  ofthe  axe  ofthe  Cone  A  Bs  it  produceth  by  bis  motion,  and  feudlution  a  circle,  which  circle  is 
the  bafe  of  the  Cone  :  as  in  this  example,  the  circle  CD  E, 

SS.ij,  The 


%4  CmecaUei 
dfCampane  a 
rounds  Pm- 
mis. 


Seuentcnth 

dijfnimn* 


Eightemb 
~~  Wien, 


'  7 he  eleuenth  Boohe 

The  line  which  produceth  the  bafe  of  the  Cone,  is  the  line  of  the  triangle  which  together  with 
the  axe  of  the  Cone  contayneth  the  right  angle.  The  other  fide  alfo  of  the  triangle,namely,the  line  A  C, 
is  molted  about  alfo  with  the  motion  of  the  triangle,  which  with  his  reuolution  defcribeth  alfo  a  fuper- 
lAemis&U (f§-  ficieSjWhich  is  a  round  fuperficies,&  is  ereded  vpon  the  bafe  of  the  Cone,  &  endeth  in  a  point,name- 
perfkiet*  ly»in  the  higher  part  or  toppe  of  the  Cone.  And  it  is  commonly  called  a  Conicall  fuperficies. 

1 8  A  cylinder  is  a  folide  or  bodely  figure  nhich  is  made ,  lohen  one  of  the 
fides  of  a  refifangle  parallelogramme ,  abiding fixed  ,  the  paralle  logramme 
is  moued  about,  Mill  it  returne  to  the  felfe fame  place  from  whence  it  be* 
o-an  to  be  moued . 

<o 

This  definition  alfo  is  of  the  fame  fort  and  condition,that  the  two  definitions  before  geue  were, 
namely,  the  definition  ofa  Sphere  and  the  definition  of  a  Cone  .  For  all  are  geuen  by  mouing  ofa  fu¬ 
perficies  about  a  right  line  fixed,  the  one  ofafemicircle  about  his  diameter,  the  other  of  a  redangle  tri¬ 
angle  about  one  of  his  fides.  And  this  folide  or  body  here  defined  is  caufed  of  the  motion  of  a  redangle 
parallelogramehauingoneof  his  fides  contayning 
the  right  angle  fixed  from  fome  one  poynt  till  it  re¬ 
turne  to  the  lame  agayne  where  it  began .  As  fuppofe 
A  B  C  D  to  be  a  redangle  parallelogramme ,  hauing 
his  fide  A  B  faftned,  about  which  imagine  the  whole 
parallelogramme  to  be  turned  ,  till  it  returne  to  the 
poynt  where  it  began,  then  is  that  folide  or  body, by 
this  motion  defcribed,a  Cylinder:  which  becaufe  of 
his  roundnes  can  not  at  full  be  defcribed  in  a  playne 
fuperficies,yet  haue  you  for  an  example  thereof  a  fuf- 
ficient  defignation  therof  in  the  margent  fuch  as  in  a 
plaine  may  be.If you  wilperfedly  behold  the  forme 
of  a  cilinder.Confider  a  round  piller  that  is  perfect¬ 
ly  round. 


-A 


Nmetenth  -  ip  The  axe  of  acilinderis  that  right  line  ^ohich  abydeth  fixed,  about 
which  the  parallelogramme  is  moued.  ydnd  thebafesof  the  cilinder  are 
the  circles  defcribed  of  the  tloo  oppofite  fides  1 thick  are  moued  about. 

.B-\:  •.  '■  _ 

Euen  as  in  the  defcription  of  a  Sphere  the  line  fattened  was  the  axe  of  the  Sphere  produced  :  and 
in  the  defcription  of  a  cone,the  line  fattened  was  the  axe  of  the  cone  brought  forth :  fo  in  this  defcripti¬ 
on  of  a  cilinder  the  line  abiding, which  was  fixed, about  which  the  redangle  parallelogramme  was  mo¬ 
ued  is  the  axe  of  that  cilinder  .As  in  this  example  is  the  lin  zAB.  The  bafes  of the  cilinder  &c.  In  the  reuo¬ 
lution  of  a  parallelogramme  onely  one  fide  is  fixed ,  therefore  the  three  other  fides  are  moued  about: 
of  which  the  two  fides  which  with  the  axe  make  right  angles,  and  which  alfo  are  oppofite  fides,in  their 
motion  defcribe  eche  of  them  a  circle  ,which  two  circles  are  called  the  bafes  of  the  cilinder.  As  ye  fee  in 
the  figure  before  put  two  circles  defcribed  of  the  motio  of  the  two.  oppofitlines  A  D  and  BCywhich  arc 
the  bafes  of  the  Cilinder. 

Ae'MniricdU  T^e  other  line  of  the  redangle  parallelogramme  moued ,  by  his  motion  defcribeth  the  round  fu- 

(ttberficm.  Per^c*es  ahout  the  Cilinder.  As  the  third  line  or  fide  of  a  redangle  triangle  by  his  motion  defcribed  the 

■f  F  i  °  round  Conical  fuperficies  about  the  Cone.  And  as  the  circuferece  of  the  femicircle  defcribed  the  round 

fphericall  fuperficies  about  the  Sphere. In  this  example  it  is  the  fuperficies  defcribed  of  the  line  D  C. 

By  this  definition  it  is  playne  that  the  two  circles ,  or  bafes  of  a  cilinder  are  euer  equall  and  paral- 
iels:for  that  the  lines  moued  which  produced  them  remayned  alwayes  equall  and  parallels .  Alfo  the 
axe  of  a  cilinder  is  euer  an  ereded  line  vnto  either  of  the  bafes.  For  with  all  the  lines  defcribed  in  the 
bafes,  and  touching  it,it  maketh  right  angles, 

C^mpaneyV itellto ,with  other  later  writers, call  this  folide  or  body  a  round  Columne  or  piller.  And 
Cxmptne  addeth  vnto  this  definition  this,as  a  corrollary.That  of  a  round  Columne ,  of  a  Sphere ,  and 
><mr.  of 


Ctsrsilary. 


*4  rounds  Co 
litmus  er 


of Eticlides  Elemented  FoL]  18. 

of  a  circle  the  cetre  is  one  and  the  felfe  fame.That  is  (as  he  him  felfe  declareth  it  &  proueth  the  fame) 
where  the  Columne,the  Sphere, and  the  circle  haue  one  diameter. 

20  Like  cones  and  cilinder s  are  tbofe3  ivhofe  axes  arid  diameters  of  their 
bafes  are  proportionall 


%A  Corollary 
added  by  Cam 
pane. 

Twenty  diffi* 
ttitian. 


a 


The  fimilitude  of  cones  and  cilira- 
ders  ftandeth  in  the  proportion  of  thofe 
right  linesjof  which  they  haue  their  ori- 
ginalland  fpring  .  For  by  the  diameters 
of  their  bafes  is  had  their  length  and 
breadth  j  and  by  their  axe  is  had  their 
heigth  or  deepenes  *  Wherefore  to  fee 
whether  they  be  like  or  vnlike ,  ye  mull 
compare  their  axes  together ,  which  is 
their  depth,  andalfo  their  diameters  to¬ 
gether,  which  is  thier  length  &  breadth. 
As  if  the  axe  B  G  of  the  cone  A  B  c  be  to 
to  the  axe  El  of  the  cone  DEF,  as  the 
diameter  AC  of  the  cone  A  B  C  is  to  the 
diameter  D  F  of  the  cone  D  E  f.then  are 
the  cones  ABC  and  DEF  like  cones. 
Like  wife  in  the  cilinders.  If  the  axe  L  N 
of  the  cilinder  L  HMN  haue  that  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  axe  O  ijjsf  the  cilinder  R 
o  lJ  <?_,which  the  diameter  H M hath  to 
the  diameter .R  P :  then  are  thecilinders 
H  lm  n  znd.RO  P  £Mike cilinders,and 
fo  of  all  others. 


si  A  Quiets  a  folide  or  hodely 
figure  contayned  Tender  fixe  e* 
quallfquares , 

As  is  a  dye  which  hath  fixe  fides,  and  eche  of 
them  is  a  full  and  perfect  fquare,  as  limites  or  bor¬ 
ders  vnder  which  it  is  contayned.  And  as  ye  may 
conceiue  in  a  piece  of  timber  contayning  a  foote 
fquare  euery  way,  or  in  any  fuch  like.  So  that  a 
Cubeisfuch  a  folide  whole'three  dimenfions  are 
equailjfhe  length  is  equall  ter  the  breadth  thereof, 
and  eche  of  them  equall  to  the  depth.Here  is  as  if 
may  he  in  a  playne  fuperficies  fet  an  image  therof, 
in  thefe  two  figures  wherof the  firltis  as  it  is  com¬ 
monly  delcribedin  a  playne,the  fecond  ( which  is 
in  the  beginning  of  the  other  fide  of  this  leafe) 
i  s  drawn  as  it  is  delcribed  by  arte  Vpo  a*  playne  fu¬ 
perficies  to  fhewfomWhat  bodilike.Andin  deede 
the  latter  deferiptio  i-s  for  the  fight  better' the  the 
iirft.But  the  firll  for  the  demollrations  of  Euclides 
proportions  in  the  fiue  bookes  following  is  of 
more  vfe,for  that  in  it  may  be  confidcrcd  and  fene 


SS.  iii,  all 


Twenty  on* 
definition* 


Twenty  two 
diffinition* 


ATelrahe- 
drsn  one  of 
the  fine  regu¬ 
lar  bodyes. 

Difference 
betwene  a 
Tetrahedron 
and  a  Pira  - 
mis . 


P fellas  eaUeth 
a  Tetrahedron 
a  Piramts, 


Twenty  three 
definition* 


7 he  eleuenth  TSookt 


f 

all  the  fixe  fides  of  the  Cube.  And  fo  any  lines  or  fe&ions  drawen 
in  any  one  of  the  fixe  fides.Which  can  not  be  fo  wel  fene  in  the  o- 
xher  figure  defcribed  vpon  a  playneh  And  as  touching  the  firft 
figure  (  which  is  fet  at  the  ende  of  the  other  fide  of  this  leafe)  ye 
fee  that  there  are  fixe  parallelogrammes  which  ye  ffiuft  conceyue 
to  be  both  equilaterand  redangle,  although  in  dede  there  can  be 
in  this  defcription  onely  two  of  them  redangle,they  may  in  dede 
be  defcribed  al  equilater.Now  if  ye  imagine  one  of  the  fixe  paral¬ 
lelogrammes, as  in  this  example,the  parallelogram  me  AB  C  D  to 
be  the  bafelieng  vpon  a  ground  playnefuperficies.  And  fo  con- 
ceiue  theparallelogramme  E  F  G  H  to  be  in  the  toppe  ouer  it,  in 
fuch  fort,that  the  lines  A  E,C  G,D  H ,  &  B  F  may  be  erected  per¬ 
pendicularly  from  the  pointes  A,C,B,D,to  the  ground  playne  fu- 
perficiesorfquare  AB  CD.  For  by  this  imagination  this  figure 
wil  {hew  vnto  you  bodilike.  And  this  imagination  petfe&ly  had, 

wil  make  many  of  the  propofitions  in  thefe  flue  bookes  following,  in  which  are  required  to  be  defers 
bed  fuch  like  folides (although  notall  cubes)  to  be  more  plainly  and  eafily  conceiued. 

In  many  examples  of  the  Greeke  and  alfo  of  the  Latin,there  is  in  this  place  fet  the  diffinition  of  a  Te- 
trahedron,which  is  thus. 


22 


A Tetrahedron  is  a  folide  K>hicb  is  contained  lender  fower  triangles 
equal!  and  equilater. 

A  forme  of  this  folide  ye  may  fee  in  thefe  two  examples  here  fet, 
whereofoneisasitis  commonly  defcribed  in  a  playne.  Neither  is 
it  hard  to  conceaue .  For  (  as  we  before  taught  in  a  Pyramis  )  if  ye 
imagine  the  triangle  BCD  to  lie  vpon  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies, 
and  the  point  A  to  be  pulled  vp  together  with  the  lines  A  B,  A  C,and 
A  D,  yelhallperceaue  the  forme  of  the  Tetrahedron  to  be  contayned 
vnder  4.triangles,which  ye  mull  imagine  to  be  al  fower  equilaterand 
cquiangle,  though  they  can  not  fo  be  drawen  in  a  plaine  .  And  a  Te¬ 
trahedron  thus  defcribed,  is  of  more  vfe  in  thefe  fiue  bookes  follow¬ 
ing,  then  is  the  other,  although  the  other  appeare  in  forme  to  the  eye 
more  bodilike. 

Why  this  definition  is  here  left  out  both  of  Campane  and  of  Elujfas, 

I  can  not  but  maruell,  confidering  thataTetrahedron,is  of  all  Philo- 
fophers  counted  one  of  the  fiue  chiefe  folides  which  are  here  de¬ 
fined  of  Euchdc,  which  are  called  comonly  regular  bodies, with¬ 
out  mencion  of  which,the  entreatie  of  thefe  fhould  feeme  much 
maimed  :  vnlelfe  they  thought  it  fufficiently  defined  vnder  the 
definition  of  a  Pyramis,  which  plainly  and  generally  taken  ,inclu- 
dethin  deede  a  Tetrahedron,  although  a  Tetrahedron  properly 
much  differeth  from  a  Pyramis,as  a  thing  fpeciall  or  a  particular, 
from  a  more  generall.For  fo  taking  it,euery  T etrahedron  is  a  Py¬ 
ramis,  but  not  euery  Pyramis  is  a  Tetrahedron  .  By  the  generall 
definition  of  a  Pyramis,  the  fuperficieces  of  the  fides  may  be  as 
many  in  number  as  ye  lift,  as  3.4.  y.  6.  or  moe,  according  to  the 
forme  of  the  bafe,  whereon  it  is  fet,  whereof  before  in  the  defi¬ 
nition  ofa  Pyramis  were  examples  geuen.  But  in  a  Tetrahedron 
the  fuperficieces  erefted  can  be  but  three  in  number  according 
to  the  bafe  therofj  which  is  euer  a  triangle  .  Againe,  by  the  generall  definition  of  a  Pyramis, the  fuperfi¬ 
cieces  ere&ed  may  afeend  as  high  as  ye  lift,butin  a  Tetrahedron  they  muft  all  be  equall  to  the  bafe. 
Wherefore  a  Pyramis  may  feeme  to  be  more  generall  then  a  Tetrahedron,  as  before  a  Prifme  feemed 
tobemore  generall  then  a  Parallelipipedon,  or  a  fidedColumne  :  fo  that  euery  Parallelipipedon  is  a 
Prifme,  but  not  euery  Prifme  is  a  Parallelipipedon .  And  euery  axe  in  a  Sphere  is  a  diameter  :  but  not 
euery  diameter  ofa  Sphere  is  the  axe  therof.So  alfo  noting  well  the  definition  ofa  Pyramis,euery  Te¬ 
trahedron  may  be  called  a  Pyramis,  butnot  euery  Pyramis  a  Tetrahedron.  And  in  dede  Pfe/lus  in  num- 
bring  of  thefe  fiue  folides  or  bodies,  calleth  a Tetrahedron  a  Pyramis  in  manifell  wordes  .  This  I  fey 
might  make  Elujfas  &  others(as  I  thinke  it  did)  to  omitte  the  definition  of  a  Tetrahedron  in  this  place, 
as  Efficiently  comprehended  within  the  definition  ofa  Pyramis  geuen  hefore.  But  why  then  did  he 
not  count  that  definition  of  aPyramis  faultie,for  that  it  extendeth  it  felfe  to  large,and  comprehendeth 
vnder  it  a  Tetrahedron  (  which  differeth  from  a  Pyramis  by  that  it  is  contayned  of  equall  triangles)  as 
fienotfoaduifedly  did  before  the  definition  ofa  Prifme. 

2  3  An  Ocdohedron  is  a folide  or  bodily  figure  cotamed  lander  eight  equall 

and  equilater  triangles. 

As 


of  Euclid es  Elementes. 


Fol.\\$. 


As  a  Cube  is  a  folide  figure  contayned  vnder  fixe  fuperficiall  fi¬ 
gures  of  foure  fides  or  fquares  which  are  equilater,  equiangle,  and 
equall  the  one  to  the  other  :  fo  is  an  O<ftohedron  a  folide  figure 
contained  vnder  eight  triangles  which  are  equilater  and  equall  the 
one  to  the  other .  As  ye  may  in  thefe  two  figures  here  fet  beholde. 
Whereof  the  firft  is  drawen  according  as  this  folide  is  commonly 
deferibed  vpon  a  plaine  fuperficies .  The  fecond  is  drawen  as  it  is 
deferibed  by  arte  vpon  a  plaine,  to  fhewe  bodilike  .  And  in  deede 
although  the  fecond  appeare  to  the  eye  more  bodilike,  yet  as  I  be¬ 
fore  noted  in  a  Cube,  for  the  vnderftanding  of  diuers  Propofitions 
in  thefe  fiue  bookes  following,  is  the  fil'd  defeription  of  more  vfe 
yea  &ofneceflitie.  For  withoutit,  ye  can  notcoceaue  the  draught 
oflines  and  fe&ions  in  any  one  of  the  eight  fides  which  are  fome- 
timesin  the deferiptions  of  fome  of  thofe  Propofitions  required. 
Wherefore  to  the  confideration  of  this  firft  defcription,imagine 
firif  that  vppon  the  vpper  face  of  the  fuperficies  of  the  parallelo- 
gramme  A  B  C  D,  be  deferibed  a  Pyramis ,  hauing  his  fower  trian¬ 
gles  A  F  S,A  F  C,C  F £>, and  D  F  £,equilater  and  equiangle,and  con¬ 
curring  in  the  point  F.  The  coceaue  that  on  the  lower  face  of  the 
fuperficies  of  the  former  parallelogram  me  be  deferibed  an  other 
Pyramis,hauing  his  fower  triangles  A  £  B,A  £  C,CE  D,8cD  E  3, 
equilater  and  equiangle,and  concurring  in  the  point  £.  For  fb  al¬ 
though  fomewhat  grolly  by  reafon  the  triangles  can  not  be  de¬ 
feribed  equilater,you  may  in  a  plaine  perceaue  the  forme  of  this 
folide,  and  by  that  meanesconceaue  any  lines  orfe&ions  requi¬ 
red  to  be  drawen  in  any  of  the  fayd  eight  triangles  which  are  the 
fides  of  that  body. 

24-  J  Dodecahedron  is  a  folide  or  lodilyfi* 
gure  cotained  louder  twelue  equall equilater 9 
and  equiangle  Pentagons. 

As  a  Cube,  a  Tetrahedron,  and  an  O<ftohe- 
dron,are  contayned  vnder  equall  plaine  figures, 
a  Cube  vnder  fquares,  the  other  two  vnder  tri¬ 
angles  :  fb  is  this  folide  figure  contained  vnder 
twelue  equilater,  equiangle,  and  equall  Penta¬ 
gons, or  figures  of  fiue  fides .  As  in  thefe  two  fi¬ 
gures  here  fet  you  may  perceaue  .  Of  which 
the  firft  (which  thinge  alfo  was  before  noted 
of  a  Cube,aTetrahedron,andan  O&ohedron) 
is  the  common  defeription  of  it  in  a  plains,  the- 
other  is  the  defeription  of  it  by  arte  vppon  a 
plaine  to  make  it  to  appeare  fomwhat  bodilike. 

The  firft  defeription  in  deede  is  very  obfeure  to  y 
conceaue,  but  yet  of  neceffitie  it  muftfo,  ney- 
ther  can  it  otherwife,be  in  a  plaine  deferibed  to 
vnderftad  thofe  Propofitions  of  Euclide  in  thefe 
fiue  bokes  following  which  concerne  the  fame. 

For  in  it  although  rudely,  may  you  fee  all  the 
tweluePentagons,whichfhould  in  deede  be  all 
equall,equilater,  and  equiangle  .  And  now  how 
you  may  fomewhat  conceaue  the  firft  figure  de¬ 
feribed  in  the  plaine  to  be  a  body  .  Imagine  firft  the  Pentagon 
ABCDE  to  be  vpon  aground  plaine  fuperficies,  then  imagine 
the  Pentagon  F  G  H  K  L  to  be  on  high  oppofite  vnto  the  Penta¬ 
gon  ABCDE.  And  betwene  thofe  two  Pentagons  there  will  be 
ten  Pentagons  pulled  vp,  fiue  fro  the  fiue  fides  of  the  ground  Pen- 
tagon,namely,from  the  fide  A  B  the  Pentagon  A  B  O  N  M,  from 
the  fide  B  C  the  Pentagon  B  C  QP  O, from  the  fide  C D  the 
Pentagon  C  D  S  R  Q^,  from  the  fide  D  E,the  Pentagon  D  E  V  T  S, 
from  the  fide  E  A  the  Pentagon  E  A  M  X  V,  the  other  fiue  Penta¬ 
gons  haueeche  one  of  their  fides  common  with  one  of  the  fides 
of  the  Pentagon  F  G  H  K  L,  which  is  oppofite  vnto  the  Pentagon 
in  the  ground  fuperficies  :  namely,  thefe  are  the  other  fiue  Penta- 
gons  FGNMX,  G  H  P  O  N,  HKR  QJ>,  KLRST,LFXVT. 

SSiiij.  So 


Jtpety  former 
definition* 


Twenty  fine 
dijfmnwn 


/ 


Fiue  regular 
bodies. 


The  dignity  of 
theft  bodies. 

Tetrahe¬ 
dron  afcribed 
tnto  the  fire. 
An  ociohe - 
t iron  afcribed 
Wntotheayre. 


) 


So  here  you  may  behold  cwelue  Pentagons,  which  if  you  imagine  to  be  equall,equilater,  &  equiangle, 
and  to  be  lifted  vp,ye  (hall  (although  fomewhat  rudely)  conceaue  the  bodily  forme  of  a  Pentagon .  Ana 
fome  light  it  will  geue  to  the  vnderllanding  of  certaine  Propolitions  of  the  fiue  bookes  following  con¬ 
cerning  the  fame.'  ‘ 

2$  An  Icofahedron  is  a  folide  or  bodily  figure  contained  lender  twentie 

e quail  and  equilater  triangles. 


As  the  folides  before  laft  mentioned  are  all 
defcribed  by  the  number  and  forme  of  the  fu- 
petficieces  which  containe  them:  fo  this  body 
likewife  is  defined  by  that  that  it  is  contayned 
of  twentie  triangles  equall,  equilater,  and  e  - 
quiangle  .  And  although  this  folide  alfo  be  ve¬ 
ry  hard  to  conceaue,  as  it  is  commonly  defcri¬ 
bed  vpon  a  plaine  (an  example  wherofyou  haue 
in  thefiril  figure  here  fet)  :  yet  is  it  of  neceftitie 
that  in  that  forme  it  be  defcribed,  if  wev/ill 
vnderiland  fuch  defcriptions  as  are  fet  forth  of 
Euclide  touching  that  body  in  the  fiue  bookes 
following.  Howbeityou  may  by  it  (although 
fomewhat  rudely  )  fee  the  ao.  triahgles,which 
are  imagined  to  be  equa!l,equilater,and  equian- 
gle,  ifyouconfider  fine  angles  of  fiue  triangles 
to  concurre  together  at  a  point.  And  forafmuch 
as  there  are  in  this  folide  ao.  triangles, an  d  euery 
triangle  hath  three  angles,  the  concurfe  of  the 
faid  triangles  will  be  in  twelue  pointes  .  As  in 
this  example  the  pointes  of  the  concurfe  are  A, 

B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  K,  L,  M,&  N. Where  note  that  in  this  plaine 
the  two  poyntes  M  and  N  are  but  one  point,  yet  mull  ye  imagine 
one  of thofe  pointes  to  be  eredied  vpward,  and  the  other  down¬ 
ward  .  Now  the  fiue  triangles  which  concurre  in  the  point  M,  are 
thefe,  B  M  D,  D  M  F,  F  M  H,H  M  L,and  LMB  :  the  fiue  triangles 
which  concurre  in  the  point  N,  and  are  imagined  to  be  erefted 
downward, are  thefe, ANC,CNE,ENG,GNK, and K N A : 
the  other  ten  triangles  which  include  this  body,are  thefe,  ABC, 
B  C  D,  C  D  E,  D  E  F,  EiF  G,  F  G  H,  G  H  K,  H  K  L,  K  L  A,  L  A  B. 
The  fecond  figure  here  appeareth  more  bodilike  vnto  the  eye. 


Thefe  fiue  folides  now  laft  defined,iiamely,a  Cube,aTetrahedro,an  Odtohedron,  a  Dodecahedron 
and  an  Icofahedro  are  called  regular  bodies.  As  in  plaine  fuperficieces,  thofe  are  called  regular  figures, 
whofe  fides  and  angles  are  equal.as  are  equilater  triangles , equilater  pentagons,hexagons,& fuch  lyke, 
fo  in  folides  fuch  only  are  counted  and  called  regular, which  are  copreheded  vnder  equal  playne  fuper- 
ficiecesjwhich  haue  equal  fides  and  equal  angles, as  all  thefe  fine  forefayd  haue,  as  manifeftly  appeareth 
by  their  definitions,  which  were  all  geuen  by  this  proprietie  of  equalitie  of  their  fuperficieces,  which, 
haue  alfo  their  fides  and  angles  equall.  And  in  all  the  courfe  of  nature  there  are  no  other  bodies  of  this 
condition  and  perfedion,but  onely  thefe  fiue.Wherfore  they  haue  euer  of  the  auncient  Philofophers 
bene  had  in  great  e  Urination  and  admiration, and  haue  bene  thought  worthy  of  much  contempiaGion, 
about  which  they  haue  bellowed  moll  diligentiludy  and  endeuour  to  fearche  out  the  natures  &  pro¬ 
perties  of  them  .They  are  as  it  were  the  ende  and  perredtion  of  all  Geometry,  for  whofe  fake  is  written 
whatfoeuer  is  written  in  Geometry.  They  were  ( as  men  fay)  firft  inuented  by  the  moll  witty  Pith*go* 
ras  then  afterward  fet  forth  by  the  diuine  rLto,  and  laft  of  all  merueloufly  taught  and  declared  by  the 
m oil  excellent  Philofopher  Evdide  in  thefe  bookes  folloWing.and  euer  fince  wonderfully  embraced  of 
all  learned  Philofophers.The  knowledge  of  them  containeth  infinite  fecretes  of  natur  c.Pithagorxs,Ti~ 
me»s  and  PUto}  by  them  fearched  out  the  copofition  of  the  world/with  the  harmony  and  preferuation 
therof,and  applied  thefe  fiue  folides  to  the  fimple  partes  therof,the  Pyramis,or  Tetrahedro  they  afcri¬ 
bed  to  the  fire,for  that  it  afcendeth  vpward  according  to  the  figure  of the  Pyramis  .To  the  ayre  they 
afcribed  the  O£lohedron,for  that  through  thefubtle  moilture  which  ithath,it  extendeth  it  felfe euery 
way  to  the  one  fide, and  to  the  otller,accordyng  as  that  figure  doth.  Vnto  the  water  they  affigned  the 

Ikofihedrojs 


o/Suclides  Elementes: 


Ikofahedron,for  that  it  is  continually  flowing  and  mouing,and  as  it  were  makyng  angles  on  euery  fide  •dnfkpfahedrm 
according  to  that  figure. And  to  the  earth  they  attributed  a  Cube, as  to  a  thing  ftable,firme  and  fare  as  #ftgned  $nto 
the  figure  fignifieth.Lafl  ©fall  a  Dodecahedron,for  that  it  is  made  of  Pentagos,  whofe angles  are  more  *he  water. 
ample  and  large  then  the  angles  of  the  other  bodies,and  by  that  meanes  draw  more  to  roundnes,&  to  A  cube  aligned 
the  forme  and  nature  of  a  fphere,they  affigned  to  a  fphere,  namely,  to  heauen.Who  fo  will  read  Plato  the  earthy 

in  his  7V»<?*.r,{hall  read  of  thefe  figures,and  of  their  mutuall  proportion,  flraunge  ma  tters,  which  here  -d  dodecahe - 
are  not  to  be  entreated  of,  this  which  is  fayd,fhall  be  fufficientfor  the  knowledge  of  them, and  for  the  dron  aligned  to 
declaration  of  their  definitions.  heauen. 


After  all  thefe  diffinitions  here  fet  of  Euclide,  Plufias  hath  added  an  other  diffinition,  which  is  of  a 
Parallclipipedofl,which  bicaufe  it  hath  not  hitherto  oiPuclide  in  anyplace  bene  defined,  and  becaufe 
it  is  very  good  and  neceffary  to  be  had,I  thought  good  not  to  omitte  it,  thus  it  is* 


parallelipipedonis  a  folide  figure  comprehended  Tinder  foure  playne  qua*  Diffinition  of* 
dr  angle  figures }of which  thofe  which  are  oppo fite  are  parallels.  r^aUeit^ 


As  in  playne  fuperficieces  a  parallelogramme  is  that  which  is  contained 
vnder  foure  fides  beyng  lines,  and  whofe  oppofite  fides  are  equidiflant  and 
parallel  lynes,  fo  in  folide  figures  a  Parallelipipedon  is  that  folide  which  is 
contayned  vnder  foure  quadrangle  fuperficieces,whofe  oppofite  fides  are  al- 
fo  parallels,as  it  is  eafily  to  be  fene  and  conceaued  in  a  Cube  or  die,  all  whofe 
oppofitefides  are  parallel  fuperficieces,  &  fo  of  others  like,ye  may  alfo  fome- 
what  conceiue  therof  by  the  example  in  the  margent. 

There  is  alfo  in  thefe  bookes  following,  mencion  made  of  folides,  whofe 
two  bafes  are  Poligonon  figures,lyke,equall,equilater,and  parallels,  and  the 
fides  fet  vpon  the  bafes  are  paralielogrammes :  which  kynde  of  folides  Cam- 
pane  calleth  fided  Columnesf and  which  as  was  before  noted, may  be  copre- 
ded  vnder  the  definition  of  a  Prifme )  a  forme  wherof  although  grofely,  be¬ 
hold  in  this  example,  whofe  bafes  are  two  like  equall,  equilater,  equiangle, 
and  parallel  hexagons,  and  the  fides  fetvppon  thofe  bafes  are  fixe  parallel©- 
grames:ye  may  better  coceiue  the  forme  therof  by 
the  figure  put  vnder  the  figure  of  the  parallelipipe¬ 
don,  which  apeareth  more  bodilike.  There  may  of 
thefe  be  infinite  formes  according  to  the  diuerfitie 
of  their  bafes. 


Becaufe  thefe  fiue  regular  bodies  here  defined 
are  not  by  thefe  figures  here  fet,  fo  fully  and  liuely 
cxpreffed,that  the  fludious  beholder  can  through¬ 
ly  according  to  their  definitions  conceyue  them.  I 
haue  here  geuen  of  them  other  deferiptions  drawn 
in  a  playne,  by  which  ye  may  eafily  attayne  to  the 
kno  wledge  of  them .  For  if  ye  draw  the  like  formes 
in  matter  that  wil  bow  and  gene  place,  as  moil  apt¬ 
ly  ye  may  do  in  fine  palled  paper,  fuch  as  paftwiues 
make  womes  palles  of,  &  the  with  a  knife  cut  eue¬ 
ry  line  finely, not  through,but  halfe  way  only, if  the 
ye  bow  and  bende  them  accordingly,  ye  {hall  moll 
plainly  and  manifeflly  fee  the  formes  and  fliapes  of 
thefe  bodies, euen  as  their  definitions  {hew. And  it 
{hall  be  very  necelfary  for  you  to  haue  llore  of  that 
palled  paper  by  you, for  fo  Ihalyou  vpon  itdelcribe 
the  formes  of  other  bodies,as  Prifines  and  Parallelipopedons,  and  fuch  like 
fet  forth  in  thefe  fiue  bookes  following,  and  fee  the  very  formes  of  thofe 
bodies  there  mecioned :  which  will  make  thefe  bokes  concerning  bodies,as 
eafy  vnto  you  as  were  the  other  bookes,whofe  figures  you  might  plainly  fee 
vpon  a  playne  fuperficies. 


x  S  •  v 


A  Jtded  C#» 
lumne . 


If 


I 


,\  .  .*±  -  ' 

<JL  Tetuhe- 
drm* 


i 


If  ye  draw  this  figure  confirting  as 
ye  fee  offower  equilater  and  equian- 
gle  triangles  vpo  parted  paper,or  vp- 
pon  any  other  fuch  like  matter  that 
will  bowe  and  gene  place,  and  then 
cut  not  through  the  paper,  but  as  it 
were  halfe  the  thicknes  of  the  paper, 
the  three  lines  contained  within  the 
figure,and  bowe  &  folde  in  the  fower 
triangles  accordingly;  they  will  clofe 
together  in  fuch  fort,  that  -they  will 
make  the  perie&e  forme  of  a  Tetra¬ 
hedron . 


iA  (tthe. 


This  figure  (  confirting  of 
fixe  equail  .Squares)  drawen  vp- 
on  parted  paper,  and  the  fiue 
lines  contained  within  the  fi¬ 
gure  being  cut  finely  halfe  the 
thicknes  of  the  paper,  or  not 
through,  if  then  ye  bowe  and 
folde  accordingly  the  fixe  e- 
quall  fquares,  they  will  fo  clofe 
together,  that  they  will  caufe 
the  perfe&e  forme  of  a  Cube, 


This  figure  (which  confifteth  of  eight  e- 
quilater  and  equiangle  triangles)  drawen  vp- 
on  the  forefay d  matter,  and  the  feuen  lines 
contained  within  the  figure  being  cut  as  be¬ 
fore  was  taught, and  the  triangles  bowed  and 
folded  accordingly,  they  will  clofe  together 
in  fuch  fort,  that  they  will  make  the  perfe&c 
forme  of  an  O&ohedron. 


ofSuclides  Ekmenks.  FoL^u 

Defcribe  this  figure  which  confifleth  of  tw slue  cquikter  and  equiangle  Pentagon's*  v'pon  -the  fore- 
faid.  matter,  and  finely  cut  as  before  was  taught  the  eleuen  lines  contained  within  the  figure,  and  bow 
and  folde  the  Pentagons  accordingly .  And  they  will  fo  dole  together,  that  they  will  make  theyery 
forme  of  a  Do  decahedron. 


A  Dodecahe¬ 
dron* 


T be  eleuenth  B  ooke 

leofak*  defcribe  this  figure  which  confifteth  of  twentie  equilater  and  equiangle  triangles  vpon  the 

draft  *  forefaid  matter,  and  finely  cut  as  before  was  fhewed  the  ninetene  lines  which  are  coptayned  within 

the  figure,  and  then  bowc  and  folde  them  accordingly,  they  will  in  fuch  fort  clofe  together,  that  there 
will  be  made  a  perfedte  formeofanlcofahcdron. 


Becaufein  thefe  fiue  bookes  there  are  fometimes  required  other  bodies  befides  the  forefaid  Hue 
regular  bodies,  as  Pyramifes  of  diuers  formes,  Prifmes,and  others,  I  haue  here  fet  forth  three  figures 
of  three  fundry  Pyramifes,  one  hauing  to  his  bafe  a  triangle,  an  other  a  quadrangle  figure,  the  other  z 
Pentagon  t  which  ifye  describe  vpon  the  forefaid  matter  &  finely  cut  as  it  was  before  taught  the  lines 
contained  within  ech  figure,  namely,  in  the  firft,three  lines,in  the  fecond,fower  lines,and  xn  the  third, 
fine  lines,  and  fo  bead  and  folde  them  accordingly,  they  will  fo  clofe  together  at  the  toppes,  that  they 
will  make  Pyramidsofthatformethat  their  bafes  are  of.  And  if  ye  conceauewell  thcdefcribingof 
thefe,  ye  may  raoft  eafily  defcribe  the  body  of  a  Pyramis  of  what  fornae  fo  eucr  ye  will. 


\ 

\ 


A  trutMgtei 
Pyramis. 


7 be  forme  of 
a  quadratig - 
kd  Pyrams, 


1  be  forme  of 
a  fine  angled 
Pyramis . 


The  eleuenth  Tiooke 


The  fame  of 
4  prifme . 


Likewife  if  ye  defcribe  this  figure 
vpon  the  forefaid  matter,  and  finely 
cutte  the  fower  lines  cotained  within 
the  figure,  and  bowe  and  folde  them 
together  accordingly,  the  three  paral- 
lelogrammes  and  the  two  triangles 
will  fo ;  clofe  together,  that  they  will 
caufe  the  perfcde  forme  of  a  Prifme 
cotained  vnder  three  parallelogrames 
and  two  equediiiant  triangles  .  And 
conceauing  this  defcription  well ,  it 
(hall  not  be  hard  to  defcribe  any  o- 
ther  Prifme  of  any  other  forme. 


7  be  forme  of 
4  p  arallelipi- 
pedon* 


Touching  the  defcrip¬ 
tion  ofParallelipipedons  I 
fhallnot  neede  to  fpeake. 
For  if  ye  confider  well  the 
defcription  of  a  Cube  ,  it 
fhall  not  be  hard  to  de¬ 
fcribe  a  Parallelipipedon 
of  what  forme  ye  will. 
Onely  where  as  in  a  Cube 
all  the  parallelogrames  in 
the  defcription  of  that  fi¬ 
gure  are  fquares,  in  the  de¬ 
scribing  of  a  Parallelipipe¬ 
don  ,  the  fayd  parallelo¬ 
gram  me  may  be  of  what 
forme  ye  will  .  So  thatye 
take  hcede  that  the  oppo- 
fite  parallelogram  mes  be 
equal  &  equiangle.  Which 
oppofite  parallelogrames 
in  the  figure  as  it  lieth  in  a 
plaine,isany  two  paralle¬ 
logrames  leauing  one  pa- 
rallelogramme  betwene 
them  .  An  example  wher- 
of  beholdc  in  this  figure. 


Cecaufe  thefe  fine  bookes  following  are  fomewhat  hard  for  young  beginners,  by  reafen  they  mull 
in  the  figures  deferibed  inaplaineimaginelinesandfuperficiecestobeeleuated  and  ereded,  the  one 
to  the  other, and  alfo  conceaue  folides  or  bodies,  which.for  that  they  haue  not  hitherto  bene  acquain¬ 
ted  with,  will  at  the  firfi  fight  be  fomwhat  ftraunge  vnto  the,I  haue  for  their  more  eafe,in  this  eleuenth 
booke,attheendofthedemonll:rationofeueryPropofition  either  fetnew  figures,  if  they  concerne 
the  eleuatingoreredingoflinesorfuperficieces,orelsifthey  concerne  bodies,  I  haue  fhewed  how 
they  fliall  defcribe  bodies  to  be  compared  with  the  confirudions  and  demonftrations  of  the  Propofi- 
tions  to  them  belonging.  And  if  they  diligently  weigh  the  maner  obferued  in  this  eleuenth  booke  tou¬ 
ching  the  defcription  of  new  figures  agreing  with  the  figures  deferibed  in  the  plainest  fhall  not  be  hard 
for  them  of  them  felues  to  do  the  like  in  the  other  bookes  following,  when  they  come  to  a  Propofiti- 
on  which  concerneth  either  the  eleuating  or  ereding  oflines  and  fuperficieces,or  any  kindes  of  bodies 
to  be  imagined . 

fTh 


ofSuctides  Elementes: 

fThe  i.  Theorems.  The  i.Tropofition, 

T  hat  part  of a  right  line fhould  be  in  aground  playne fuperficieSy  <&r  part 
eleuated  upward  is  impofible \ 


Or  if  it  be  poffible  Jet  part  of  the  right  line  ABC ,  name¬ 
ly, the  part  ABbe  in  a  ground playne  fuperfcics,  and  the 
other  part  therof  namely  ,B  C  be  eleuated  vpwarde.  And 
produce  directly 
q\\  vpo  the  ground 
1  playne  fuperfi- 
n  cies  the  right 
line  A  B  beyond 
vn- 

ffjc-tothe  point  D. 


Wherfore  vnto  two  right  lines  geuen  ABC ,  and  AB  Dy 
the  line  A  Bis  a  common feclion  orpartjvhich  is  impofi- 
ble.  Fora  right  line  can  not  touche  a  right  line  in  mopointes  then  one}vnleJfe  thofe  right  be 
exactly  agreingand  laid  the  one  vpon  the  other. Wherfore  that  part  of  a  right  line  fhould  be 
w  a  gi  ound  plaine fuperfcks >and part  eleuated  vpward  is  impoffible :  which  was  required 
to  beproued. 


This  figure  more  plainly  fetteth  forth  the  forefaid  de-  .. _ _ 

monftratiojif ye  eleuate  the  fuperfkies  wherin  is  drawn  _ _  ,  p _ _ _ _ C 

the  line  BC.  A  & 

ft 


An  other  demonftration  after  Flufas. 

Ifit  be  poflible  let  there  be  a  right  line  A  B  G, 
whofe  part  A  B  let  be  in  the  ground  playne  fuper- 
ficies  A  E  D,and  let  the  reft  therofB  G  be  eleuated 
on  highjthat  is^without  the  playne  A  E  D.  Then  I 
fay  that  A  B  G  is  not  oneright  line.For  forafmuch 
as  A  E  D  is  a  plaine  iuperficies, produce  directly  & 
equally  vpon  the  fayd  playne  A  E  D  the  right  lyne 
A  B  towardes  D,which  by  the  ^..definition  of  the 
firftfhall  bearightline.Andfrom  forneone  point 
of  the  right  line  A  BD,  namely  ,from  C,draw  vnto 

the  point  G  a  right  lyne  CG.  Wherefore  in  the  £ 

triangle  B  C  G  the  outward  angle  A  B  G  is  equall 
to  the  two  inward  and  oppolite  angles  (by  the  31. 
of  the  firft )  and  therfore  it  is  ieffc  then  two  right  angles  (by  the  i7.of  the  fame)  Wherfore  the  lyne  A 
B  G  forafmuch  as  it  maketh  an  anglers  not  a  right  line.  Wherefore  that  part  of  a  right  line  fhould  be 
in  a  ground  playne  fuperficies,and  part  eleuated  vpward  is  impoffible. 

If  ye  marke  well  the  figure  before  added  for  the  playnerdeclaration  of  Euclides  demonftration^  it 
will  not  be  hard  for  you  to  conceiue  this  figure  which  Flufias  putteth  for  his  demonftration ;  wherein 
is  no  difference  but  onely  the  draught  of  the  lyne  G  C. 

f  The  2.  Theoreme.  The  2.  Tropoftion . 

If  two  right  line  cut  the  one  to  the  other ,  they  are  in  one* and  the felfe fame 
playne Juperficies  Ay  euery  triangle  is  in  one  <ty  the felfe fame fuperfcies. 

FT.ij.  Suppofs 


Demnjlrati* 
on  leading  td 
an  impojsibi * 
iitie. 


An  other  <fe- 
monSlration 
after  Fluj fas. 


1 


7  he  eleuenth  Hooke 

Fppofe  that  theje  two  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D  doo 
cutte  the  one  the  other  in  the  point  E.T hen  I  fay.  that 
thefe  lines  A  B  and  C  D  are  in  one  and  the  felfc 
fame  fuperfcies,  and  that  euery  triangle  is  in  one  fg 
Cmf  ruction.  fetfe  fa^e  playne ", fuperjicies .T ake  in  the  lines  E  C  and E  B  points 
at  all  auentures ,  and  let  the  fame  be  F  and  G ,  and  draw  a  right 
line from  thepoynt  B  to  the  point  C,  and  an  other from  the  point 
F  to  the  point  G .  And  draw  the  lines  F  H  and  G  K .  ‘First  1 fay 
that  the  triangle  E  B  C  is  in  one  and  the  fame  ground fuperfcies. 
For  if  part  of  the  triangle  E  B  G, namely  the  triangle  FCH,r 
the  triangle  G  B  K  be  in  the  ground fuperfcies ,  and  the  refidue 
be  in  an  other ,  then  alfo  part  of one  of  the  right  lines  E  C  or  E  B 
jhall  be  in  the  ground fuperfcies ,  and part  in  an  other .  So  alfo  if 


Demmftra- 
tion  teadingto 
an  impofibi- 
litie. 


K 


K 


part  of  the  triangle  E  B  C  ,  namely ,  the  part  E  F  G  be  in  the  ground  fuperfcies  and  the 
ref  due  be  in  an  other  ,then  alfo  one  part  of eche  of  the  right  lines  E  C  and  E  B  Jhall  be  in  the 
ground fuperfcies, &  an  other  part  in  an  other fuperfcies,  which  ( by  thefrf  of  the  eleuenth) 
isproued  to  be  imp  offiblc.W her  fore  the  triangle  EBCw  in  one  and  the felfe fame play  ne fu¬ 
perfcies. For  in  what  fuperfcies  the  triangle  B  C  E  is ,  in  the  fame  alfo  is  either  of  the  lines 
E  C  and  E  B  ,and  in  what  fuperfcies  either  of  the  lines  E  C  and  E  B  is, in  the felfe fame  al¬ 
fo  are  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D.Wherfore  the  right  lines  lines  A  B  and  C  D  are  in  one  &  the 
felfe fame  playne fuperfcies ,  and  euery  triangle  is  in  one  &  the  felfe  fame  play  ne  fuperfcies: 
which  was  r  equired  to  be proued. 


In  this  figure  here  fet  may  ye  more  playnely  conceaue  the  demon- 
ftration  of  the  former  propofition  where  ye  may  eleuate  what  part  of  the 
triangle  E  C  B  ye  will,namely  the  part  F  C  H  or  the  part  G  B  K,  or  finally 
the  part  F  C  G  B  as  is  required  in  the  demonftration. 


TtcmmHra- 


f  T he  3  ■  T heoreme.  The  3.  Propofition. 

If  two  playne fuperficieces  cutte  the  one  the  other ;  their  common feffiion  is 
a  right  line. 

Fppofe  that  thefe  two  fuperfcieces  A  B  &  B  C  do 
cutte  the  one  the  other,  and  let  their  common  fecli- 
on  be  the  line  D  B.  T  hen  I  fay  that  D  Bis  a  right 
line. For  if not,, dr aw from  thepoynt  D  to  the  point 


B  a  right  line  DVB  in  the  playne fuperfcies  A  B,  and  likewife 
uan  leading  to  jrrQm  tfje  fame  p0yntes  draw  another  right  line  DEB  in  the 

1  S  playne  fuperfcies  B  C  .Now  tberfore  two  right  lines  DEB  and 
D  F  B I hall  haue  the felfe  fame  endes, and  therefore  doo  include 
a  fuperfcies  which  (  by  the  lap  common fentence  )  is  imp  of fible. 
Wherefore  the  lines  DEB  and  D  F  B  are  not  right  lines .  In 


I 


ofSticlides  Elementes. 


FoLytfa 


like fort  alfo  may  we  prone  that  no  other  right  line  can  he  drawrte  from  the  poynt  D  to  the 
point  B  hefides  the  line  D  B  which  is  the  common  fieclion  of  the  two  fuperficieces  A  B  and 
B  C .  if  therefore  two  playne  fuperficieces  cutte  the  one  the  other  3  their  common  fettion  is  4 
right  line:  which  was  required  to  he  demonf  rated. 


This  figure  here  fet ,  fheweth  mofl  playnely  not 
onely  this  third  propofition,but  alf®  the  demonilra- 
tion  thereof,  if  ye  eleuate  the  fuperficies  A  and  fo 
compare  it  with  the  demonflratioru 


<p  T he  4-  T beoreme.  T he  4.  ^Profojition , 

If  from  ti9o  right  lines  pitting  the  one  the  other,  at  their  common feSiion, 
a  right  line  be  perpendicularly  ere£fed:the fame frail  alfo  be  perpendicular * 
ly  erelded from  the  playne fuper fetes  by  the fayd  two  lines  paffing. 


Fppofe  that  there  he  two  right  lines  A  B 
and  CD  cutting  the  one  the  other  in  the 
poynt  E.^And from  the  poynt  E  let  there  he 
erected  a  right  line  E  F  perpendicularly  to 
the  fayd  two  right  lines  A  B  and  CD;  then  I  fay  that  the 
right  line  E  F ,  is  alfo  eredied perpendicular  to  the plaine 
fuperficies  which  pafieth  by  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D  .  Let 
thefe  lines  A  E,E  B,E  C,  and  ED^c  put  e  quail  the  one 
to  the  other.  And  hy  the  poynt  E  extend  a  right  line  at  all 
auentures ,  and  let  the fame  he  G  E  H  .  And  dr  awe  thefe 
right  lines  A  D,  C  B,  F  A,  F  G,  F  D,  F  C,  F  H,  and  $ 

F  B  .And forafmuch  as  thefe  two  right  lines  AEfrET) 
are  e quail  to  thefe  two  lines  C  E  and  E  B,  and  they  com¬ 
prehend  equallanglesfhy  the  1 5 -of  the frf  ) : therefore ( hy 

the  4.0ft  he frsi)the  hafe  A  D  is  e  quail  to  the  hafe  C  B,  and  the  triangle  AED«  equallto 
the  triangle  C  E  B.  Wherefore  alfo  the  angle  DAE ,  is  equall  to  the  angle  E  B  C  •  But  the 
angle  AEG  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  E  H  (  hy  the  75  of  the  frf ) .  Wherefore  there  are  two 
triangles  AGE,  and  B  E  H  hauing  two  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  two  angles  of  the  other , 
eche  to  his  correfpondent  angle, and  one fide  of  the  one  equall  to  one fide  of the  other ,  namely 
one  of the fides  which  lye  betwene  the  equall  angles, namely  ,  the fide  A  E  is  equallto  the fide 
E  B.  Wherefore  ( hy  the  26. of thefirfipthe fides  remayning  are  equall  to  the fides  remay  ning. 
Wherefore  the  fide  G  E  is  equall  to  the fide  E  H ,  and  the fide  A  G  to  the fide  B  H.  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  the  line  A  E  is  equall  to  the  line  E  B ,  and  the  line  F  E  is  common  to  them  both, 

'I  .iij ,  and 


T 


Cenjlruftm* 


Vemonfira* 
tkn • 


1 


7  he  eleuenth  Tiooke 


Contraction* 


Demon  fir  a- 

thnleaimgto 
a<t  impufiibi- 
litis. 


Fppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D  doo 
cutte  the  one  the  other  in  the  point  E.T hen  I  fay.  that 
thefe  lines  A  B  and  C  D  are  in  one  and  the  felfc 
fame  fuperfcies,  and  that  euery  triangle  is  in  one  & 
felfe  fimeplayne fuperfcies.T  ake  in  the  lines  E  C  and  E  points 
at  ail  auentures ,  and  let  the  fame  he  F  and  G ,  and  draw  a  right 
line  from  the  poynt  B  to  the  point  C,  and  an  other from  the  point 
F  to  the  point  G .  And  draw  the  lines  F  FI  and  G  K .  First  I fay 
that  the  triangle  E  B  C  is  in  one  and  the. fame  ground fuperfcies. 

For  if  part  of  the  triangle  E  B  C, namely  the  triangle  F  C  H,  or 
the  trianfle  GBK  he  in  the  ground fuperfcies ,  and  the  ref  due 
he  in  an  other ,  then  alfopart  of one  of  the  right  lines  E  C  or  E  B 
jhall  he  in  the  ground fuperfcies ,  and part  in  an  other .  So  alfo  if 
part  of  the  triangle  E  B  C  ,  namely ,  the  part  E  F  G  he  in  the  ground  fuperfcies  and  the 
ref  due  be  in  an  other  ,then  alfo  one  part  of eche  of  the  right  hncsf  C  and  E  B  Jhall  he  in  the 
ground fuperfcies,  fr  an  other  part  in  an  other fuperfcies,  which  ( by  the frfl  of  the  eleuenth ) 
isproued  to  he  impoffihle.Wherfore  the  triangle  EBC  is  in  one  and  the felfe  fimeplayne fu¬ 
perfcies. For  in  what fuperfcies  the  triangle  B  C  E  is,  in  the  fame  alfo  is  either  of  the  lines 
E  C  and  E  B  ^and  in  what  fuperfcies  either  of  the  lines  E  C  and  E  B  is, in  the  felfe fame  al¬ 
fo  are  the  lines  A  B  and  C  D  Wherfore  the  right  lines  lines  A  B  and  C  D  are  in  one  &  the 
felfe fame  playne fuperfcies ,  and  euery  triangle  is  in  one  &  the  felfe fame play  ne  fuperfcies: 
which  was  required  to  heproued . 


A 


In  this  figure  here  fet  may  ye  more  playnely  conceaue  the  demon- 
fixation  of  the  former  proportion  where  ye  may  eleuate  what  part  of  the 
triangle  E  C  B  ye  will,namely  the  part  FCHor  the  part  G  B  K,  or  finally 
the  part  F  C  G  B  as  is  required  in  the  demonftration. 


C  El  KB 


De  monUra- 
tion  leading  to 
an  tmpefibi- 

iim • 


ff  T he  3 •  T heoreme.  The  3  -  Propofition . 

If  two  playne fuperficieces  cutte  the  one  the  other ;  their  common feffiion  is 
a  right  line. 


Fppofe  that  thefe  two  fuperfcieces  A  B  &  B  C  do 
cutte  the  one  the  other ,  and  let  their  common  fecli- 
on  be  the  line  DB.T hen  1  fay  that  D  B  is  a  right 
line. For  if not, dr  aw from  the  poynt  D  to  the  point 
B  a  right  line  D  F  B  in  the  playne fuperfcies  A  B,  and  likewife 
from  the  fame  poyntes  draw  another  right  line  DEB  in  the 
playne fuperfcies  B  C  .Now  t her  fore  two  right  lines  DEB  and 
D  F  B  f hall  haue  the felfe  fame  endes,  and  therefore  doo  include 
a  fuperfcies  which  (  by  the  laf  common fentence  )  is  imp  off  hie. 
Wherefore  the  lines  DEB  and  D  F  B  are  not  right  lines .  In 


ofSuclides  Elementes.  Foltytp 

like  fort  alfo  may  we prone  that  no  other  right  line  can  be  drawrte  from  the  poynt  D  to  the 
point  B  befides  the  line  T)  B  which  is  the  common  feel  ion  of  the  two  fuperficieces  A  B  and 
B  C .  if  therefore  two  playne  fuperficieces  cutte  the  one  the  other ,  their  common fettion  is  4 
right  line:  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 


This  figure  here  fet ,  fheweth  moil  playnely  not 
onely  this  third  propofition,but  alf©  the  demonilra- 
tion  thereof,  if  ye  eleuate  the  fuperficies  A  and  fo 
compare  it  with  the  demonftration. 


ff  The  4-  Theorems.  The  4.  Tropofition. 

If  from  typo  right  lines  putting  the  one  the  other,  at  their  common feffiion y 
a  right  line  he  perpendicularly  ereciedithe fame fall  alfo  he  perpendicular « 
ly  ere  filed from  the  playne fuperfcies  hy  the fayd  two  lines  paffing. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  two  right  lines  A  B 
and  CD  cutting  the  one  the  other  in  the 
poynt  E.^ylnd from  the  poynt  E  let  there  be 
eredled  a  right  line  E  F  perpendicularly  to 
the  fayd  two  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D then  1 fay  that  the 
right  line  EF,«  alfo  eredled perpendicular  to  the  plaine 
fuperfcies  which  pafieth  by  the  lines  A  B  and  CD.  Let 
thefe  lines  A  E,E  B,E  C,  and  ED  be  put  equal!  the  one 
to  the  other.  And  by  the  poynt  E  extend  a  right  line  at  all 
auentures ,  and  let  the fame  be  G  E  H  .  And  dr  awe  thefe 
right  lines  A  D,  C  B,  F  A,  F  G,  F  D,  F  C,  F  H,  and  $ 

F  B  .Andforafmuch  as  thefe  two  right  lines  AE^-rED 
are  equal!,  to  thefe  two  lines  C  E  and  E  B>  and  they  com¬ 
prehend  equallangles(by  the  is •  ofthefrf ) : thereforelhy 

the  4.0ft  be fir  si)  the  bafe  A  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  C  B,  and  the  triangle  A  E  D  is  equallto 
the  triangle  C  E  B  Wherefore  alfo  the  angle  DAE,«  equall  to  the  angle  E  B  C  .  But  the 
angle  AEG  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  E  H  (by  the  1$  of  the firft ) .  Wherefore  there  are  two 
triangles  AGE,  and  B  E  H  halting  two  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  two  angles  of  the  other , 
eche  to  his  correfpondent  angle, and  one fide  of  the  one  equall  to  one fide  of  the  other ,  namely 
one  of  the fides  which  lye  betwene  the  equall  angles, namely  ,  the fide  A  E  is  equallto  the  fide 
E  B .  Wherefore  ( by  the  26  .of  the  firft )  'the  fides  remay  ning  are  equall  to  the  fides  remay  ning. 
Wherefore  the  fide  GEw  equall  to  the fide  E  H ,  and  the fide  AG  to  the fide  B  H  .And for- 
afrnuch  as  the  line  A  E  is  equall  to  the  line  EB,  and  the  line  FE  is  common  to  them  both , 

2"  T  .iu  o  and 


F 


Cenftruflion* 


VemonUrtfi 

tiottt 


md  mabeth  with  them  right  angles ,  wherefore  (  by  the fourth  ofthefrjl )  the  hafe  FA  is  e- 
qudlto  the  bafe  F  B  .And  (by  the fame  reafon )  the  hafe  F  C  is  equallto  the  hafe  FD.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  A  D  is  equallto  the  line  B  C,and  the  line  F  A  is  equal  to  the  line  F  B 
as  it  hath  bene  proued .  T herefore  thefe  two  lines  F  A  and  A  D  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines 
*  F  B  dr  B  C  /he  one  to  the  other ,&  the  bafe  F  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  C.  Wherfore  alfo  the 
angle  F  A  D  is  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  C  .  And  againe forafmuch  as  it  hath  henefroued, 
that  the  line  A  G  is  equall  to  the  line  B  W,hut  the  line  F  A  is  equall  to  the  line  F  B.  Where¬ 
fore  there  are  two  lines  F  A  and  A  G  equall  to  two  lines  F  B  and  B  H  audit  ts  proued  that 
the  angle  FAG  is  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  H  wherefore  (by  the  4. of the  firjl )  the  hafe  F  G 
is  equal  to  the  bafe  F  H  .  Agayne  forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued  that  the  line  G  E  is  equal 
to  the  line  E  Yi,and  the  line  EFB  common  to  them  both:  whereforethefetwo  lines  G  E  and 
E  F  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  H  E  and  E  F ,  and  the  bafe ;  E  H  is  equallto  the  bafe  F  G,.* 
wherefore  the  angle  G  E  F  is  equall  to  the  angle  H  E  F.  Wherefore  either  of  the  angles  G  E 
F ,and  H  E  F  is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  the  line  E  F  is  erected,  from  thepoint  YL, perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  line  G  Id. In  like  fort  may  weprouejhatthe  fame  line  F  E  maketh  right  angles 
with  all  the  right  lines  which  are-  drawnevpon  the  ground  playne  fuperficies  and  touch  the 
point  3. But  a  right  line  is  then  erected perpendicularly  to  aplaine  fuperficies, when  it  maketh 
right  angles  with  all  the  lines  which  touch  it ,  and  are  drawne  vpon  the  ground  playne fu  per - 
fetes  ( by  the  2  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  F  E  is  erected  perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  ground  playne  fuperficies  .And  the  ground  plaine fuperficies  is  that  which  paf- 
feth  by  thefe  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  FEzV  erected perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  fiayne  fuperficies  which  fafieth  by  the  right  lines  A  B  and  CD.//  therefore 
from  typo,  right  lines  cutting  the  one  the  other  and  at  their  common  fetation  a  right  line  be 
perpendicularly erected:  it  frail  alfo  be  ere  tied  perpendicularly  to  the plaine fuperficies  by  the 
faff  two  fines  pafilng:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


In  this  figure  you  may  moil  euidently  conceaue  tfi'*  " 
propofition  and  demonftration,ifye  ere£i  perpendi^' 
ground  playne  fuperficies  A  C  B  D  the  triang’ 
the  triangles  A  F  D,&  C  F  B  in  fiich  fortjthat  tn.. 
angle  A  F  B  may  ioyne  &  make  one  line  with  the  Unt¬ 
angle  A  F  D :  and  likewife  that  the  line  B  F  of  the  triangle 
ioyne  Sc  make  one  rightline  with  the  lineB  F  of  the  triangle  B  . 

.  1  1  .  am  V  Ai'.'.y-i’i'Viviiya  G-, 


yfThe  f.  Theorems.  The  s.fropofition. 

If  lento  three  right  lines  ithtch  touch  the  one  the  other ,  beereffed  a  per * 
pendmlar  line  from  the  common  point  inhere  thofe  three  lines  touckthofe 
three  right  lines  are  in  one  and  the felfe fame  plaine fuperficies . 

Vppofe  that  vnto  thefe  three  right  lines  B  C  ,33),  and  B  E,  touching  the  one 
the  other  in  thepoynt3,be  erected  perpendicularly  from  the poynt3,  the  line 
A  B  .Then  I  fay, that  thofe  thre  right  lines  B  C,B  D  andB  E,  are  in  one  &  the 
felfe fame  plaine fuperficies.  For  ifnotjhen  if  it  be  poffiblefiet  the  lines  B  D  & 


more  playnel^ 


e  ere£t  per] 


ofBuclides  Elementes • 


B  E  be  in  the  ground  fuperfries ,  and  let  the  line  B  C  be  e- 
recled  upward  ( norv  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  in  one  and  the  ■ 
fame  play  ne fuperfries  ( by  the  2.  of  the  elenenth jfor  they  touch 
the  one  the  other  in  the  point  B  )  .  Extend  the  plains fuperfries 
wherein  the  lines  AB  and  B  Care ,  and  it  (hall mike  at  the  - 
length  a  common  fechon  with  the  ground  fuperfries ,  which 
common fetrion  fhall  be  a  right  line  (by  the  3 .  of  the  deuenthrf? 
let  that  common  feclion  be  the  line  BF  .  Wherefore  the  three 
right  lines  AB,  B  C,  and  B  F  are  in  one  and  the felfe fame fu¬ 
perfries  ,  namely ,  in  the  fuperfries  wherein  the  lines  A  B  and  '■ 

B  C  are .  And  forafmuch  as  the  right  line  A  B  is  ended  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  either  ofthefe  lines  B  D  and- B  E ,  therefore  the 
line  AB/j  alfo  (  by  the  4.of  the  eleuenth  )  ere  tried  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  plaine fuperfries ,  wherein  the  lines  B  D  and  B  Bare.  But  the fuperfries  wherein 
the  lines  B  D  and  B  E  are  is  thriground fuperfries .  Wherefore  the  line  A  B  is  erected  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  ground plaine fuperfries.  Whereforefby  the  2.  defnition  of the  eleuenth) 
the  line  A  B  maketh  right  angles  with  all  the  lines  which  are  drawne  vpon  the  ground fuper¬ 
fries  and  touch  it. But  the  line  B  F  which  is  in  the  ground  fuperfries  doth  touch  it.Wherfore 
the  angle  ABF  is  a  right  angle .  And  it  is  fuppofed  that  the  angle  ABC  is  a  right  angle* 
Wherefore  the  angle  A  B  F  is  e quail  to  the  angle  ABC,  and  they  are  in  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  plaine  fuperfries  which  is  impoffble .  Wherefore  the  right  line  B  C  is  not  in  an  higher *' 
,  fuperfries .  Wherefore  the  right  lines  B  G,  B  D,  B  E  are  in  one  and  the felfe fame  plaine  fu¬ 
perfries .  If  therefore  <vnto  three  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  one  the  other, be  ere  fled 
a  perpendicular  line  from  the  common  point  where  thofe  three  lines  touch:  thofe  three 
right  lines  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  plaine fuperfries :  which  was  rcc. 
riirated . 


this  1 

declareth  1 _ 

mer  proportion, 
larly  vnto  thegrour 

perficies  wherein  is  _ 

andfo  compare  it  with  thefayd  1— 
fixation. 


The  6. Theorem?,  The  6fPropofition* 

•  •  ■  noianj  

If two  right  lines  he  ere  tried  perpendicularly  to  one  IS  the felfe fame  plaine 
fuperficies : thofe  right  lines  are  parallels  the  one  to  the  other, 

TT.iiq.  Suppofs 


/ 

Vewcnprcii- 

cn  leading  to 
an  mpojsibri 


Theeleuenth^Boo!^ 

ind  maketh  with  them  right  angles ,  wherefore  (  by  the  fourth  oftbefrf  )  the  hafe  FA  he* 
quail  to  the  bafe  F  B  .  And  ( by  the  fame  reafon )  the  hafe  F  C  is  e quail  to  the  hafe  F  D .  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  A  D  is  equallto  the  line  B  Q,and  the  line  F  A  is  equal  to  the  line  F  B 
as  it  hath  bene  proued .  T her ef ore  thefe  two  lines  F  A  and  A  D  are  equall  to  the fe  two  lines 
,  F  B  <4*  B  C, the  one  to  the  other, &  the  bafe  F  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  G.  Wherfore  alfo  the 
angle  F  A  D  is  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  C .  And  againe  forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  pr cued, 
that  the  line  A  G  is  equall  to  the  line  B  H  ,but  the  line  F  A  is  equall  to  the  line  F  B.  Where¬ 
fore  there  are  two  lines  F  A  and  A  G  equall  to  two  lines  F  B  and  B  H  and  it  is  proued  that 
the  angle  FA  G  is  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  H  wherefore  (  by  the  4. of the  firfi  )  the  bafe  F  G 
is  equal  to  the  bafe  F  H  .  Agayne forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued  that  the  line  G  E  is  equal 
to  the  line  E  H ,and  the  line  E  F  is  common  to  them  both:  whereforethefetwo  lines  G  E  and 
E  F  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  H  E  and  E  F ,  and  the  bafe ;  F  H  is  equall.  to  the  hafe  F  G  .* 
wherefore  the  angle  G  E  F  is  equall  to  the  angle  H  E  F.  Wherefore  either  of  the  angles  G  E 
F  ,and  H  E  F  is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  the  line  E  F  is  erected,  from  the  point  ~E, perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  line  G  H  .In  like  fort  may  weprouejhat  the  fame  line  F  E  maketh  right  angles 
with  all  the  right  lines  which  are-  dr awnevpon  the ground  playne  fuperfeies  and  touch  the 
point  B  .But  a  right  line  is  then  erected perpendicularly  to  a  plaine fuperfeies, when  it  maketh 
right  angles  with  all  the  lines  which  touch  it ,  and  are  drawne  vpon  the  ground  playne fuper - 
fetes  ( by  the  2  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  F  E  is  erected  perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  ground playne fuperficies  .And  the  ground  plainefuperficies  is  that  which  paf- 
feth  by  thefe  right  lines.  A  B  and  G  X> .  Wherefore  the  right  line  F  E  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  playne  fuperfeies  which  pafieth  by  the  right  lines  A  B  and  CD.//  therefore 
frpygi  two  right  lines  cutting  thr  one  the  other  and  at  their  common  fiction  a  right  line  be 
perpendicularly  ereffed:  it  frail  a  fo  be  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine fuperfeies  by  the 
fayd two  lines pajjmg.-which  was  required  to  be proued. 


In  this  figure  you  may  moft  euidently  conceaue  th^ 
propofition  and  demonliration,  ifye  ereft  perpendm-' 
ground  playne  fuperficies  A  C  B  D  the  mans7’ 
the  triangles  A  F  D,&  C  F  B  in  fuch  fort,that  tr^ 
angle  A  F  B  may  ioyne  &  make  one  line  with  the  lin*. 
angle  A  F  D :  and  likewiie  that  the  line  B  F  of  the  triangle^ 
ioyne  &  make  onerightline  with  the  lineB  F  of  the  triangle  b  » 


flThe  f.  'Theorems .  The  s.Trobofition. 

If  lento  three  right  lines  ^hich  touch  the  one  the  other  ,  he  erctfed  a  per* 
pendiculctr  line  from  the  common  point  inhere  thofe  three  lines  touch:  thofe 
three  right  lines  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame plaine  fuperficies. 

Vppofe  that  vnto  thefe  three  right  lines  B  C  ,  B  D  ?  and  B  E,  touching  the  one 
the  other  in  the poyntB, be  er elded  perpendicularly  from  thepoyntB,  the  line 
A  B  .Then  J fay, that  thofe  thre  right  lines  B  C,B  D  andB  E, are  in  one  &  the 
felfe fame  plaine fuperfeies.  For  ifnot,then  if  it  be  pojfiblejet  the  lines  B  D  & 

BE 


\  X 


The  eleuenth  Hooke 


md  maketh  with  them  right  angles ,  wherefore  (  by  the  fourth  ofthefrfl  )  the  bafe  F  A  is  e~ 
quail  to  thibafe  F  B  .  And  ( by  the fame  reafon )  the  bafe  F  C  is  e  quail  to  the  bafe  F  D .  And 
forafmitch  as  the  line  A  D  /;  equallto  the  line  B  C ,and  the  line  F  A  is  equal  to  the  line  F  B 
as  it  hath  beneproued .  T her ef ore  thefe  two  lines  F  A  and  A  D  are  equall  to  theft  two  lines 
.  F  B  &  B  C ,  the  one  to  the  ether ,&  the  bafe  F  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  C .  Wherfore  alfo  the 
angle  FAD/;  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  C  .  And  againe forafnuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued, 
that  the  line  A  G  is  equall  to  the  line  B  H,but  the  line  F  A  is  equall  to  the  line  F  B.  Where¬ 
fore  there  are  two  lines  F  A  and  A  G  equall  to  two  lines  F  B  and  B  H  and  it  isprouedthat 
the  angle  F  A  G  is  equallto  the  angle  F  B  H  wherefore  (  by  the  4.0 f  the  firfi )  the  bafe  F  G 
is  equal  to  the  bafe  F  H  .  Agayne forafnuch  as  it  hath  beneproued  that  the  line  G  E  is  equal 
to  the  line  E  Yl,and  the  line  E,  F  is  common  to  them  both:  wherefore  thefe  two  lines  G  E  and 
'EY-  are  equallto  thefe  two  lines  YiEandEY  ,andtfa  bafe  F  H  is  equall  to  thebafeYG: 
wherefeore  the  angle  G  E  F  /;  equall  to  the  angle  H  E  Y.  Wherefore  either  of  the  angles  G  E 
Y,and  H  E  F  is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  the  line  E  F  is  erected,  from  the  point  Eferpendi- 
cularly  to  the  line  G  Id.  In  like fort  may  we  prone, that  the fame  line  F  E  maketh  right  angles 
with  ail  the  right  lines  which  are.  dr awnevpon  the ground  playne  fuperfeies  and  touch  the 
point  B  .But  a  right  line  is  then  erected perpendicularly  to  a  plains fuperfeies, when  it  maketh 
right  angles  with  all  the  lines  which  touch  it ,  and  are  drawne  vpon  the  ground  playne fuper - 
fqies  ( by  the  2  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  F  E  is  er tided perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  ground playne fuper feies  .And  the  ground  plaineftperfcies  is  that  which  pafi 
feth  by  thefe  right  lines  A.B  and  G  D .  Wherefore  the  right  line  F  E  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  playne  fuper  fetes  which  pafeth  by  the  right  lines  A  B  and  CD.//  therefore 
frpm  twf  right  fines  cutting  the  om  the  other  and  at  their  common  feciion  a  right  line  be 
'pefpendkuldrty  erifted:  it frail alfo  be  eretied  perpendicularly  to  the plaine fuperfeies  by  the 
fay  d  two  lines  paf mg:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


In  this  figure  you  may  molt  euidcntly  conceaue  tb^  ' 
propofition  and  demonilration,  if  ye  ere6t  perpendi'”' 
ground  playne  fuperficies  A  C  B  D  the  tfianp' 
the  triangles  A  F  D,&  C  F  B  in  fuch  fort3that  tm 
angle  A  F  B  may  ioyne  &  make  one  line  with  the  litw 
angle  A  F  D :  and  likewife  that  the  line  B  F  of  the  triangle  ^ 
ioyne  Sc  make  one  right  line  with  the  lincB  F  of  the  triangle  Is » 


yjThe  f.  Theorems .  The  s.Tropofition. 

If Ymto  three  right  lines  Yohich  touch  the  one  the  other  ,  be  ere  fled  a  per* 
pendicular  line  from  the  common  point  Yohere  tbofe  three  lines  touckthofie 
three  rkht  lines  are  in  one  and  the felfe fame  plaine fuperficies. 


Vppofe  that  vnto  thefe  three  right  lines  B  C  3  B  D,  and B  E,  touching  the  one 
the  other  in  thepoynt  E,be  creeled  perpendicularly  from  the poynth,  the  line 
A  E.Tben  I fay, that  thofe  thre  right  lines  B  C,B  D  andV>E,areinone &the 
felfe fame  plaine fuperfeies. For  zfnotpben  if  it  be  pojfblefet  the  lines  B  D  dr 


BE 


The  eleuentb  ^Bool^e 


md  maketh  with  them  right  angles ,  wherefore  (  by  the  fourth  of thefrf  )  the  bafe  FA  is  e- 
quail  to  the  hafe  V  B  .And  (by  the fame  reafon )  the  bafe  F  C  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  D .  And 
forafrmtch  as  the  line  AD  is  equalltothe  linelbC,undtbeline1c  Ais  eqnalto  the  line  F  B 
as  it  hath  bene  proued .  T her ef ore  thefe  two  lines  F  A  and  A  D  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines 
.  F  B  &  B  C,  the  one  to  the  other, &  the  bafe  F  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  C .  Wherfore  alfo  the 
angle  F  A  D  is  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  C .  And  againe forafnuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued, 
that  the  line  A  G  is  equall  to  the  line  B  H,but  the  line  F  A  is  equall  to  the  line  F  B.  Where¬ 
fore  there  are  two  lines  F  A  and  A  G  equall  to  two  lines  F  B  and  B  H  and  it  is  proued  that 
the  angle  FAG  is  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  H  wherefore  (  by  the  4.  of  the  firfi  )  the  bafe  F  G 
is  equal  to  the  bafe  F  H  .  Agayne forafnuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued  that  the  line  G  E  is  equal 
to  the  line  E  ¥l,and  the  line  E  F  is  common  to  them  both:  wherefore  thefe  two  lines  G  E  and 
E  F  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  H  EandE  V ,  and  the.  bafe  E  H  is  equall  to  the  bafel'G: 
wherefore  the  angle  G  E  F  is  equall  to  the  angle  H  E  F.  Wherefore  either  of  the  angles  G  E 
F  ,and  H  E  F  is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  the  line  E  F  is  erected, from  the  point  Eferpendi- 
cularly  to  the  line  G  H  An  like fort  may  we  prone,  that  the  fame  line  F  E  maketh  right  angles 
with  all  the  right  lines  which  ar  e-  drawnevpon  the  ground  playne  fuperficies  and  touch  the 
point  lb. But  a  right  line  is  then  erected perpendicularly  to  aplaine fuperf  ties, when  it  maketh 
right  angles  with  all  the  lines  which  touch  it ,  and  are  drawne  vpon  the  ground  playne fuper- 
fqies  ( by  the  2  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  F  E  is  eretted perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  ground  playne fuperf 'cies  .And  the  ground  plainefuperfcies  is  that  which  pa  f- 
feth  by  thefe  right  lines.  A,  IB. and  C  D  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  F  E  is  creeled  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  playne  fuperficies  which  pafieth  by  the  right  lines  A  B  and  CD  Jf  therefore 
from  two,  right ,  lines  cutting  the  one  the  other  and  at  their  common  fiction  a  right  line  be 
'perpehdh'uldrtj  eritfed:  it  frail  alfo  be  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine fuperficies  by  the 
fay  d  two  lines  puffing:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


In  this  figure  you  may  moll  euidently  conceaue  the  former 
propofition  and  demonllration,  if  ye  ereft  perpendicularly  vnto  the 
ground  playne  fuperficies  A  C  B  D  the'  triangle  A  F  B  ;  and  eleuate 
the  triangles  A  F  D,&  C  F  B  in  fuch  fort,that  the  line  A  F  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  A  F  B  may  ioyne  &  make  one  line  with  the  line  A  F  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  A  F  D :  and  likewife  that  the  line  B  F  of  the  triangle  A  F  B  may 
ioyne  &  make  one  right  line  with  the  line  B  F  of  the  triangle  B  F  C. 


ffThe  Theorems.  The  s.TropoJition. 

Ifynto  three  right  lines  ^ohich  touch  the  one  the  other  ,  he  ereffed  a  per* 
pendicular  line  from  the  common  point  Inhere  thofe  three  lines  touckthofe 
three  right  lines  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame plaine  fuperficies. 

- —  Fppofe  that  vnto  thefe  three  right  lines  BC,BD,  and  lb  E,  touching  the  one 

the  other  in  the poynt!b,be  eretted  perpendicularly  from  thepoynt  B,  the  line 
Alb.Then  I  fay, that  thofe  thre  right  lines  B  C  ,B  D  and  B  E,are  in  one  &  the 
_______  felfe fame  plaine fuperf cies. For  ifnotjben  if  it  be  pojfiblejet  the  lines  B  D  & 


B  E  be  in  the  ground  fuper  fries,  and  let  the  line  B  C  be  S- 
rected  ‘upward  ( now  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  in  one  and  the 
fame play  ne  fuperfUes  ( by  the  2.  of  the  eteuentkjfor  they  touch 
the  one  the  other  in  the  point  B  )  .  Extend  the  plains fuperfcies 
wherein  the  lines  AB  and  B  Care ,  and  it  (halim&keat  the- 
length  a  common  feclion  with  the  ground  fuperf  cies ,  which 
common  fed! ion  f hall  be  a  right  line-  (by  the  3 .  of  the  deuenth): 

■let  that  common  feclion  be  the  line  B  F .  Wherefore  the  three 
right  lines  A  B,  B  C,  and  B  F  are  in  one  and  the felfe fame  fu¬ 
perfcies  ,  namely ,  in  the  fuperfcies  wherein  the  lines  A  B  and 
B  C  are .  And  forafmuch  as  the  right  line  A  B  is  ere  Usd  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  either  ofthefe  lines  B  D  and  B  E ,  therefore  the 
line  A  B  is  alfo  (by  the  4.of  the  eleuenth  )  created  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  tbeplaine fuperfcies ,  wherein  the  lines  B  D  and  B  E  are.  But  the fuperfcies  wherein 
the  lines  B  D  and  B  E  are  is  tkdground fuperfcies .  Wherefore  the  line  A  B  is  erehied  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  ground plaine fuperfcies.  Wherefore(  by  the  2.  definition  of the  eleuenth) 
the  line  A  B  maketh  right  angles  with  all  the  lines  which  are  drawne  -upon  the  ground  fuper¬ 
fcies  and  touch  it. But  the  line  B  F  which  is  in  the  ground  fuperfcies  doth  touch  it.Wherfore 
the  angle  ABF  is  a  right  angle .  And  it  is  fuppofed  that  the  angle  ABC  is  a  right  an  fie. 
Wherefore  the  angle  A  B  F  is  e  quail  to  the  angle  ABC,  and  they  are  in  one  and  the felfi 
fame  plaine  fuperfcies  which  is  impcffible .  Wherefore  the  right  line  B  C  is  not  in  an  higher 
,  fuperfcies .  Wherefore  the  right  lines  B  G,  B  D,  B  E  are  in  one  and  the felfe fame  plaine fu¬ 
perfcies.  Jf  therefore  ‘unto  three  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  one  the  other  fie  erected 
a  perpendicular  line  from  the  common  point  where  thofe  three  lines  touch:  thofe  three 
right  lines  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  plaine fuperfcies :  which  was  required  to  be  demon* 
firated. 


.V.v,  •  V.V  r,  . .  Ml'.'SgiWi 

This  figure  here  fee  more  playnely 
declareth  the  demonfixation  of  the  for¬ 
mer  propofition,  if  ye  ercCt  perpendicu¬ 
larly  vnto  the  ground  fuperficies,the  fii- 
perficies  wherein  is  drawne  the  line  A  B 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  fayd  demoi?- 
ftration. 


C  - 


iii  A  : 

ii 3 .  'i* 


The  6fl  heoreme. 


-  ropofition , 


r  f 


If two  right  lines  be  erefifed perpendicularly  to  one  43  the felfe fame  plaine 
fuperficies  :thofe  right  lines  are  parallels  the  one  to  the  other. 


TT.iijj, 


I 

VeWonpyeti- 
cn  leading  to 
an  mpo/iibi* 


i 


Conffruffion, 

*  An  Affumpt 
as  M.  Dee 
praucth  it, 
Umoniira- 

tion , 


T  he  eleuenth  2>  coke 

I  V ppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  AB  and  CD  be  eretted perpendicularly  to  a 
i ground  plaine  fuperficies .  Then  I  fay  that  the  line  A  B  is  a  parallel  to  the  line 
J  C  D  .Let  the pointes  which  thofe  two  right  lines  touch  in  the  plaine [up er fries  be 
B  and  D  .And  draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  B  to  the  point  D  .  Cdnd  (  by  the 
1 1.  of  the firft  )  from  the  point  D,draw  vnto  the  line  B  D  in  the ground fuperficies  a perpen¬ 
dicular  line  D  E  .  ^„d(yj  thex.of  the firftyptit  thehneD  Eequ*U  t-othe  line  AB  .And  draw  thefe. 
right  lines  B  E,  A  E,  and  AD.  Andforafmuch  as  the  line 
A  B  is  ere  tried perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperfeies, there¬ 
fore  ( by  the  2  'definition  of  the  eleuenth )  the  line  A  B  maketh 
right  angles  with  all  the  lines  which  are  drawnc  vpon  the 
ground  play  ne  fuperficies  and  touch  it .  But  either  of  thefe 
lines  B  D  and  B  E  which  are  in  the  ground fuperficies,  touch 
the  line  A  B ,  wherefore  either  of  thefe  angles  A  B  D  and 
AB  E  is  a  right  angle  • and  by  the fame  reafion  alfo  either  of 
the  angles  C  D  B,efC  D  E  is  a  right  angle.  And forafmuch 
as  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  D  E  ,  and  the  line  B  D  is 
common  to  them  loth, therf ore  thefe  two  lines  A  B  andB  D, 
are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  E  D  and  D  B,and  they  contayne  right  angles :  wherefore  (by  the 
4 .  of  the  first )  th  e  bafe  A  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  E .  Andforafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  equall 
to  the  line  D E ,  and  the  line  AD  to  the  line  B  E ,  therefore  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  B  E  are 
equall  to  thefe  two  lines  ED  and  D  A ,  andrihe  line  AEisa  common  bafe  to  them  both. 
Wherefore  the  angle  ABE  is  (  by  the  8  .ofthefirjl)equal  to  the  angle  EDA.  But  the  angle 
A  BE.  is  a  right  angle:  whefore  alfo  the  angle  ED  A  is  aright  angle  :wherf ore  the  line  E  D 
is  erected  perp'edicularly  to  the  line  D  A:  and  it  is  alfo  erected perpedicularly  to  either  of thefe 
lines  B  D  and  D  C,  wherefore  the  line  ED  is  nanto  thefe  three  right  lines  B  D  ,D  A ,  and 
D  C  erected  perpendicularly  from  the  poynt  where  thefe  three  right  lines  touch  the  one  the 
other :  wherefore  ( by  the  5.0ft  he  eleuenth )  thefe  three  right  lines  B  D ,  D  A,  and  D  C  are  in 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies .  i^sind  in  what  fuperficies  the  lines  B  D  and  D  A  are,  in 
the  felfe  fame  alfo  is  the  lineB  A :  for  euery  triangle  is  (by  the  2.  of  the  eleuenth  )  in  one  and 
the  felfe  fame  fuperficies .  Wherefore  thefe  right  lines  A  B,B  D,and  D  C  are  in  one  and  the 
felfe fame fuperficies ,  and  either  of  thefe  angles  AB  D  and  BD  C  is  a  right  angle  (  by  fup - 
pofition )  .Wherefore  ( by  the  28.  of  the  fir fl )  the  line  A  B  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  C  D .  If  there¬ 
fore  two  right  lines  be  eredled  perpendicularly  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  play  ne  fuperficies , 
thofe  right  lines  are  parallels  the  one  to  the  other:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


Here  for  the  better  vnderflanding  of  this  0.  propofition  I 
haue  deferibed  an  other  figure:  as  touching  which  if  ye  ereft  the 
fuperficies  AB  D  perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  BD  E,  and 
imagine  only  alinetobedrawnefrom  the  poynt  A  to  the  poynt 
E  (if  ye  will  ye  may  extend  a  thred  from  the  faide  poynt  a  to 
the  poynt  £ )  and  fo  compare  it  with  thedemonllration,  it  will 
make  both  the  propofition, and  alfo  the  demonllration-moft 
cleare  vnto  you. 


IF  An  other  demonftration  of  the  fixth  propofition  by  tM.  Dee. 

'  \  1  ~y  '’T  >  '  v  T  *.,**.,  ,  •  ,  v  tS 

Suppofc  that  the  two  right  lines  A  B5:  CD  be  perpendicularly  erected  to  one  &  the  fame  playne  f«- 

perficies 


t)fSuclides  Element  es .  .326* 

•  perfrcies,namely  the  playne  fuperficies  o  p. Then  I  fay  that  a  b  and  c  d  are  parallels. Let  the  end  points 
of  the  right  lines  a  b  and  c  d, which  touch  theplaine  fuperficies  o  p,be  thepoyntes  b  and  D,fro  b  to  d 
let  a  ftrai"  ht  line  be  drawne(by  the  firft  petition)and(by  the  fecond  petition)lec  the  ftraight  line  b  d  be 
exteded,as  to  the  poynts  m  &  n.  Nowforafmuch 
as  the  right  line  a  b  ,  from  the  poynt  b  produced, 
doth  cutte  the  line  m  n  (  by  conftrudlion). There¬ 
fore  (by  the  fecond  propofition  of  this  eleuenth 
bo^kejthe  right  lines  a  b  &  m  n  are  in  one  plaine 
fuperficies. Which  let  be  q_r,  cutting  the  fuperfi¬ 
cies  o  p  in  the  right  line  m  n  .By  the  fame  meanes 
may  we  conclude  the  right  line  c  d  to  be  in  one 
playne  fuperficies  with  the  right  line  m  n.  But  the 
right  line  m  n  (by  fuppofition)  is  in  the  plaine  fu¬ 
perficies  q_r  :  wherefore  c  d  is  in  the  plaine  fu¬ 
perficies  q.r  .  And  a  b  the  right  line  was  proued 
to  be  in  the  fame  plaine  fuperficies  q_r  .Therfore 
a  b  and  c  d  are  in  one  playne  fuperficies,  namely 
q_r  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  lines  a  b  and  c  d  (by 
fuppofition  )  are  perpendicular  vpon  the  playne  fuperficies  o  p  ,  therefore  (by  the  fecond  definition  of 
this  booke  )  with  all  the  right  lines  drawne  in  the  fuperficies  o  p  and  touching  a  b  and  c  d  ,  thg  fame 
perpediculars  a  b  and  c  d  ,do  make  right  angles.  But(by  c@nftru&ion)M  N,being  drawne  in  the  plaine 
fuperficies  o  p  toucheth  the  perpendiculars  a  b  and  c  d  at  the  poyntes  b  and  d  .Therefore  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  a  b  and  cd,  make  with  the  right  line  m  n  two  right  angles  namely  a  b  n,  and  c  d  m  :  and  m  n 
the  rightline  is  proued  to  be  in  the  one  and  the  fame  playne  fuperficies,with  theright  lines  abSccd: 
namely  in  the  playne  fuperficies  q_a  .  Wherefore  by  the  fecond  part  of  the  28  .  propofition  of  the  firft 
booke, the  right  lines  a  e  and  c  d  are  parallels  .  If  therefore  two  right  lines  be  eredied  perpendicularly 
to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies  thofe  right  lines  are  parallels  the  onetothe  other:  which 
was  required  to  be  uemonftrated. 

A  C orollary  added  by  M. Dee. 

Hereby  it  is  euident  that  any  two  right  lines  perpendicularly  erected  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
playne fuperficies , are  alfo  them  felues  in  one  and  the  fame  playne  fuperficies yyhicb  is  likewife  perpen~ 
dicularly  erected  to  the  fame  playne  fuperficies  svnto  'Which  the  two  right  lines  are  perpendicular. 

The  firft  part  hereof  is  proued  by  the  former  conftrudtion  and  demonftration ,  that  the  right  lines 
a  b  and  c  d  are  in  one  and  the  fame  playne  fuperficies  o^R.The  fecond  part  is  alfo  manifeftf that  is, that 
the  playne  fuperficies  q_r  is  perpendicularly  eredted  vpon  the  playne  fuperficies  o  p  )  for  that  a  b  and 
c  d  being  in  the  playne  fuperficies  q_r,  are  by  fuppofition  perpendicular  to  the  playne  fuperficies  o  p ; 
wherefore  by  the  third  definition  of  this  booke  q_r  is  perpendicularly  eredled  to,or  vpon  o  p  :  which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 

Jo. Dee  his  aduife  vpon  the  Afliimpt  of  the  6. 

*  As  concerning  the  making  of  the  line, D  E ,  equall  to  the  right  line  A  B  ,  verely  the  fecond  of  the 
firft,without  fome  farther  confideration ,  is  not  properly  enough  alledged  .  And  no  wonder  it  is ,  for 
that  in  the  former  bookes ,  v/hatfoeuer  hath  of  lines 
bene  fpoken ,  the  fame  hath  .’.braves  bene  imagined  to 
be  in  one  onely  playne  fuperficies  confidered  or  execu¬ 
ted  .  But  here  the  perpendicular  line  AB,  is  not  in  the 
fame  playne  fuperficies,that  the  right  line  D  E  is.  Ther¬ 
fore  iome  other  helpe  muft  be  put  into  thehandes  of 
young  beginners ,  how  to  bring  this  probleme  to  exe¬ 
cution  :  which  is  this ,  moll  playne  and  briefe  .  Vnder- 
ftand  that  B  D  the  right  line ,  is  the  common  fedlion  of 
the  playne  fuperficies,  wherein  the  perpendiculars  A  B 
and  C  D  are,&  of  the  other  playne  fuperficies,  to  which 
they  are  perpendiculars.The  firft  of  thefe(in  my  former 
demonftration  of  the  6') ,  I  noted  by  the  playne  fuperfi¬ 
cies  QR :  and  the  other,I  noted  by  the  plaine  fuperficies 
O  P.WherforeB  D  being  a  right  line  common  to  both 
the  playne  fuperficieces  Qjv.  &  O  P,  therby  the  ponits  & 

B and D are comon to  theplaynes  QJUnd  OP.  Now 

from 


ConttruEUott* 

*  dn  Affkmpt 
as  M.  Dee 
praucth  it* 
Dmonflra- 

tion , 


T  he  eleuenth  2>  ooke 

Vppofe  that  tbefe  two  right  Urns  AB  and  CD  be  eretted perpendicularly  to  a 
! ground  plaine  fuperfcies .  Then  I  fay  that  the  line  A  B  is  a  parallel  to  the  line 
1 C  D  .Let  the  point  es  which  thofe  two  right  lines  touch  in  the  plaine fuperfcies  be 

_  B  and  D.And  draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  B  to  the  point  D  .  Cdnd  (  by  the 

ii.  of  the firfl  )  from  the  point  D,draw  vnto  the  line  B  D  in  the  ground fuperfcies  a  perpen¬ 
dicular  line  D  E  .  And(by  the  z.of  the frft  )r put  the  line  D  E  equall  t-o  the  line  A  E  .  And  draw  thefe 
right  lines  B  E,  A  E,  and  AD.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line 
A  B  is  ere  hied perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies  fther- 
f ore  (by  the  2  (definition  of  the  elenenth)thelwe  A  B  maketh 
right  angles  with  all  the.  lines  which  are  drawnc  vpon  the 
ground  play  ne  fuperfcies  and  touch  it .  But  either  of  tbefe 
lines  B  D  and  B  E  which  are  in  the  ground fuperfcies  ft  ouch 
the  line  A  B ,  wherefore  either  of  thefe  angles  A  B  D  and 
AB  E  is  a  right  angle  • and  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  either  of 
the  angles  CDB,&CDE  is  a  right  angle. And forafmuch 
as  the  line  A  B  is  e quail  to  the  line  D  E ,  and  the  line  B  D  is 
common  to  them  both  ftherf ore  thefe  two  lines  AB  andB  D, 
are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  E  D  and  D  B,and  they  contayne  right  angles :  wherefore  (by  the 
4 .  of  the  fir  Hi)  the  bafe  A  D  is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  E .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  equall 
to  the  line  D  E ,  and  the  line  AD  to  the  line  B  E ,  therefore  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  B  E  are 
equall  to  thefe  two  lines  E  D  and  D  A ,  anduhe  line  AEisa  common  bafe  to  them  both. 
Wherefore  the  angle  ABE  is  (  by  the  8.ofthefirfi)equal  to  the  angle  EDA.  But  the  angle 
ABE  is  a  right  angle:  whefore  alfo  the  angle  E  D  A  is  a  right  angle -.wherf ore  the  line  E  D 
is  creeled perpedicularly  to  the  line  D  A  :and it  is  alfo  erected perpedicularly  to  either  of  thefe 
lines  B  D  and  D  C,  wherefore  the  line  ED  is  vnto  thefe  three  right  lines  B  D  ,D  A ,  and 
D  C  erected  perpendicularly  from  the poynt  where  thefe  three  right  lines  touch  the  one  the 
other :  wherefore  ( by  the  s -of 'the  eleuenth)  thefe  three  right  lines  B  D  ,D  A,  and  D  C  are  in 
one  and  the felfe fame  fuperfcies .  t_And  in  what  fuperfcies  ^  ^  4  are7in 

the  felfe  fame  alfo  is  the  line  B  A :  for  euery  triangle  is  (by  th  f  \  one  and 

the felfe  fame fuperfcies .  Wherefore  thefe  right  lines  AB,B 
felfe fame fuperfcies ,  and  either  of  thefe  angles  AB  D  and  . 
p  oft  ion)  .Wherefore(  by  the  28.  ofthefrfl)the  line  A  B  is  aj 
fore  two  right  lines  beer  eel  ed  perpendicularly  to  one  and  ti 
thofe  right  lines  are  parallels  the  one  to  the  other  :which  was j 


Here  for  the  better  vnderftanding  of  this  6.  propofition  I 
haue  deferibed  an  other  figure:  as  touching  which  if  ye  erefl  the 
fuperficies  AB  D  perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  BD  E,  and 
imagine  only  a  line  to  bedrawnefrom  the  poynt  A  to  the  poynt 
£(ifye  will  ye  may  extend  a  thred  from  the  faide  poynt  A  to 
the  poynt  E  )  and  fo  compare  it  with  thedemonllration,  it  will 
make  both  the  propofition, and  alfo  the  demonilration-moft 
deare  vnto  you. 


IF  An  other  demonftration  of  the  fix th  propofition  by  UA.  Dee. 

■  *  •  \  ?  *  •  •  t  ^ 

Suppofc  that  the  two  right  lines  A  B  &  CD  be  perpendicularly  ere&ed  to  one  8c  the  fame  playne  fu¬ 
perficies 


and  the 
'byfup- 
f there - 
lerficics. 


Demonstra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  tmpofiibi* 
line* 


7 he  eleuenth  Tioolf 

from  B  D  (fufticiently  extended)cutte  a  right  line  equall  to  A  B,  (  which  fuppofe  to  be  B  F)  by  the  third 
of  the  firft,and  orderly  to  B  F  make  D  E  equall, by  thej.ofthcfirftjif  D  E  be  greater  then  B  F.  f  Which 
alwayes  you  may  caufe  fo  to  be,by  producing  of  D  E  fufficiently). Now  forafmuch  as  B  F  by  conftrudi- 
On  is  cutte  equall  to  A  B,and  D  E  aifo  ,  by  conilru&ion,  put  equall  to  B  F  ,  therefore  by  the  i .  common 
fentence,D  E  is  put  equall  to  A  B :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

In  like  fort, if  D 1  were  a  line  geuen  to  whome  A  B 
were  to  be  cutte  and  made  equall,  fir  ft  out  of  the  line 
D  B (fufficiently  produced)cucting  of  D  G,equall  to  DE 
by  the  third  of  che  firft ;  and  by  the  lame  3  .cutting  from 
B  A(fufficiently  produced)B  A,  equall  to  D  G  :  then  is 
it  euidetjthat  to  the  right  line  D  B.the  perpedicular  line 
A  B  is  put  equall.  And  though  this  be  eafy  to  conceaue, 
yet  I  haue  defigned  the  figure  accordingly,  wherby  you 
may  inrtrudyourimagination.  Many  fuch  helpes  are  in 
this  booke  requifite ,  as  wdl  to  enforme  the  young  ftu- 
dentes  therewith ,  as  aifo  to  mafter  the  frpward  gayne- 
fayer  ofour  condufion  ,or  interrupter  of  our  demon- 
Ilrations  courfe. 


0  j 

c 

/ 

/  • 

A 

j 

/  3 

TO  D 

/ 

/ 


/ 


E 


B 


fTbe  7-Theoreme.  The  7. tpropofition. 

Xf there  be  two  parallel  right  lines }  and  in  either  of  them  be  taken  a  point 
at  all aduentures :  a  right  line  drawen  by  the faid pointes  is  in  the felffame 
j uper fetes  t>ith  the  parallel  right  lines. 

I  S’ppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  CD  be  parallels ,  and  in  either  of the  take 
7 a  point  at  all  aduentures, namely ,  E  and  F .  T hen  1 fay,  that  a  right  line  drawen 
t from  the  point  E  to  the  point  F,  is  in  the felfe fame  plaine  fuperfeies  that  the  pa¬ 
rallel  lines  are .  For  if  not,  then  if  it  bepofible , 

let  it  be  in  an  higher fuperfeies, as  the  line  EG  F  A  _ 

is, and  draw  the fuperfeies  wherin  the  line  EG  F 
is, dr  extend  it,  and  it fall  make  a  common feclu 
on  with  the  ground fuperfeies, which fecnon  fall 
( by  the  3  .of  the  eleuenth )  be  a  right  line ;  let  that 

feolion  be  the  right  line  F  F  .  Wherefore  two  _  _ 

right  lines  EG  F  and  E  F  include  a fuperfeies:  c  F  x> 

which  (by  the  laH  common  fentence  )ts  impofible. 

Wherfore  a  right  line  drawen  from  the  point  E  to  the  point  F,is  not  in  an  higher fttperfeies. 
Wherfore  a  right  line  drawen  from  the  point  F  to  the  point  F,  is  in  the felfe fame  fuperficies 
wherein  are  the  parallel  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D  .  if  therefore  there  be  two  parallel  right 
lines,  and  in  either  of them  be  taken  a point  at  all  aduentures,  a  right  line  drawen  by  thofe 
pointes  is  in  the  felfe fame  plaine fuperfeies  with  the  parallel  right  lines :  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  demonstrated. 


By  this  figure  it  is  eafie  to  (be 
the  former  demonftration,  ifye 
eleuate  the  fuperficies  wherin  is 
drawen  the  line  E  G  F. 


E 

T 

c> 

T 

L 

B 


f rh 


The  8.  Tbeoreme.  The  8.  fropojition. 


If  there  he  two  parallel  right  lines }of which  one  is  erected  perpendicularly 
to  a  round  flayne fuperficies:  the  other  alfo  is  ereffied  perpendicularly  to 
the felfe fame  ground  playne J uperficies. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  two  parallel  right  lines  A  B  and  C  I),  and  let  one  of  them, 
namely,  A  B  be  ereAed perpendiculerly  to  aground  fuperfeies.  Then  l  fay  that 
the  line  C  B  is  alfo  erected perpendiculerly  ,to  the  felfe fame  ground  fuperfeies. 
Let  the  lines  A  B  and  C  B  fall  vpon  the  ground  fuperfeies  in  thepointes  B  and 
B,and  ( by  thefrfpeticion )  draw  aright  line fr cm  the  point  B  to  the  point  B.  And  dr  awe 
{by  the  n.  of  the  frf)  in  the  ground  fuperfeies  from  the  point  B  vnto  the  line  B  B  a per- 
pendiculer  line  B  E,  and(  by  the  2.  of  the  fr  A)  put  the  line 
B  E  e  quail  to  the  line  A  B,and  draw  a  right  line  from  the 
point  B  to  the  point-  E,and  an  other  from  the  point  A  to  the 
point  E,and  an  other from  they  oint  A  to  the  point  B  .And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  crested  perpendicularly  to  the 
ground  fuperfcieces, therf ore  (by  the  2  .definition  of  the  e- 
leuenth)  the  line  A  B  is  ereAed  perpendicularly  to  all  the 
right  lines  that  are  in  the  ground fuperfeies  and  touche  it. 

Wherfore  either  ofthefe  angles  A  B  D  fig  A  B  E  is  a  right 
angle.  And ' forafmuch  as  vpon  thefe  parallel  lines  A  B  and 
C  D  fallefh  a  certaine  right  lineB  D , therefore  (by  the  2 p  „• 
of  the frf )  the  angles  A  B  B  and  C  D  B  are  equal  to  two  right  angles  .But  the  angle  A  B  Id 
is  a  right  angle,  wherfore  alfo  the  angle  C  D  B  is  a  right  angle.  Wherfore  the  line  C  D  is  e- 
recied perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  B.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  Id 
E,and  the  line  B  B  is  common  to  them  both,therfore  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  B  D  are  equal 
to  thefe  two  lines  E  B  and  B  B,and  the  angle  ABB  is  equall  to  the  angle  E  B  Bfor  either 
of them  is  a  right  angle.  Wherfore  (by  the  4.  of  the  fir  A)  the  hafe  A  B  is  equall  to  the  hafe 
B  Ea^And forafmuch  as  the  tine  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  B  E,  and  the  line  B  E  to  the  line 
A  B , therf  ore  thefe  two  lines  A  B  andB  E  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  A  B  fig  B  E,  the  one 
to  the  other, andthe line  A  E  is  a  common  bafetothem  both.  Wherfore  ( by  the  8  .of the  fr  A) 
the  angle  AB  E  is  equall  to  the  angle  A  B  E:  but  the  angle  A  B  E  is  a  right  angle, wherfore 
the  angle  E  B  A, is  alfo  a  right  angle.  Wherefore  the  line  E  B  is  ereAed  perpendicularly  to 
the  line  A  B,and it  is  alfo  ereAed perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  B.  Wherfore  the  line  E  B  is 
ereAed perpendicularly  to  the  plain  e fuperfeies  w her  in  the  lines  B  B  and  B  A  are  (by  the  4 . 
of  this  booke )  Wherfore  (by  the  2.  definition  of  the  eleuenth  )theline  E<B  is  ereAed  perpen¬ 
dicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  touche  it  and  are  in  the  f  uperficies  wherein  the  lines  B  B 
and  A  B  are. But  in  what fuperfeies  the  lines  B  B  and  B  A  are, in  the felfe  fame fuperficies 
is  the  line  B  C.For  the  line  A  B  being  drawenfrom  two  point es  taken  in  the  parallel  lines  A 
B  and  C  B  is  by  the  former  propofition  in  the  felfe  fame fuperficies  with  them.  Epow  foraf¬ 
much  as  the  lines  A  B  andB  B  are  in  the  fuperficies  wherin  the  lines  B  B  and  B  A  are,  but 
in  what fuperficies  the  lines  AB  figBB  are, in  the  fame  is  the  line  B  C. Wherfore  the  line  E 
B  is  ereAed perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  C.  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  C  B  is  ereAed  perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  line  B  E.  And  the  line  C  Bis  ereAed  perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  B.  For  by 
the  2  p.  of  the  frf , the  angle G  B  B  being  equall  to  the  angle  ABB  is  a  right  angle  Where¬ 
fore  the  line-CB  is from  the  point  B  ereAed  perpendicularly  to  two  right  lines  B  E  and  B 
B  cutting  the  one  the  other  in  the  point  B  Wherfore  by  the  4.ofthe  eleuenth, the  line  C  B  is 
ereAed ferpendiculaaly  to' the  plain  e  fuperficies,  wherein  are  the  lines  B  E  and  B  B.  But 

the 


This  [wpofi- 
urn  is  as  it 
TVere  the  con* 
uerfe  of  the 
Jixth 

Lonflrtiblion* 


Vensonf  ra¬ 
tion. 


T he  eleuentb  Boo^e 


from  B  D(fufficiently  extended)cutte  a  right  line  equall  to  A  B,  (  which  fuppofe  to  be  B  F)  by  the  third 
of  the  firfl,and  orderly  to  B  F  make  D  E  equality  the  3  .of  the  firth,  if  D  E  be  greater  then  B  F.  (  Which 
alwayes  you  may  caufe  fo  to  be, by  producing  of  D  E  fufficiently)  .Now  forafmuch  as  B  F  by  conftru&i- 
6n  is  cutte  equall  to  A  B,and  D  E  aifo  ,  by  confirudion,  put  equall  to  B  F  3  therefore  by  the  x.  common 
fentence,D  E  is  put  equall  to  A  B :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

In  like  fort. if  D  E  were  a  line  geuen  to  whome  A  B 
were  to  be  cutte  and  made  equall3  firftout  of  the  line 
D  B (fufficiently  produced) cutting  of  D  G, equall  to  DE 
by  the  third  of  the  firth  and  by  the  fame  3  .cutting  from 
B  A(fufficiently  produced)B  A,  equall  to  D  G  ;  then  is 
it  euidet,that  to  the  right  line  D  E.the  perpedicular  line 
A  B  is  put  equall.  And  though  this  be  eafy  to  conceaue, 
yet  I  haue  defigned  the  figure  accordingly,  wherby  you 
may  inllrud  your  imagination.  Many  fuch  helpes  are  in 
this  booke  requifite ,  as  well  to  enforme  the  young  fiu- 
dentes  therewith ,  as  alfo  to  mailer  the  frpward  gayne- 
fayerofourcondufion  ,  or  interrupter  of  our  demon- 
ilratioas  courfe. 


f  The  7.  Theorems.  The  7.  fpropojition. 

If there  he  two  parallel  right  lines }  and  in  either  of  them  he  taken  a  point 
at  all aduentures :  a  right  line  drawen  by  the faid pointes  is  in  the felffame 
j uperficies  "with  the  parallel  right  lines. 

i  Tppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  CD  he  parallels ,  and  in  either  of  the  take 
9  a  point  at  all  aduentures, namely ,  E  and  F .  Then  1 fay ,  that  a  right  line  drawen 
t from  the  point  E  to  the  point  F,  is  in  the felfe fame  plaine  fuperfeies  that  the  pa¬ 
rallel  lines  are .  For  if  not,  then  if  it  bepofible , 

Demon  ftra-  let  lt  he  in  an  higher fuperfeies, as  the  line  EG  F 
tim  leading  to  is, and  draw  the fuperfeies  wherin  the  line  EG  F 
an  tmpofibi*  is,&  ext end  it,  and  it  fall  make  a  common fefli- 


litie • 


on  with  the  ground fuperfeies, which fcciion  fall 
( by  the  3  .of  the  eUuenth)  be  a  right  line ;  let  that 
feffiion  be  the  right  line  F  F  .  Wherefore  two  i 

right  lines  EG  F  and  E  F  include  a fuperfeies:  c  F  o 

which  ( by  the  laft  common fentence )is  impofible. 

Wherfore  aright  line  drawen  fr om  the point  E  to  the point  F, is  not  in  an  higher fuperfeies. 
Wherfore  a  right  line  drawen  from  the  point  E  to  the  point  F ,  is  in  the felfe fame  fuperfeies 
wherein  are  the  parallel  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D  .  if  therefore  there  be  two  parallel  right 
lines,  and  in  either  of them  be  taken  a point  at  all  aduentures,  a  right  line  drawen  by  thofe 
pointes  is  in  the  felfe fame  plaine fuperfeies  with  the  parallel  right  lines :  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  demonstrated.  '  0 

A — - — -  ■  ■  — ■ g 


By  this  figure  it  is  eafie  to  fee 
the  former,  demonilration,  ifye 
eleuate  the  fuperficies  wherin  is 
drawen  the  line  E  G  F. 


The  eleuenth  *Boohe 

the  ground plaine  fuperfiries  is  that  wherin  are  the  lines  D  E  and  D  B,  to  which  fuperficies 
alfo  the  line  A  B  is  fnppofed  to  be  creeled perpendiculerly.  Wherefore  the  line  C  D  is  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the  ground  plaine fuperf tries, wherunto  the  line  A  B  is  erected perpendicu¬ 
larly  .  If th  erf  ore  there  be  two  parallel  right  lines,  of which  one  is  erected  perpendicularly  to 
aground  plaine fuperf, 'tries, the  other  alfo  is  erelted perpendicularly  to  the felfe fame  ground 
plaine  fuperfiries :  which  was  required  to  be  dent  on f rated. 


This  figure  will  more  clearely  fet  forth  the  former de^ 
monilration,  if  ye  ere#  perpendicularly  the  fuperficies 
A  B  D  to  the  fuperficies  B  D  E, and  imagine  a  lyne  to  be 
drawee  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  D,  in  flede  wher¬ 
eas  in  the  6.  propofition  ye  may  extendea  threede. 


f  The  9.  Theoreme.  The  p.  frofofitm. 

lines  ^hich  are  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  right  line ,  and 
are  not  in  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies  that  it  is  in:  are  alfo  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other.  \-  . 


Conflructm* 


Vemonftra- 

turn. 


F ppofe  that  either  ofthefe  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D  be  a  parallel  to  the  line  E  F 
not  bring  in  the  felfe fame fuperficies  with  it.  T hen  I fay  that  the  line  A  B  is  a 
parallel  to  the  line  C  D  IT ake  in  the  line  EE  a  point  at  all  aduentures,  and  let 
the  fame  be  G.^/fnd  from  thepoint  G  raife  *vp  in  the  fuperfiries  wherin  are  the 
lines  E  F  and  A  B,vnto  the  line  EE  a  perpendiculer  line  GH,  andagainein  the fuperficies 
wherin  are  the  lines  E  F  and  C  D, raife  vp from  the fame  point  G  to  the  lint  EE  a  perpen¬ 
diculer  line  G  K.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line 
EE  is  erefted perpendiculer  ly  to  either  of  the 
lines  GH  and  G  K,  therfore  (by  the  4. of  the 
eleuenth )  the  line  E  F  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines  G  H 
and  G  K  are,  but  the  line  E  F  is  a  parallel 
line  to  the  line  A  B.Wherfore(  by  the  S. of  the 
eleuenth )  the  line  A  Bis  eretfed perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  plaine  fuperfiries,  wherin  are  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  al¬ 
fo  the  line  C  D  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine fuperfiries  wherin  are  the  lines  GB& 
G  K .  Wherefore  either  ofthefe  lines  A  B  and  CD  is  erelted perpendicularly  to  the  plaine 
fuperficies, wherin  the  lines  GH  and  G  K  are.  But  if  two  right  lines  be  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  one  and  the felfe fame plaine fuperficies, thofe  right  lines  are  parallels  the  one  to  the 
other  (by  the  6. of  the  eleuenth )  Wherfore  the  line  A  B  is  aparallel  to  the  line  C  D .  Wherfore 
right  lines  which  are  parallels  to  one  &  the  felfe fame  right  line, and  are  not  in  the felffame 
fuperfiries  with  it  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to  the  other ;  which  was  required  to  beproned. 


This 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


FolqzS. 


This  figure  more  clearely  manifefleth  the  former  propo¬ 
rtion  and  demoniirationjif  ye  eleuate  the  fuperficieces  A  B 
E  F  and  CDEF  that  they  may  incline  and  concurre  in  the 
lyneE  F. 


ti  V 

M  . . 

£>  2 

jfc.1-  i- - 

K 

The  jo.  T heoreme . 


The  io.Tropofition. 


If  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  he  parallells  to  two  other 
right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other }  and  not  being  in  one  and  the  felfe 
Jame  ftiperficies  tnth  the  two firft :  thofe  right  lines  cotame  equall  angles. 

.  Fppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  B  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other ,  be 

parallells  tothefe  two  lines  D  E  and  E  F  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other ,  and 
\not  beingin  the felfe fame fuperficies  that  the  lines  A  B  andB  C  are.  The  1  fay, 
that  the  angle  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  D  E  F  .For  let  the  lines  B  A,B  C, 
E  D,E  F,be  put  equall  the  one  to  the  other  ••  and  draw  thefe 
right  lines  A  D,C  F,B  E,  A  C,andD  F .  And forafmuch 
as  the  line  BA  is  equall  to  the  line  ED,  and  alfo  far allell 
'vntoit,  therefore  (by  the  s^.ofthefrf  )  the  line  AD  is  e- 
quall  and far  allell  to  the  line  B  E :  and  by  the fame  reafon  a 
alfo  the  line  CF  is  equall  &  far  allell  to  the  line  B  E. Where¬ 
fore  either  of thefe  lines  AD  and  C  F  is  equall  dr  far  allell 
to  the  line  EB .  But  right  lines  which  are  parallells  to  one 
and  the felfe fame  right  line, and  are  not  in  the felfe fame ft- 
ferfeies  with  it,  are  alfo  (by  the  p  .of  the  eleuenth )  parallells 
the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  line  AD  is  a  far  allell 
line  to  the  line  C  F .  And  the  lines  A  C  and  D  F  ioyne  them 
together.  Wherefore  ( by  the  3  3. of the  frfl )  the  line  is  p 

equall  and  par  allell  to  the  line  D  F .  And  forafmuch  as  thefe  two  right  lines  AB  &  BC  are 
equall  to  thefe  two  right  lines  D  EandEF,  and  the  bafe  A  C  alfo  is  equallto  the  bafe  D  F: 
therefore  (by  tne  $  .of the firf)  the  angle  A  B  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  D  E  F .  iftherfore  two 
right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  be  parallells  to  two  other  right  lines  touching  the  one 
the  other ,  and  not  being  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies  with  the  twofrsl :  thofe  right 
lines  containe  equall  angles :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


This  figure  here  fet  more 
plainly  dedareth  the  former  Pro- 
pofition  and  demonilration,  if  ye 
eleuate  the  fuperficieces  D  A  B  E, 
and  F  C  B  E,  till  they  concurre  in 
the  line  F  E. 


y 

W 

p 

F 

vr.i 


The 


ConHruiUon. 

Vemonjlra - 
turn. 


Coftjlructm • 

Vemnjlnt- 

txm. 


the  ground plaine  fuperficies  is  that  wherin  are  the  lines  D  E  and  D  B ,  to  which fuperficies 
alfo  the  line  A  B  is fuppofed to  be  ereffed perpendiculerly.  r  pp  is  erected 


perpendicularly  to  the  ground  plaine fuperficies, wheruntoti, 
larly.  Jftherfore  there  he  two  parallel  right  lines ,  of  which 
aground  plaine fuperficies, the  other  alfo  is  erected  perpend 
plaine  fuperficies :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfratet 


This  figure  will  more  clearely  fet  forth  the  former  de- 
monllration,  if ye  ereft  perpendicularly  the  fuperficies 
A  B  D  to  the  fuperficies  B  D  E,and  imagine  a  lyne  to  be 
drawer  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  D,  in  llede  wher¬ 
eas  in  the  6.  propofition  ye  may  extendea  chrecde. 


P 


f  The  9.  Theorems.  The  9. 


Hndicu- 
darly  to 
eground 


tffght  lines  "^hich  are  parallels  to  one  and  the  Jelfe  fame  right  line ,  and 
are  not  in  the  Jelfe fame fuperficies  that  it  is  in:  are  alfo  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other.  ...  .  . 

(Y  ,,  yv'  .•  vr  .’j- ’V;  •  u  ■a  v  y"  >■  .  '*•••  v  • 

V ppofe  that  either  ofthefe  right  lines  A  B  and  C  D  be  a  parallel  to  the  line  E  F 
not  being  in  the  felfe fame  fuperficies  with  it.  Then  l  fay  that  the  line  A  B  is  a 
par allel  to  the  line  CD.T akein  the  line  EE  a  point  at  all  aduentures ,  and  let 
the fame  be  G.^And from  the  point  G  raife  *vp  in  the fuperficies  wherin  are  the 
lines  E  F  and  A  B,vnto  the  line  E  F  a  perpendiculer  line  GH ,  and  againe  in  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  the  lines  E  F  and  C  D, raife  vpfrom  the fame  point  G  to  the  lint  EE  a  per  pen- 
diculer  line  G  K.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line 
EF  is  erecied  perpendiculerly  to  either  of  the 
lines  G  H  and  G  K,  therfore  ( by  the  4. of  the 
eleuenth )  the  line  E  F  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines  G  H 
arid  G  K  are ,  but  the  line  E  F  is  a  par  allel 
line  to  the  line  A  B.Wher fore  ( by  the  8. of  the 
eleuenth )  the  line  A  Bis  erecied  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies,  wherin  are  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  al¬ 
fo  the  line  C  D  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  plaine fuperficies  wherin  are  the  lines  GH& 
G  K .  Wherefore  either  ofthefe  lines  A  B  and  C  D  is  erecied perpendicularly  to  the  plaine 
fuperficies, wherin  the  lines  GH  and  G  K  are.  But  if  two  right  lines  be  erecied  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  one  and  the felfe  fame plaine fuperficies,  thofe  right  lines  are  parallels  the  one  to  the 
other  (by  the  6.  of the  eleuenth)  Wherfore  the  line  A  B  is  apar allel  to  the  line  C  D .  Wherfore 
right  lines  which  are  parallels  to  one  &  the felfe fame  right  line, and  are  not  in  the felffame 
fuperficies  with  it  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to  the  other ;  which  was  required  to  beproned. 


A 


W 


This 


of-Suclides  Elementes . 


This  figure  more  clearely  manifefteth  the  former  propo- 
fltion  and  demonilrationjif  ye  eleuate  the  fuperficieces  A  B 
E  F  and  C  D  E  F  that  they  may  incline  and  concurre  in  the 
lyneEF. 


B 


J3  U 


D 


K 


A 


K 


f  T he  io.  Tbeoreme. 


The  io.Tropofition. 


If  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  he  parallells  to  tiro  other 
right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other,  and  not  being  in  one  andthefelfe 
Jame  fuperficies  hnth  the  two firft :  thofe  right  lines  cotame  equall  angles. 

Fppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  B  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other ,  be 

parallells  to  thefe  two  lines  D  E  and  E  F  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other,  and 
I  not  being  in  the felfe fame fuperficies  that  the  lines  A  B  andB  C  are.  T he  1 fay, 
that  the  angle  eylB  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  DEE .  For  let  the  lines  B  A,B  C, 


ED,E  F, be  put  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  and  draw  thefe 
right  lines  A  D,C  F,B  E,  A  C,and D  F .  And  forafmuch 
as  the  line  B  A  is  equall  to  the  line  E  D,  and  alfo  par a llell 
r vnto  it,  therefore  ( by  the  33  .of  the firf  )  the  line  A  D  is  e- 
quall  andparallellto  the  line  BE:  and  by  the  fame  reafon  a 
alfo  the  line  CF  is  equally  par  all  ell  to  the  line  B  E.Wher- 
fore  either  of  the  felines  AD  and  C  F  is  equall  &  par allell 
to  the  line  EB .  But  right  lines  which  are  parallells  to  one 
and  the felfe fame  right  line, and  are  not  in  the felfe fame fi- 
ferficies  with  it,  are  alfo  ( by  the  $  .of  the  eleuenth )  parallells 
the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  line  AD  is  aparallell 
line  to  the  line  C  F  .  And  the  lines  A  C  and  D  F  ioyne  them 
together.  Wherefore  ( by  the  3  3  .of  the  frfl)  the  line  ^AC  is 
equall  and par allellto  the  line  D  F .  And  forafmuch  as  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  B  C  art 

equall  to  thefe  two  right  lines  D  E  andE  F,  and  the  bafe  A  C  alfo  is  equall  to  thebafcD  F: 
therefore  (by  the  S.ff the  frfl)  the  angle  A  BCisequallto  the  angle  D  EF.lftherforetwo 
right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  be  parallells  to  two  other  right  lines  touching  the  one 
the  other, and  not  being  in  one  and  the felfe fame  fuperficies  with  the  twofrtt  :  thofe  right 
lines  containe  equall  angles :  which  was  required  to  be  demonflrated . 


This  figure  here  fet  more 
plainly  dec-lareth  the  former  Pro- 
pofition  and  demonilration,  if  ye 
eleuate  the  fuperficieces  DABE, 
and  F  C  B  E,  till  they  concurre  in 
the  line  F  E. 


The 


ConUtuUion. 

Demonflra- 

lion. 


YV.l 


oj-Suclides  Elementes . 


This  figure  more  dearely  manifefteth  the  former  propo¬ 
rtion  and  demonfiration,if  ye  eleuate  the  fuperfideces  A  B 
E  F  and  C  D  E  F  that  they  may  incline  and  concurre  in  the 
lyne  E  F. 


B 


f 

to 


The  io.  Theoreme. 


The 


io. 


If  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  her 

right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other y  and  not  being  m  one  and  the  felfe 
Jame  fuperficies  't’lth  the  two firft :  thofe  right  lines  cotame  e quail  atigles. 

Fppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  B  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other ,  be 

parallells  to  thefe  two  tines  TO  E  and  E  F  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other,  and 
not  being  in  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies  that  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are.  T he  1 fay, 
that  the  angle  B  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  DEE.  For  let  the  lines  B  A,B  C, 

ED, EE, be  put  equall  the  one  to  the  other  ■  and  draw  thefe 
right  lines  A  D,C  E,  BE,  A  C,andD  F .  And forafmuch 
as  the  line  B  A  is  equall  to  the  line  ED,  and  alfo  par allell 
'unto  it,  therefore  ( by  the  3 3  .of  the firft  )  the  line  A  D  is  e- 
quall  and par  allell  to  the  line  BE:  and  by  the fame  reafon  a 
alfo  the  line  C  F  is  equall  &  par  allell  to  the  line  B  E. Where¬ 
fore  either  of  thefe  lines  A  D  and  C  F  is  equall  &  par  allell 
to  the  line  EB .  But  right  lines  which  are  parallells  to  one 
and  the felfe fame  right  line, and  are  not  in  the felfe fame fu¬ 
perficies  with  it,  are  alfo  (by  the  p. of the  eleuenth )  parallells 
the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  line  AD  is  a  par  allell 
line  to  the  line  C  F  .  And  the  lines  A  C  and  D  F  ioyne  them 
together.  Wherefore  ( by  the  3  3  .of  the  firft)  the  line  ^AC  is  p 
equall  and par  allell  to  the  line  D  F .  And forafmuch  as  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  (ft  BC  are 
equall  to  thefe  two  right  lines  D  E  and  E  F,  and  the  bafe  A  C  alfo  is  equall  to  the  bafc  D  F: 
therefore  (by  the  8  .of the firft)  the  angle  A  B  C  is  equall  to  the  angle  D  E  F.  Iftherfore  two 
right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  be  parallells  to  two  other  right  lines  touching  the  one 
the  other ,  and not  being  in  one  and  the felfe fame fuperficies  with  the  two  firfi  .•  thofe  right 
lines  containe  equall  angles :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 


This  figure  here  fet  more 
plainly  dec-lareth  the  former  Pro- 
pofition  and  demonfixation,  if  ye 
eleuate  the  fuperfideces  DABE, 
and  F  C  B  E,  till  they  concurre  in 
the  line  F  E. 


The 


ConftruBion* 

Vemonftra - 
tm . 


FF.f 


< 'The  eleuenth  cBoo%e 

f  The  i.  Trohleme.  T he  1 i.  Tropofition. 

From  apointgeuen  on  high,  to  dr  awe  Tonto  aground  plaine  fuperficies  a 
perpendicular  right  line. 


on  high  be  A,  and  fuppofie  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies , 


E 


t.GH 


F 

A.  g . 

D 


fer.ftrucUon. 

Two  cafes  in 
this  brspofi' 

tiow »  _ _  _  _  x  ^  ^ 

The  ftrfi  cafe ♦  tures,and  let  the fame  be  B  C .  c^/Ind  ( by  the  12.  ofthefrf  )  from  the  point  a  draw  $nte  the  line 

John  Dee.  B  C  a  perpendicular  hne  A  D  .  *  Aj)  ^  perpendicular  lim  to  the 

C/T|m  regttireth  the  imagination  ground fuperficies  .then  is  that  done  which  was  fought  for. But  if not  .then 

p  0  iifte  A  ^anci  The" lira  iglu  I'm  bTa  (hthe  1  1 4 t  he frft)  from  the  point  D  raije  nop  in  the  ground fuper- 
And  fo  helpe  your  felfe  in  the  lyke  ficies  unto  the  line  B  C  a  perpendicular  line  D  E  .  And  ( by  the  12. of  the 
cafes  either  Mathematically  imagi-  firfi)  from  the  point  A  draw  unto  the  line  D  E  a  perpendicular  line  A  F« 
than!  tally  C~  h  the  point  F  draw(  by  the  3 1  .of the firfi)unto  the 

p  radii  ling..  line  B  C  a  par  all  ell  line  F  H .  And  extend  the  line  F  Ft 
Sc  ton  a  caft.  from  the  point  F  to  the  point  G .  And forafmuch  as  the 

Vem  onjtra -  jjnc  g  g  /x  creeled  perpendicularly  to  either  of  thefie  lines  is  _ _ ^ 

F>  E  and  D  A,  therefore  (by  the  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the 
line  B  C  is  ere  Bled  perpedicnlarly  to  the  fuperficies  wher- 
in  the  lines  E  D  and  A  D  are :  and  to  the  line  B  C  the 
line  G  H  is  a  parallell .  But  if  there  be  two  par allell  right 
lines, of  which  one  is  erected perpendicularly  to  a  certaine 
plaine  fuperficies,  the  other  alfo(  by  the  $  .of the  eleuenth ) 
is  ere  fled  perpendicularly  to  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies. 

Wherefore  the  line  G  .H  is  erefled  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines 
E  D  and  D  A  are .  W her  Fore  alfio  ( by  the  2  .definition  of the  eleuenth)  the  line  G  H  is  erected 
perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  which  touch  it,  and  are  in  the  plaine fuperficies  wherein 
the  lines  E  D  and  A  D  are .  But  the  line  A  F  toucheth  it  being  in  the  fuperficies  wherein  the 
lines  E  D  and  AD  are  ( by  the  2.0 ft  his  booke)  .  Wherefore  the  line  G  H  is  erefled  perpen¬ 
dicularly  to  the  line  F  A .  Wherefore  alfio  the  line  F  A  is  ere  fled  perpendicularly  to  the  line 
G  H :  and  the  line  A  F  is  alfio  erefled perpendicularly  to  the  line  D  E .  Wherefore  A  F  is  e - 
refled  perpendicularly  to  either  of  thefie  lines  H  G  and  D  E.  But  if  a  right  line  he  erefled  per¬ 
pendicularly  from  the  common  feflion  of  two  right  lines  cutting  the  one  the  other 3it jhall  alfio 
be  erefled  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  of  the  fiaid  two  lines  (by  the  4.of the  ele¬ 
uenth)  .  Wherefore  the  tine  A  F  is  erefled perpendicularly  to  that  fuperficies  wherin  the  lines 
E  D  and  G  FI  are .  But  the  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines  E  D  and  G  Ft  are,  is  the  ground  fu¬ 
perficies  .  Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  erefled perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  Wher- 
fore  from  apointgeuen  on  high, namely,  fro  the  point  A,  is  drawen  to  the  ground fuperficies 
a  perpendicular  line  :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

In  this  figure  {hall  ye  much  more  plainely  fee  both 
the  cafes  of  this  former  demonftratio.  For  as  touching 
the  fir  ft  cafe,  ye  muft  eredte  perpendicularly  to  the 
ground  fuperficies,  the  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen 
the  line  A  D,  and  compare  it  with  the  demonftration, 
audit  will  be  clere  vnto  you.  For  tile  fecond  cafeye 
muft  eredte  perpendicularly  vn  to  the  ground  fuperfi- 
eies  the  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen  the  line  A  F,and 
vnto  itlet  the  other  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen  the 
line  A  D,  incline, fo  that  the  point  h  of  the  one  may 
concurre  with  the  point  A  of  the  other:  and  fo  with  B 
your  figure  thus  ordered,compare  it  with  the  demon- 
ftrauon.and  there  will  bemic  no  hardnes  at  all. 


B 


A 

B 

P  c 

o/Euclides  Elementes ;  319. 

tf'The  2.  Trobleme.  The  i  zfPropofition. 

Vnto  a playne fuperficies  geuen  3  and from  a  poynt  in  it  geuen  fio  rayje  hp  a 
perpendicular  line. 


Vppofe  that  there  be  a  ground  playne fuperficies  geuen  7 
and  let  the  poynt  in  it geuen  be  Pc.  It  is  required 
from  the  point  A  toraife  vp  vnto  the  ground plaine 
fuperficies  a  perpendicular  line  .  Vnder stand  fome 
cert  ay  ne  poynt  on  high ,  and  let  the  fame  bells.  And  from  the poynt 
B  draw  (by  the  n.of the  eleuenth )  a  perpendicular  line  to  the  ground 
fuperfcies ,  and  let  the  fame  be  B  C  .  And  (by  the  31.  of  the  fir fl ) 
by  the  poynt  A  dram  vnto  the  line  B  C  a  parallel  line  D  A .  Now 
forafmuch  as  there  are  two  parallel  right  lines  A  D  and  C  B ,  and 
the  one  of them, namely  ,C  B  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  thegroi 
fuperfcies  .*  wherefore  the  other  line  alfo ,  namely  ,A  D ,  is  era 
perpendicularly  to  the fame  ground fuperfcies  (  by  the  eight  of th 
leuenth  )  .  Wherefore  vnto  a  playne  fuperfcies  geuen ,  and  fro 
poynt  in  it  geuen ,  namely ,  A, is  ray  fed  vp  a  perpendicular  lyne  & 
be  doone. 


In  this  fecond  figure  ye  may  confider  playnely  the 
demonlhration  of  the  formerpropofitionif  ye  ereft  per¬ 
pendicularly  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  drawne  the  Janes 
A  D  and  C 13. 


r - r- 


3 


" equired  to 


A  G 


v? 


fiThe  n.Tbeoreme.  The  13.  (Proportion. 

From  one  and  the  f elf e  poynt  3  and  to  one  and  the felfe fame  playne fuperf¬ 
cies  yan  not  he  erebled  two  perpendicular  right  lines  on  one  and  the  felfe 
fame fde. 

Or  if it  be  poffible  from  the  poynt  A  let  there  be  eretted perpendicularly  to  one 
and  the felfe  fame  playne fuperfcies  two  right  lines  A  B  and  AC  on  one  and 
the  felfe  fame  fide  .  And  extende 
the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines 
A  B  and  A  C :  and  it fall  make  at 
length  a  common  feclion  in  the ground  fuperficies 
which  common  feclion  fall  be  a  right  line ,  and 
fall pafie  by  the  poynt  A:  let  that  common  feclion 
he  the  line  D  A  E  .Wherefore  ( by  the  3 .  of  the  ele¬ 
uenth  )  the  lines  A  B,  A  C ,and  DAE  are  in  one  ■ 

and  the felfe  fame  playne fuperfcies .  And foraf¬ 
much  as  the  line  C  A  is  erecfed  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies ,  therfore  (  by  the 

VF.ij.  z.de - 


Conjlmfikn » 


Demonstra¬ 

tion, 


Demonstra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  impofibi- 
litie, 

Note  this 
maner  oft* 
magination 
Mathemati¬ 
cal. 


cfhe  eleventh  ‘Books 

ff  The  i.  'Problems.  T he  1 1.  Propofition. 

From  apointgeuen  on  high }  to  dr  awe  lento  a  ground  plaine  fuperfcies  4 
perpendicular  right  line. 


F°J e  tfje  point  geuen  on  high  he  A.,  and  fuppofe  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies, 

^j^!namely,  B  C  G  H .  It  is  required  from  the  point  A  to  draw  vnto  the  ground fuper- 


t.on . 


G 


F 

H 


fonftrucHm. 

Two  cafei  i-t 
this  Orettofi-  » 

trnu  “  \JzagtpjtCKS  a perpendicular  line .  J)r awe  m  the  ground fuperficies  a  right  line  at  aduen- 
The  firft  cafe,  tures,and  let  the fame  be  B  C .  ^ylnd  ( by  the  12.  ofthefrf )  from  the  point  a  draw  $nto  the  line 

'  lohn  Dee.  BC«Per?en*cuUrl,Ke^D-*  if  AD  bea  perpendicular  line  tot fo 

;Th's  re^mr££hthe  imagination  ground  fuperficies, then  is  that  done  which  was  fourht  for. But  if  not, then 

poLPtcaZeaXheTra|htTLbBa  (hthe  *  *  .of the  firft )  from  the  point  D  raije  nop  in  the  ground fuper- 
And  fo  helpe  your  felfe  in  thelyke  ficies  vnto  the  line  B  C  a  perpendicular  line  D  E  .  And  (by  the  12. of  the 
ntnCS  orMe Math£inanca1^  im3S  firfi)  from  the  point  A  draw  vnto  the  line  D  E  a  perpendicular  line  A  F. 
chanicallv £~  -dndby  the  point  F  draw(  by  the  31.  of the firfi)vnto  the 
p  radii  fin  g.  line  B  C  a  par  all  ell  line  F  H .  And  extend  the  line  F  Ft 

Sc  con  d  caft.  from  the  point  F  to  the  point  G .  And forafmuch  as  the 
Demon  fra -  jj}U  js  creeled  perpendicularly  to  either  of  the fe  lines 

D  E  and  D  A,  therefore  ( by  the  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the 
line  B  C  is  ere  fled  perpedicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wher- 
in  the  lines  E  D  and  A  D  are :  and  to  the  line  B  C  the 
line  G  His  a  parallell .  But  if  there  be  two  paraded  right 
lines , of  which  one  is  ere  fled  perpendicularly  to  a  cert aine 
plaine piper feies,  the  other  alfo  (by  the  8.0 ft  he  eleuenth ) 
is  erefled  perpendicularly  to  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies. 

Wherefore  the  line  G.H  is  erefled  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines 
E  D  and  D  A  are  .W her  fore  alfo  ( by  the  2  .definition  of  the  eleuenth)  the  line  G  H  is  erected, 
perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  which  touch  it,  and  are  in  the  plaine fuperficies  wherein 
the  lines  E  D  and  A  D  are .  But  the  line  A  F  toucheth  it  being  in  the  fuperficies  wherein  the 
lines  E  D  and  A  D  are  ( by  the  2. of  this  booke)  .  Wherefore  the  line  G  H  is  erefled  perpen¬ 
dicularly  to  the  line  F  A .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  F  A  is  erefled  perpendicularly  to  the  line 
G  H  :  and  the  line  A  F  is  alfo  erected perpendicularly  to  the  line  D  E .  Wherefore  A  F  is  e- 
refled  perpendicularly  to  either  ofthefe  lines  H  G  and  D  E.  But  if  a  right  line  he  erefled  per¬ 
pendicularly  from  the  common  feel  ion  of  two  right  lines  cutting  the  one  the  other, it fhall  alfo 
be  erefled  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  of  the  faid  two  lines  (by  the  4.of the  ele¬ 
uenth  ) .  Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  erefled perpendicularly  to  that  fuperficies  wherin  the  lines. 
E  D  and  G  H  are .  But  the  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines  E  D  and  G  H  are,  is  the  ground  fu¬ 
perficies  .  Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  erefled perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  Wher- 
fore from  apointgeuen  on  high, namely,  fro  the point  A,  is  drawen  to  the  ground fuperficies 
a  perpendicular  line  .*  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

In  this  figure  fhall  ye  much  more  plainely  fee  both 
the  cafes  of  this  former  demonftratio.  For  as  touching 
the  firft  cafe,  ye  muft  eredte  perpendicularly  to  the 
groundfuperficies,  the  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen 
the  line  A  D,  and  compare  it  with  the  demonftration, 
audit  will  be  clere  vnto  you.  For  tile  fecond  cafeye 
m uft eredte perpendicularly  vnto  the  ground  fuperfi- 
eies  the  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen  the  line  A  F,and 
vnto  it  lec  the  other  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen  the 
line  A  D,  incline, fo  that  the  point  &  of  the  one  may 
eoncurre  with  the  point  A  of  the  other:  and  fo  with  B 
your  figure  thus  ordered, compare  it  with  the  demon- 
ftrationj  and  there  will  be  in  it  no  hardnes  at  all. 


B 


The  eleucnthHooke 

if  The  i.  Trobleme.  T he  1 1.  Tropofition. 

From  a  point geuen  on  high }  to  dr  awe  lento  a  ground  plaine  fuperficies  4 
perpendicular  right  line. 


R8?  Ftt°fe  ^at  the  Pointgeuen  on  high  he  A ,  and fuppofea  ground  ptaine  fuperficies, 
this  brspofi-  BCG  H .  It  is  requiredfrom  the  point  A  to  draw  unto  the  ground fuper- 

tmu  *  $ZufFfficies  a  perpendicular  line .  Drawe  in  the  ground fuperjicies  a  right  line  at  aduen - 
1  he  fir [l  cafe,  t  arcs, and  let  the fame  heB  C .  cylnd  ( by  the  12.  of  the  fir f  )  from  the  point  a  dram  <tnto  the  line 
John  Dee.  B  C  «  perpendicular  tine  A  D  .  *  ^  if  A  D  a perpendicular  line  to  the 

re3mreih.' tbe  i^a§i"atl?n  ground  fuperficies, then  is  that  done  which  was  fought  for. But  if not, then 

(hfihe  n. of  the  firfi)  from  the  point  D  raije  vp  in  the  ground fiuper- 
And  fo  helpe  your  felfe  in  the  lyke  ficies  unto  the  line  B  C  a  perpendicular  line  D  E.  And  (by  the  12. of  the 
cafes  either  Mathematically  lmagi  -firfi)  from  the  point  A  draw  unto  the  line  D  E  a  perpendicular  line  A  F« 
chanically  C_  h  the  point  F  draw(  by  the  3 1  .of the firfi)Unto  the 

pra&ifing,  line  B  C  aparallell  line  F  H .  And  extend  the  line  EH 
Be  <:o  a  a  caft.  from  the  point  F  to  the  point  G .  And forafimuch  as  the 
Vem  on  fir  a -  fjnc  g  g  ls  erccled  perpendicularly  to  either  ofthefe  lines  c 
t.on,  j)  £  any  j)  therefore  (by  the  4.  of  the  ekuenth  )  the 

line  B  C  is  ere  fled  perpedicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wher~ 
in  the  lines  E  D  and  A  D  are :  and  to  the  line  B  C  the 
line  G  His  a  parallell .  But  if  there  be  two  parallell  right 
lines,  of  which  one  is  ere  fled  perpendicularly  to  a  certaine 
plaine  fuperficies,  the  other  alfo(bythe  8 .of  the  ekuenth ) 
is  ere  fled  perpendicularly  to  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies. 

Wherefore  the  line  G.H  is  ere  fled perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines 
E  D  and  D  A  are  .W her  fore  alfio  ( by  the  2. definition  of the  ekuenth )  the  line  G  H  is  ere  fled 
perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  which  touch  it,  and  are  in  the  plaine fuperficies  wherein 
the  lines  E  D  and  A  D  are .  But  the  line  A  F  toucheth  it  being  in  the  fuperficies  wherein  the 
lines  E  D  and  AD  are  ( by  the  2.0 fit  his  booke)  .  Wherefore  the  line  G  H  is  ere  fled perpen¬ 
dicularly  to  the  line  F  A .  Wherefore  alfio  the  line  F  A  is  ere  fled perpendicularly  to  the  line 
G  H :  and  the  line  A  F  is  alfio  ere  fled  perpendicularly  to  the  line  D  E .  Wherefore  A  F  is  e- 
reeled  perpendicularly  to  either  ofithefie  lines  H  G  and  D  E.  But  if  a  right  line  he  ere  fled per¬ 
pendicularly  from  the  common feflion  of  two  right  lines  cutting  the  one  the  other, it jhall  alfio 
he  ere  fled  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  of  the  fiaid  two  lines  (by  the  4. of the  ele¬ 
uenth  )  .  Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  ere  fled perpendicularly  to  that fuperficies  wherin  the  lines 
E  D  and  G  H  are .  But  the  fuperficies  wherein  the  lines  E  D  and  G  H  are,  is  the  ground  fu¬ 
perficies  .  Wherefore  the  line  A  F  is  ere  fled perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  Wher- 
fiore from  a  point  geuen  on  high, namely,  fro  the point  A,  is  drawen  to  the  ground fuperficies 
a  perpendicular  line  :  which  was  required  to  be  done . 


In  this  figure  fball  ye  much  more  plainely  fee  both 
the  cafes  of  this  former  demonftratio.  For  as  touching 
the  firfi:  cafe,  ye  muft  eredle  perpendicularly  to  the 
groundfuperficies,  the  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen 
the  line  A  D,  and  compare  it  with  the  demonftration, 
and  it  will  be  clere  vnto  you.  For  the  fecond  cafe  ye 
m uft ere&e perpendicularly  vnto  the  ground  fuperfi- 
eies  the  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen  the  line  A  F,and 
vnto  it  let  the  other  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawen  the 
line  A  D,  incline, fo  that  the  point  &  of  the  one  may 
eoncurre  with  the  point  A  of  the  other:  and  fo  with  B 
your  figure  thus  ordered, compare  it  with  the  demon- 
}£rauon,  and  there  will  be  in  it  no  hardnes  at  all. 


o/Suclides  Elementes: 

fThe  2.  Problems.  The  i  zJPropoJition. 


11% 


Vnto  aplajne fuperfcies geuen3  and  from  apoynt  in  itgeuenjto  rayje  'Ip  a 
perpendicular  line. 


In  this  fecond  figure  ye  may  confider  playnely  the 
demonftration  of  the  former  propofition  if  ye  ere£t  per¬ 
pendicularly  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  drawne  the  lines 
ADandCp. 


f  T he  n .Theorems * 


The  (P 


tefuperf* 
felfe 


From  one  and  the  felfe  poynt 3  and  to  one  and  theJ 
desman  not  he  ereffied  two  perpendicular  right  h 
fame fide. 

Or  if  it  be  poffible  from  the  poynt  A  let  there  be  ereBed perpendicularly  to  one 
and  the felfe  fame  play  ne fuperfcies  two  right  lines  A  B  and  A  G  on  one  and 
the  felfe  fame  fide  .  And  extends 
the  fuperfcies  wherein  are  the  lines 
A  B  and  A  C  .*  and  it  jhall  make  at 
length  a  common feBion  in  the ground fuperfcies 
which  common  feBion  Jhall  be  a  right  line ,  and 
Jhall pafe  by  thepojnt  A:  let  that  common  feBion 
be  the  line  D  A  E  .Wherefore  ( by  the  $ .  of  the  ele- 
uenth )  the  lines  A  B,  A  C,and  D  A  E  are  in  one  « 

and  the  felfe  fame  playne fuperfcies .  And for af 

mnch  as  the  line  C  A  is  ereBed  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperfcies ,  therfore  (  by  the 

rf.ij.  2. de¬ 


ft 


CenfmBkn* 


Vernon  B ra¬ 
tion. 


Demnfira- 
tion  leading  to 
an  mpofibi- 
litie, 

Note  this 
manerofi- 
magination 
Mathemati¬ 
cal!, , 


umkaiingts 
an  imp&fitbi- 
Udt\ 


7 he  eleuenth  Boo^e 

2  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  )it  maheth  right  angles  with  all  the  right  lines  that  touch  it >  and 
are  in  the  ground fuperficies. But  the  line  DAE  toucheth  it,  being  in  the  ground fuperficies . 
Wherefore  the  angle  CAEw4  right  angle, and  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  the  angle  B  A  E  is 
aright  angle. Wherefore  (by  the  4  petitiorfthe  angle  CAE  is  e  quail  to  the  angle  BAE 
the  lefe  to  the  more,  both  angles  being  in  one  dr  the  ft  f  im* 

poffiile. Wherefore  from  one  and  the felfe fame  poynt,  fu - 

perfities  can  not  be  erected  two  perpendicular  right  Ik 
was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


In  this  figure  if  ye  ered  perpendicularly  the  fu- 
perficies  wherein  are  drawne  the  lines  b  a  and  c  a  to 
the  ground  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawn  the  line  dae5 
andfo  compare  it  with  the  thedemonftratioofthe  for 
mer  proportion  it  will  be  deare  vncoyou. 


A 


uch 


i 


M.  Dee  his  annotation. 

£»r//'<wWordes  in  this  i3.propofition  admit  two  cafes:  one, if  the  poynt  aifigned  be  in  the  playne 
fuperficies,(as  comonly  the  demonfirations  fuppofe)  the  other,if  the  poynt  aifigned  be  any  where  with 
out  the  fay d  playne  fuperficies ,  to  which ,  the  perpendiculars  fall,is  confidered  .  Contrary  to  either  of 
which, if  the  aduerfarxe  affirme ,  admitting  from  one  poynt  two  right  lines,  perpendiculars  to  one  and 
the  felfe  iame  playne  fuperficies,  and  on  one  and  the  fame  fide  thereof,by  the  tf.ofthe  eleuenth  he  may 
be  bridled ‘.which  will  tore  him  to  confeife  his  two  perpendiculars  to  be  alfo  parallels.  But  by  fuppofi- 
tion  agreed  one,they  concurre  at  one  and  the  fame  poynt.  which(by  the  definition  of  parallels  )  is  im- 
poifible.Therefore  our  aduerfary  mult  recant  aud  yelde  to  our  propofition. 

ff  The  i2.Tbeoreme.  The  14.  (propofition. 


To  ‘tyhatjoeuer  plaine fuperf  cieces  one  and  the  felfe  fame  right  line  is  e* 
retted  perpendicularly  :  thofe  fuperficieces  are  parallels  the  one  to  the 
other. 


Vppofe  that  a  right  line  A  B  be 
erected perpedicularly  to  either 
of  thefe  plaine  fuperficieces 
C  D  and  EF.T hen  1 fay,  that 


they  be  extended  they  will  at  the  length 
meete  .  Let  them  meete,ifit  be  pofiible. 
eJgow  then  their  common  fecit  on  (hall  (by 
the  3.  of  the  eleuenth  )  be  a  right  fiine. 
Let  that  common fechon be  GH .  cAind 
in  the  line  G  H  take  a  point  at  all  aduen- 
tures  and  let  the fame  be  K .  And  dr  awe  a 
right  line from  the  point  A  to  the  point  K, 
and  an  other  from  the  point  B  to  the  point 
K .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  AB  is  e- 


re&ed 


ofSuclides  Elementes .  FoL%  c. 


If  a  right  line  be  creeled  perpendicularly  to  one  ofthofe  fuperficies ,  it  Jhall  alfo  be  ereBed  perpetU 
dicularly  to  the  other. 

Forifitfhouldnot  beerefled  perpendicularly  to  the  other  *  then  it  falling  vpon  that  other  fhall 
make  with  fome  one  line  thereof  an  angle  lexTe  then  a  right  angle  '.which  line  fhould  ( by  the  y  .petition 
of  the  firit)concurre  with  fome  one  line  of  that  fuperficies  whereunto  ids  perpendicular .  So  that  thofe 
fuperficieces  lbould  not  be  parallels :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition .  For  they  are  fuppfed  to  be 
parallels. 

ff  The  1 3.  Theorems. .  The  is.  Tropofition. 

If  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  he  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other  and  not  being  in  the  felfe  fameplaine 
fuperficies ‘frith  the  two  firft :  the  plains  fuperficieces  extended  bj  thofe 
right  lines }  are  alfo  parallells  the  one  to  the  other. 

V ppofe  that  thefe  trvo  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other  bepa- 
1  rallells  to  thefe  two  right  lines  D  E  &  E  F  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other, and 
not  being  in  the felfe  fame  plaine  fuperficies  with  the  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C. 

:  T hen  I fay ,  that  the  plaine fuperficieces  hy  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  and  the  lines 
EE  and  EF  being  extended,  full  not  meete  together,  that 
is,  they  are  equedifiant  and parallels .  From  the  point  B  draw 
(by  the  u.of  the  eleuenth)  a  perpendicular  line  to  the  fu¬ 
perficies  wherein  are  the  lines  E  E  and  E  F,  and  let  that  per. 
pendicular  line  be  BG .  And  by  the  point  G  in  the  plaine fu¬ 
perficies  pafiing  by  E  E,and  E  F,draw  (by  the  31. of  thefirsl ) 

'untotheUneEE  a parallellline  G  H  :•  and  likewife  by  that 
point  G  draweinthe fame  fuperficies  <vnto  the  line  EFapa- 
rallell  line  G  K.  And for afinuch  as  the  line  B  G  is  ereBed  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  E  E  and 
E  F,  therefore  ( by  the  2.  definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  it  is  alfo 
ereBed  perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  which  touch  it, 
and  are  in  the felfe fame fuperficies  wherein  ar e  the  lines  E  E 

FF.iij.  and 


Confimtm . 


Tkmottjlra- 

tsm. 


7 he  eleuenth  TZooke 

2  .definition  of  the  eleuenth )it  maketh  right  angles  with  all  the  right  lines  that  touch  it,  and 
are  in  the  ground fuperficies. But  the  line  DAE  toucheth  it,  being  in  the  ground fuperficies . 
Wherefore  the  angle  C  A  E  is  a  right  angle, and  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  the  angle  B  A  E  is 
a  right  angle. Wherefore  (by  the  4 petition )the  angle  CAE  is  e quail  to  the  angle  BAE 
the  lefe  to  the  more,  both  angles  being  in  one  dr  the felfe fame play ne fuperfcies  nvhich  is  im* 
poffible.  Wherefore from  one  and  the  felfe fame poynt,  and  to  one  and  the felfe fame  play  ne fu~ 
perficies  can  not  be  erected  two  perpendicular  right  lines  on  one  &  the felfe fame fide:  which 
was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 


In  this  figure  if  ye  eredt  perpendicularly  the  fu- 
perficies  wherein  are  drawne  the  lines  b  a  and  c  a  to 
the  ground  fuperficies  wherein  is  drawn  the  line  daej 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  the  demonftratio  of  the  for 
mer  proportion  it  will  be  cleare  vnto  you. 


M.  Dee  his  annotation. 

Euc tides  wordes  in  this  ij.propofition  admit  two  cafes:  one, if  the  poynt  affigned  be  in  the  playne 
fuperficies,(as  comonly  the  demonfirations  fuppofe)the  other,if  the  poynt  affigned  be  any  where  with 
out  the  fayd  playne  fuperficies ,  to  which ,  the  perpendiculars  fall,is  confidered  .  Contrary  to  either  of 
which,  if  the  aduerfarxe  affirme ,  admitting  from  one  poynt  two  right  lines,  perpendiculars  to  one  and 
the  felfe  lame  playne  fuperficies,  and  on  one  and  the  fame  fide  thereof,by  the  6. of  the  eleuenth  he  may 
be  bridled:  which  will  fore  him  to  confeffe  his  two  perpendiculars  to  be  alfo  parallels.  But  by  fuppofi- 
tion  agreed  one,they  concurre  at  one  and  the  fame  poynt.  which(by  the  definition  of  parallels  )  is  im- 
poffible.Therefore  our  aduerfary  mull  recant  aud  yelde  to  our  propofition. 

ff  The  i2.Tbeoreme.  The  14.  ^Propofition. 

T 0  -tyhatfoeuer  plaine  fuperficieces  one  ajid  the  felfe  fame  right  line  is  e* 
retted  perpendicularly  :  thofe  fuperficieces  are  parallels  the  one  to  the 
other. 

Vppofe  that  a  right  line  A  B  be 
trebled perpedicularly  to  either 
of  thcfe  plaine  fuperficieces 
C  D  and  EFT hen  I fay,  that 
thefe  fuperficieces  C  D  and  E  F  are  paral¬ 
lels  the  one  to  the  other .  For  if  not,  then  if 
they  be  extended  they  will  at  the  length 
meete  .  Let  them  meete,ifit  be  pofiible. 

T[ow  then  their  common  fectton  / ball  ( by 
the  3.  of  the  eleuenth  )  be  a  right  fiine. 

Let  that  common  fechon  be  GH .  <^And 
in  the  line  G  H  take  a  point  at  all  aduen- 
tures  and  let  the fame  be  K .  And  dr  awe  a 
right  line from  the  point  A  to  the  point  K, 
and  an  other  from  the  point  B  to  the  point 
K .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  e- 


retfed 


ofSuclides  Elementes . 


FoLty  o* 


reeled  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine fuperfeies  EF,  therefore  the  line  A  B  is  alfo  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  K  which  is  in  the  extended  fuperfeies  E  F.Wherfore  the  angle 
A  3  K  is  a  right  angle .  <^And  hj  the  fame  reafon  alfothe  angle  B  A  K  is  a  right  angle. Wher- 
f ore  in  the  triangle  A  B  K ,thefe  two  angles  A  B  K  (f  B-A  K,  are  equall  to  two  right  angles: 
which  ( by  the  17  .of the frfl)  is  impofible .  Wherefore  thefe fuperfcieces  C  D  and  E  F  being 
extended  meete  not  together .  Wherefore  the  fuperfcieces  C  D  and  E  EAv>  <rallells.  Wher - 
fore  to  what foeuer plains fuperfcieces  one  and  the fclfe fame  rightjs  "'''Appendicu¬ 

lar ly  ;  thofe fuperfeies  are  parallels  the  one  to  the  other :  which 

In  this  figure  may  ye  plainly  fee  the  former  deraonflra- 
tion  if  ye  eredte  the  three  fiiperficieces,.  j 
K  L  M  perpediculary  to  the  gre  nnd  pis  me 
yet  in  fuch  fort  that  the  two  fuperficiec  y 
may  concurre  in  the  common  line  G  K  H, 
the  demonftration. 


A  corollary  added  by  Campane. 

If  a  right  line  be  ereSled  perpendicularly  to  one  of  thofe  fuperfeies  ,  it  fhall  alfi  be  ereSled  perpeti* 
dicularly  to  the  other. 

Forifitfhouldnoc  beeredted  perpendicularly  to  the  other ,  then  it  falling  vpon  that  other  fhall 
make  with  fome  one  line  thereof  an  angle  leffe  then  a  right  angle  ’.which  line  fhould  (by  the  j  .petition 
of  the  firll)concurre  with  fome  one  line  of  that  fuperficies  whereunto  it  is  perpendicular  .  So  that  thofe 
fuperficieces  fhould  not  be  parallels :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition .  For  they  are  fuppfed  to  be 
parallels. 


ff  The  13.T  heoreme. 


The  is.^ropofition. 


If  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  he  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other  and  not  being  in  the  felfe  fameplaine 
fuperfeies  "With  the  two  frft :  the  plains  fuperficieces  extended  by  thofe 
right  lines ?  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to  the  other. 

Fppofe  that  thefie  two  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other  be  pa- 
rallells  to  thefe  two  right  lines  D  E  &  E  F  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other, and 
not  being  in  the felfe fameplaine  fuperfeies  with  the  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C. 
T hen  I fay,  that  the  plaine fuperfcieces  by  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  and  the  lines 
DE  and  EF  being  extended,  fall  not  meete  together,  that 
is, they  are  equedif ant  and  parallels .  From  the point  B  draw 
(  by  the  it.  of  the  eleuenth  )  a  perpendicular  line  to  the  fu¬ 
perfeies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  E  and  E  E,  and  let  that  per. 
pendicular  line  he  BG .  And  by  the  point  G  in  the  plaine fu¬ 
perfeies pafing  by  D  E,and  E  F,draw  ( by  the  3 1  .of the  first ) 

'unto  the  line  EB  aparallellline  G  H  .*■  and  likewife  by  that 
point  G  draweinthe fame fuperfeies  •unto  the  line  E  F  a pa- 
rallell  line  G  K.  And forafnuch  as  the  line  B  G  is  erecled per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the fuperfeies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  E  and 
E  E,  therefore  ( by  the  2.  definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  it  is  alfo 
erecled  perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  which  touch  it, 
find  are  in  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  E 


VV.if 


and 


Conjlmtm . 


DemonJIrd- 

tion. 


ofSuclides  Elementes . 


retted  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperfcies  E  F,  therefore  the  line  A  B  is  alfo  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  I<  which  is  in  the  extended fuperfcies  E  FWherfore  the  angle 
ABK  is  a  right  angle .  <^And  by  the fame  reafon  alfothe  angle  B  A  K  is  a  right  angle. Wher- 
fore  in  the  triangle  A  B  K, thefe  two  angles  A  B  K  &  B-  A  I(,  are  equall  to  two  right  angles: 
which  ( by  the  iy.ofthefrfl )  is  impofible .  Wherefore  thefe fnperfcieces  C  D  and E  F  being 
extended  meete  not  together .  Wherefore  the fuperfcieces  C  D  and  E  F  areparallells.  Wher- 
fore  to  what foeuer  plain  e fuperfcieces  one  and  the felfe fame  right  line  is  erected perpendicu-> 
larly  ;  thofe  fuperfcies  areparallells  the  one  to  the  other :  which  was  required  to  he proued. 


In  this  figure  may  ye  plainly  fee  the  former  demonftra- 
tion  if  ye  eredte  the  three  fuperficieces,  j 
KLM  perpediculary  to  the  ground  plain's 
yet  in  fitch  fort  that  the  two  fuperficiecs: 
may  concurre  nt  the  common  line  G  K  H  J 
the  demonftration. 


A  corollary  added  by  Campane. 

If  a  right  line  be  erected  perpendicularly  to  one  of  thofe  fuperfcies ,  it  fan .  ^  be  ended  perpetf* 
dicularly  to  the  other. 


Forifitfhouldnot  beeredled  perpendicularly  to  the  other ,  then  it  falling  vpon  that  other  fliall 
make  with  fome  one  line  thereofan  angle  lefie  then  a  right  angle '.which  line  flhould  (by  the  j.  petition 
of  the  firfi)concurre  with  fome  one  line  of  that  fuperficies  whereunto  itis  perpendicular .  So  that  thofe 
fuperficieces  fhould  not  be  parallels :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppolition  .  For  they  are  fuppfed  to  be 
parallels. 


f  The  1 3.  Theorems,  The  is.Tropofition. 


If  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  he  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other  and  not  being  in  the  felfe  fameplaine 
fuperficies  'frith  the  two firft :  the  plains  fuperficieces  extended  bj  thofe 
right  lines }  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to  the  other. 

Vppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other  be  pa - 
'  rallells  to  thefe  two  right  lines  D  E&EF  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other, and 
not  being  in  the felfefame  plaine  fuperfcies  with  the  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C. 
T hen  /  fay,  that  the  plaine fuperfcieces  by  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  and  the  lines 
J)  E  and  EF  being  extended, fall  not  meete  together,  that 
is, they  are  equedif ant  and  parallels .  From  the point  B  draw 
(  by  the  11.  of  the  eleuenth)  a  perpendicular  line  to  the  fu¬ 
perfcies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F,  and  let  that  per. 
pendicular  line  be  B  G.  And  by  the  point  G  in  the  plaine  fu¬ 
perfcies pafing  by  D  E,and  E  F,draw  (by  the  31. of the  fir  si) 

•vntothe  line  ED  a  par allell  line  G  H :  and  likewife  by  that 
point  G  dr  awe  in  the fame fuperfcies  vntothe  line  E  Fa  pa¬ 
raded  line  G  K,  And forafwuch  as  the  line  B  G  is  erected  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  fuperfcies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and 
E  F,  therefore  ( by  the  2.  definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  it  is  alfo 
erected  perpendicularly  to  ad  the  right  lines  which  touch  it, 
pnd are  in  the  felfe  fame  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E 

W.iq.  and 


3 


Coujlructmt 


Demoti/lra- 

tion. 


ofSuclides  Elementes.  FoL ft  o. 

-  noted  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine fuperfcies  E  F,  therefore  the  line  A  B  is  alfo  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  I(  which  is  in  the  extended  fuperfcies  E  F  .Wherfore  the  angle 
A  BK  is  a  right  angle .  <^4nd  by  the  fame  reafon  alfothe  angle  B  A  K  is  a  right  angle.  Wher¬ 
fore  in  the  triangle  A  b  K,thefe  two  angles  A  B  K  &  B-AK,  are  equall to  two  right  angles: 
which  ( by  the  17  .ofthefrfl )  is  impofible .  Wherefore  thefi  fuperfcieces  C  D  and  E  F  being 
extended  meete  not  together .  Wherefore  the  fuperfcieces  C  D  and  E  F  areparallells.  Wher¬ 
fore  to  what foeuer  plain  e fuperfcieces  one  am. I  the fife fame  right  line  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  :  thofe fuperfcies  are  parallels  the  one  to  the  other :  which  was  required  to  be  pr  cued. 


In  this  figure  may  ye  plainly  fee  the  former  demonftra- 
tionif  ye  eredte  the  three  fuperficieces,] 

K  L  M  perpediculary  to  the  ground  pkin'cl 
yet  in  inch  fort  that  the  two  fuperficiec  ■ 
may  concurre  in  the  common  line  G  K  H  J 
the  demonftration. 


'-d  es 

CQ 

W  ’ 

A  corollary  added  by  Campane, 

If  a  right  line  be  eretled  perpendicularly  to  one  of  thofe  fuperfcies ,  it  Jhan . 
dicularly  to  the  other. 


<  be  eretled perpefi * 


Forifitihouldnot  beere&ed  perpendicularly  to  the  other ,  then  it  falling  vpon  that  other  ihall 
make  with  fome  one  line  thereof an  angle  leite  then  a  right  angle:  which  line  fhould  (by  the  5  .petition 
of  the  firft)concurre  with  fome  one  line  of  that  fuperficies  whereunto  it  is  perpendicular  .  So  that  thofe 
fuperficieces  fliould  not  be  parallels :  which  is  contrary  to  the  fuppofition  .  For  they  are  fuppfed  to  be 
parallels. 


The  13.  Theorems.  The  is.Tropofition , 


If  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  he  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other  and  not  being  in  the  felfe  fameplaine 
fuperficies  icith  the  two  frft :  the  plains  fuperficieces  extended  hj  thofe 
right  lines }  are  alfo  parallells  the  one  to  the  other. 


Conjlmtiott • 


Tkmotijlrt- 

thn. 


T  he  eleuenth  $  ookf 

mlEF .  But  either  of  thefe  lines  G II  an<LG  K  touch  it,  and 
are  alfo  in  the fuperfcies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F, 
therefore  either  of  the fe  angles  BGH,  and  BG  K,  is  a  right 
angle .  And  ferafmucb  as  the  line  B  A  is  a  parallell  to  the  line 
GH  (that  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K  are  par allellsrvnto  the  lines 
A  B  and  B  C  it  is  man  if  eft  by  the  9.0 ft  his  booke  )  :  there - 
fore  (  by  the  29 .  of the firjl )  the  angles  G  B  A  and  BGH  are 
e quail  to  two  right  angles .  But  the  angle  B  G  H  is  (by  con- 
fir uB. id )  a  right  angle,  t her  fore  alfo  the  angle  G  B  A  is  a  right 
angle  •  therefore  the  line  G  Bis  erected  perpendicularly  to  the 
line  B  A.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  it  be  proued,  that 
the  line  B  G  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  line  BC  .  1 'how 
forafmuch  as  the  right  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to 
theft  two  right  lines  B  A  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other , 
therefore  (  by  the  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the  line  B  G  is  erected 

perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  A  and  B  C . '  And  it  is  alfo  ercEted 
perpendicularly  1 0  the  paper f  ides  wherein  are  the  lines  GH  and  GK  .  But  the  fuperficies 
wherein  are  the  lines  G II  and  G  K,is  that  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F : 
wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  erebled perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E 
and  E  F  .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are 
the  lines  D  E  and  E  F,  and  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C .  But  if  one 
and  the felfe  fame  right  line  be  erected perpendicularly  to  plaine fuperficieces ,  thofe  fuperfi. 
cieces  are  ( by  the  1 4.0ft  he  eleuenth )  parallels  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is  a  parallel  to  the  fuperficies  wherin  are  the  lines  D  E  and 
E  F .  if  therefore  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  [be  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other ,  and  not  being  in  the  felfe  fame  plaine  fuperficies  with 
the  two fir  ft,  the  plaine fuperficieces  extended  by  thofe  right  lines  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to 
the  other  which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated. 


By  this  figure  here  pue,ye  may  more  clerel 
the  former  if  .Propofition  and  alfo  rhe  den^, 
therof :  if  ye  erefie  perpendicularly  vnto  t; 
fuperficies , thethree  fuperficieces  AEC,  K 
LHB  M,  and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demontf  rati! 


f? 

3 

L 

'  M 

L 

■ 

K 

: 

Cs 

A  Corollary  added  by  Fluffas. 

VntoapUine  fuperficies  being  geuen, to  draws  bj  a  point  geuen  without  it,  a  parallel  plaine  fuperfieiet. 
Suppofe  as  in  the  former  defeription  that  the  fuperficies  geue  be  ABC,  &  let  the  point  geue  without 
it  be  G  .  Now  then  by  the  point  G  drawe  (  by  the  3 1  .of  the  firft  )  vnto  the  lines  A  B  andB  C  parallel 
lines  GH  and  H  K .  And  the  fuperficies  extended  by  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K  fhall  be  parallel  vnto  the 
fuperficies  A  B  C,  by  this  1  j.Propofition. 

T he  14.  T beoreme.  The  16.  <? ropofition . 

If  two  parallel playne  fuperficieces  he  cut  by  fiome  one  playne  fuperficies t 
their  common  jeSfions  are  parallel  lines. 

I  tppfift  that  thefe  two  plaine  fuperficieces  A  B  and  CD  he  cut  by  this  plaine fit - 
'  perficies  EFG  H,and  let  their  common  fictions  be  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G 
H  ft hen  I fay  that  the  line  E  Fisa  parallel  to  the  line  G  H.  For  if  not,  then  the 
lanes  E  F  and  G  H  being  produced, fhall  at  the  length  meete  together  either  on 

the 


I 


the  fide  that  the pointes  F,H  are,  or  on 
the  fide  that  the -pointes  E,G  are.  Firfi 
let  them  be  produced  on  that fide  that 
the  pointes  F,H  are, and  let  them  mete 
in  the  point  K.^And forafmuch  as  the 
line  EF K  is  in  the  fuperficies  AB, 
therfore  all  the  points  which  are  in  the 
line  E  F  are  in  the fuperficies  A  B  (by 
the  fir B  of this  books  )  But  one  of  the 
pointes  which  are  in  the  right  line  E  F 
K  is  the point  K,  therfore  the  point  K 
is  in  the  fuperficies  A  B.  ^And  by  the 
famereafon  alfo  the  point  K  is  in  the 
fuperficies  C 1).  Wherfore  the  two  fit- 
perficieces  A  B  and  C  D  being  produ¬ 
ced  do  mete  together,  but  by  fuppofitio 
they  mete  not  together, for  they  are  fup 
pofed  to  be  parallels  .Wherfore  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G  B  produced 
on  that fide  that  the  pointes  E,H  are. In  like  fort  alfo  may  weproue 
and  G  H produced  meetc  not  together  on  that fide  that  the  pointes . 
which  being  produced  on  no  fide  mete  together,  are  parallels,  (by  t 
firfl.)  Wherfore  the  line  E  F  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  G  BJftherfo 
perficieces  be  cut  by  fome  one  plaine  fuperficies  their  common  fe 
which  was  required  to  be proned. 


This  figure  here  fet  more 
demonflration,if  ye  eredl  perpen 
fuperficies  the  three  fuperficieces  A  B, 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  dem 


Vemoxflra- 
turn  leading  to 
m  abfv.tiitie' 


A  Corollary  added  by  Flufias. 

If tV?o  plaine  fuperficieces  beparallels  to  one  and  the felfe fame  playne fuperficies;  they JhaUalJo  bi 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other, or  they  fall  make  one  and  the  felfe fame  plaine  fuperficies. 


For  if  the  plaine  fuperficieces  DG  and  GH 
being  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fuperfi- 
cies, namely,  to  A  B  be  not  alfo  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other,then  being  produced  they  lhall  con- 
currefby  the  conuerfe  of  the  fixt  definition  of  the 
eleuenth)  Let  them  concurre  in  the  rightline  G 
E.Then  I  fay  that  the  fuperficieces  G  D  and  G  H 
are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies. 
Draw  in  the  playne  fuperficies  A  B  a  right  line  at 
alladuentures  A  C.And  by  that  right  lyne  &the 
point  E  extende  a  playne  fuperficies,  cutting  the 
two  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  by  the  rightlines 
E  D  and  E  I.  „W herfore  tile  right  lines  A  C  and  D 
E,alfo  A  C  and  E I  are  parallels  by  this  propofiti- 
•oh  .But  the  lines  D  Eand  El  forafmuch  as  they 
concurre  in  the  point  E  are  not  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other.  Wherefore  the  right  lines  DE  and 
E  I  make  direftly  one  right  line  (by  that  which  is 
added  after  the  $o.  propofiton  of  the  firft.)  And 
therfore  the  plaine  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are 
in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies .  For 


VV.  iiii. 


J 


if 


T  he  eleuenth  2?  ookf 

m'l  E  F .  But  either  ofthefe  lines  G II  ancLG  K  touch  it,  and 
are  alfo  in  the  j uperfcies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  EF, 
therefore  either  of  thefe  angles  BGH,  and  BG  K,  is  a  right 
angle .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  B  A  is  a  parallell  to  the  line 
G  H  (that  the  lines  G  IF  and  G  K  are  par allells  vnto  the  lines 
AB  and  BC  it  is  manifejl  by  the  p.ofthis booke  )  :  there - 
fore  ( by  the  29 .  of  the firjl )  the  angles  GB  A  and  B  G  H  are 
e  quail  to  two  right  angles.  But  the  angle  BGH  is  ( by  con- 
frucho )  a  right  angle,  therfore  alfo  the  angle  G  B  A  is  a  right 
angle  ■  therefore  the  line  G  Bis  erected  perpendicularly  to  the 
line  B  A.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  it  be  proued,  that 
the  line  B  G  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  line  BC  .  Flow 
forafmuch  as  the  right  line  B  G  is  erected perpendicularly  to 
thefe  two  right  lines  B  A  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other , 
therefore  (  by  the  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the  line  B  G  is  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  A  and  B  C .  ’And  it  is  alfo  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  G  H  and  GK  .  But  the  fuperficies 
wherein  are  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K ,is  that  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F: 
wherefore  the  hnt  BG  is  eretted perpendicularly  to  the fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E 
and  E  F  .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  erected,  perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are 
the  lines  D  E  and  E  F,  and  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C .  But  if  one 
and  the fetfe  fame  right  line  he  erected perpendicularly  to  plaine fuperficieces,  thofe  fuperfi- 
cieces  are  (by  the  14. of  the  eleuenth )  parallels  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the fuperficies 
wherin  are  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is  a  parallel  to  the  fuperficies  wherin  are  the  lines  D  E  and 
E  F .  if  therefore  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  [be  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other,  and  net  being  in  the f  elf e  fame  plaine  fuperficies  with 
the  two fir  ft,  the  plaine fuperficieces  extended  by  thofe  right  lines  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to 
the.  other  which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated. 


By  this  figure  here  put,ye  may  more  clerely  fee  both  " 
theformer  if. Proposition  and  alfo  the  demonfitration 
therof :  if  ye  erefte  perpendicularly  vnto  the  ground 
fuperficies , the, three  fuperficieces  ABC,  KHE,  and 
LHB  M,  and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonfiration. 

%  A  Corollary  added  by  Fluffas. 

VntoapUine  fuperficies  being  geuenjo  dr  awe  bj  n  point  geuen  without  it,  a  paruSel  plaine  fupefieiet. 

Suppofe  as  in  theformerdefeription  that  the  fuperficies  geue  be  ABC,  &  let  the  point  geue  without 
it  he  G.  Now  then  by  the  point  G  drawe  (  by  the  3 1  .of  the  firft  )  vnto  the  lines  A  Bands  C  parallel 
lines  G  H  and  H  K .  And  the  fuperficies  extended  by  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K  fhall  be  parallel  vnto  the 
fuperficies  A  B  C,  by  this  if  .Proposition. 

T he  14.  T heoreme.  The  16.  <P ropofition . 

If  two  parallel playne  fuperficieces  he  cut  bj  fiome  one  playne  fuperficies: 
their  common fell  ions  are  parallel  lines. 

!  Fpppfe  that  thefe  two  plaine fuperficieces  A  Band  CD  be  cut  by  this  plaine fit- 
!  perficies  EF  G  H,and  let  their  common  fictions  be  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G 
j  H . Then  I fay  that  the  line  EF  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  G  H.  For  if  not,  then  the 
lines  E  F  and  G  ti  being  produced, fhall  at  the  length  meete  together  either  on 

the 


) 


t 


T  he  eleuenth  $ 


mdE  F .  But  either  ofthefe  lines  G II andG  K  touch  it,  and 
are  alfo  in  the  fuperfcies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  EF, 
therefore  either  ofthefe  angles  BGH ,  and  BG  K,  is  a  right 
angle .  And forafmuch  as  the  line  B  A  is  a  far  all  ell  to  the  line 
■GH  ( that  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K  are  parallells  vnto  the  lines 
A  B  and  BC  it  is  man  if  eft  by  the  p.ofthisbooke )  :  there¬ 
fore  (  by  the  29 .  of  the  fir  ft  )  the  angles  GB  A  and  BGH  are 
equall  to  two  right  angles .  But  the  angle  B  G  H  is  (by  con- 
ftruBio )  a  right  angle,  therfore  alfo  the  angle  G  B  A  is  a  right 
angle  •  therefore  the  line  G  B  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the 
line  B  A.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  it  be  proued,  that 
the  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  line  B  C  .  Flow 
forafmuch  as  the  right  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to 
thefe  two  right  lines  B  A  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other,  D  r 

therefore  (  by  the  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the  line  B  G  is  erected 

perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  A  and  B  C . '  And  it  is  alfo  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the piper  fetes  wherein  are  the  lines  GH  and  GK  .  But  the  fuperficies 
wherein  are  the  lines  G  H  and  GK  ,is  that  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F: 
wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  eredted perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E 
and  E  F  .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are 
the  lines  I)  E  and  E  F,  and  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C .  But  if  one 
and  the  felfe fame  right  line  be  erected perpendicularly  to  pi aine  fuperficieces ,  thofe  fuperfi- 
cieces  are  (by  the  14.  of  the  eleuenth )  parallels  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is  a  parallel  to  the  fuperficies  wherin  are  the  lines  D  E  and 
E  F .  if  there  fore  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  [be  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other ,  and  not  being  in  the  felfe  fame  plain  e  fuperficies  with 
the  two fir  ft,  the  plaine fuperficieces  extended  by  thofe  right  lines  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to 
the  other  which  was  required  to  be  demonftrated. 


t 


By  this  figure  here  put,ye  may  more  clerel 
the  former  if  .Propofition  and  alfo  rhe  detr^ 
thesrof :  if  ye  erode  perpendicularly  vnto  t; 
fuperficies , the, three  fuperficieces  ABC,  K 
LHB  M,  and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demon!!  rati! 


A  Corollary  added  by  Fluffas. 

Vntoaploine  fuperficies  being  geuen,to  drome  bj  o  point  geuen  without  it,  a  parotid  plaine  fupefieies. 

Suppofe  as  in  the  farmer  defeription  that  the  fuperficies  geue  be  ABC,&  let  the  point  geue  without 
it  he  G.  Now  then  by  the  point  G  drawe(bythe  3  i.ofthefirft)  vnto  the  lines  ABanaB  C  parallel 
lines  G  H  and  H  K  -  And  the  fuperficies  extended  by  rhe  lines  G  H  and  G  K  fhall  be  parallel  vnto  the 
fuperficies  A  B  C3  by  this  1  j.Propofition. 


T  he  14.T beoreme.  The  16.  Tropofition. 

If  two  parallel  playne  fuperficieces  be  cut  by  fome  one  playne  fuperficies: 
their  common  fe&ions  are  parallel  lines. 


Vpppfe  that  thefe  two  plaine fuperficieces  A  B  and  C  D  be  cut  by  this  plaine fu¬ 
perficies  E  F  GH  ,and  let  their  common  feclions  be  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G 

I  hP* 1!  1  H°r ^en  1 ^at  'tne  EFisa  fMllel t0  the  line  G  H.  For  if  not,  then  the 

^ms  %  F  and  G  H  being  produced, fhall  at  the  length  meete  together  either  on 

the 


T he  eleuenth  2?  coke 


ml  EF  .But  either  of  thefe  lines  G II  andG  K  touch  it,  and 
are  alfo  in  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F, 
therefore  either  of  thefe  angles  BGH,  and  BG  K,  is  a  right 
angle .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  B  A  is  a  parallell  to  the  line 
GH  (that  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K  are  par allells  vnto  the  lines 
AB  and  BC  it  is  rnamfef  by  the  9  .of this  booke )  :  there¬ 
fore  ( by  the  29.  of  the firjl )  the  angles  GB  A  and  B  GH  are 
equall  to  two  right  angles.  But  the  angle  B  G  H  is  (by  con- 
frticlid )  a  right  angle,  t her  fore  alfo  the  angle  G  B  A  is  a  right 
angle  •  therefore  the  line  G  B  is  erecled  perpendicularly  to  the 
line  B  A.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  it  be  proued,  that 
the  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  line  BC  .  lioxv 
forafmuch  as  the  right  line  BG  is  erecled  perpendicularly  to 
thefe  two  right  lines  B  A  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other ,  D  F 

therefore  (  by  the  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the  line  B  G  is  erected 

perpendicularly  to  the  fnperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  A  and  B  C . '  And  it  is  alfo  ercEied 
perpendicular  Ij  to  the fiperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  GH  and  GK  .  But  the  fuperficies 
wherein  arethe lines  G  H and  G  K ris  that fuperficies  wherein  are  thelines  D  E  and  E  F: 
wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E 
and  E  F  .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the fuperficies  wherein  are 
the  lines  D  E  and  E  E,  and  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  thelines  A  B  and  B  C .  But  if  one 
andthefelfe.  fame  right  line  he  erected  perpendicularly  toplainefuperficieces,  thofe  fuperfi- 
cieces  are  ( by  the  i^.ofthe  eleuenth )  parallels  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is  a  parallel  to  the  fuperficies  rvherin  are  the  lines  D  E  and 
E  F .  if  therefore  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other  [be  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other ,  and  not  being  in  thejelfe  fame  plaine  fuperficies  with 
the  two firfly  the  plaine fuperfmeces  extended  by  thofe  right  lines  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to 
the  other  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


By  this  figure  here  puc,ye  may  more  clerek 
the  former  if.Propoficionand  alfo  the  detr^ 
therof :  if  ye  erefte  perpendicularly  vnto  t\ 
fuperficies , the, three  fuperficieces  ABC,  K 1 
IHBM,  and  fc  compare  it  with  the  demonilratic 


A  T 


r 


/ 


%  A  Corollary  added  by  Fluffas. 

FntoupUine  fuperficies  being  gcuen,to  draws  bj  *  point  geuen  without  it,  a  parallel  plaine  fuperficies. 
Suppofe  as  in  the  former  defeription  that  the  fuperficies  geue  be  A  B  C,  8c  let  the  point  geue  without 
it  he  G  .  Now  then  by  the  point  G  drawe  (  by  the  3 1  .of  the  firft  )  vnto  thelines  A  B  and  8  C  parallel 
lines  GHattdHK.  And  the  fuperficies  extended  by  thelines  GHandGK  fhall  be  parallel  vnto  the 
fuperficies  A  B  Cs  by  this  if.Propofition, 


T he  14.  T beoreme.  Tire  16.  ^ropofition. 

If  two  parallel playne  fuperficieces  he  cut  by  fiome  one  playne  fuperficies : 
their  common  fictions  are  parallel  lines. 

Vpppfe  that  thefe  two  plaine  fuperficieces  A  B  and  C  D  be  cut  by  this  plaine fu¬ 
perficies  EFG  H,and  let  their  common  feclions  be  the  right  lines  E  F  andG 
H.T hen  l fay  that  the  line  E  Fisa  parallel  to  the  line  G  H.  For  if  not,  then  the 
Imes  E  F  and  G  B  being  produced, fhall  at  the  length  meete  together  either  o» 

the 


T he  eleventh  $  mkjs 

mdEF .  But  either  ofthefe  lines  G II  andG  K  touch  it,  and 
are  alfo  in  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  EF, 
therefore  either  ofthefe  angles  BGH,  and  BG  K,  is  a  right 
angle .  And forafmuch  as  the  line  B  A  is  a  parallell  to  the  line 
G  H  (that  the  lines  G  H andG  K  are par allells  vnto  the  lines 
AB  and  BC  it  is  man  iff  by  the  p.ofthisbooke )  :  there - 
fore  ( by  the  29.  of  the firfi  )  the  angles  G  B  A  and  B  G,H  are 
e quail  to  two  right  angles .  But  the  angle  B  G  H  is  (by  con- 
firuBio)  a  right  angle,  t  her  fore  alfo  the  angle  G  B  A  is  a  right 
angle  •  therefore  the  line  G  B  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the 
line  B  A.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  may  it  be  proued,  that 
the  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  line  BC  .  Cpow 
forafmuch  as  the  right  line  B  G  is  erected perpendicularly  to 
thefe  two  right  lines  B  A  and  B  C  touching  the  one  the  other , 
therefore  (  by  the  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the  line  h  G  is  erected 

perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  B  A  and  B  C . And  it  is  alfo  erected 
perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  GH  and  G  K  .  But  the  fuperficies 
wherein  are  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K ,  is  that  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F: 
wherefore  the  line  BGts  erdled perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  D  E 
and  E  F  .  Wherefore  the  line  B  G  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  fuperficies  wherein  are 
the  lines  I)  E  and  E  E,  and  to  the  f uperficies  wherein  are  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C .  But  if  one 
and  the  fife  fame  right  line  be  erdted perpendicularly  to  plaine fuperficieces,  thofi  fuperfi- 
cieces  are  ( by  the  14.0ft he  eleuenth )  parallels  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  the  lines  A  B  and  BC  is  a  parallel  to  the  fuperficies  wherin  are  the  lines  D  E  and 
E  F .  If  therefore  two  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other', be  parallels  to  two  other  right 
lines  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other,  and  not  being  in  the Jelfe  fame  plaine  fuperficies  with 
the  two firfi,  the  plaine fuperficieces  extended  by  thofe  right  lines  are  alfo  parallels  the  one  to 
the  other  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


By  this  figure  here  put,ye  may  more  clerel 
the  former  xj.Propoficion  and  alfo  rhe  derfi 
therof :  if  ye  eredte  perpendicularly  vnto 
fuperficies ,  the, three  fuperficieces  ABC,  K 
iHB  M,and  fa  compare  it  with  the  demonfiratli 


A  Corollary  added  by  Fluffas . 

Vnto  a  p Line  fuperficies  being  gcuen,to  drawc  bj  a  point  getters  vrtthout  it,  a  parallel  plaine  fiuperfieiet. 

Suppofe  as  in  the  former  defeription  that  the  fuperficies  geue  be  ABC,&  let  the  point  geue  without 
it  be  G .  Now  then  by  the  point  G  drawe(bythe  3 1. of  the  firfi)  vnto  the  lines  A  BanaBC  parallel 
lines  G  H  and  H  K .  And  the  fuperficies  extended  by  the  lines  G  H  and  G  K  fhall  be  parallel  vnto  the 
fuperficies  A  B  C,  by  this  ij.Propofition. 


T  he  14.T beoreme.  Tire  16.  ropofition . 

If  two  parallel playne  fuperficieces  he  cut  by  fame  one  playne  fuperficies: 
their  common feffions  are  parallel  lines. 

!  F'pppfe  that  thefe  two  plaine  fuperficieces  A  B  and  CD  be  cut  by  this  plaine fit- 
I  perficies  EF  G  H,and  let  their  common  fictions  be  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G 
j  D  ft hen  l fay  that  the  line  EF  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  G  H.  For  if  not,  then  the 
lines  E  F  and  G  H  beingproduced,fhall  at  the  length  meete  together  either  on 

the 


/ 


of  Suclides  Element es* 

the fide  that  the  pointes  F,H  are,  or  on 
the  fide  that  the  pointes  E,G  are.  Firjl 
let  them  be  produced  on  that fide  that 
the  point es  F,H  are,  and  let  them  mete 
in  the  point  K.^yind forafmuch  as  the 
line  EF K  is  in  the  fuperficies  AB, 
therfore  all  the  points  which  are  in  the 
line  E  Fare  in  the fuperficies  A  B  (by  3 
the fir  A  of  this  booke )  But  one  of  the 
point  es  which  are  in  the  right  line  E  F 
it  is  the  point  1C,  therfore  t he point  K 
is  in  the  fuperficies  AB.  o End  by  the 
famereafon  alfo  the  point  K  is  in  the 
fuperficies  C  D .  Wherfore  the  two  ft - 
perficieces  A  B  and  C  D  being  produ¬ 
ced  do  mete  together,  but  by  fuppofitio 
they  mete  not  together, for  they  are  fup 
pofed  to  be  parallels. Wherfore  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G  II  produced/^ 
on  that  fide  that  the pointes  F,H  are. In  like  fort  alfo  may  weprouefri - 


Fol.nu 


wether 


which  was  required  to  be proned. 

This  figure  here  fet  more  plainly  declareth  the  former 
demonftration,ifye  eredt  perpendicularly  vnco  the  ground 
fuperficies  the  three  fuperficieces  A  B,C  D,  and  E  F  K  H  G, 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonllration . 


e\F  H 

EF 

■j 

mes 

t\ 

'the 

3 

fu- 

e\ 

; 

i  .  .  . 

lest 

it 

A  Corollary  added  by  Flufas. 

Ifttyo  fame fuperficieces  be  parallels  to  one  and  thefdfe fame  piayne fuperficies; 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other, or  they  fintll  make  one  and  the  felfe fame  plaine fuperficies, 

Foriftheplaine  fuperficieces  D  G  and  GH 
being  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fuperfi¬ 
cies, namely,  to  A  B  be  not  alfo  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other,then  being  produced  they  lhall  con- 
curref  by  the  conuerfe  of  the  fixt  definition  of  the 
eleuenth)  Let  them  concurre  in  therightlineG 
E.Then  I  fay  that  the  fuperficieces  G  D  and  G  H 
are  in  one  and  the  'felfe  fame  piayne  fuperficies. 

Draw  in  the  piayne  fuperficies  A  B  a  right  line  at 
alladuentures  A  C.And  by  that  right  lyne  &the 
point  E  extende  a  piayne  fuperficies,  cutting  the 
two  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  by  the  right  lines 
E  D  and  E I.  ..Wherfore  tile  right  lines  AC  and  D 
E,alfo  A  C  and  E I  are  parallels  by  this  propofiti- 
oa  .But  the  lines  D  E  and  El  forafmuch  as  they 
concurre  in  the  point  E  are  not  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other.  Wherefore  the  right  lines  DE  and 
E I  make  diredly  one  right  line  (by  that  which  is 
added  after  the  jo.  propofiton  of  the  firit.)  And 
therfore  the  plaine  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are 
in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  piayne  fuperficies .  For 

VV,  jiii. 


ll 


if 


Vemorilra- 
tion  leading  to 

Lr  • 

m  abjuriitie' 


\ 


; 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


Fol.nu 


the fide  that  the pointes  F,H  are ,  or  on 
the fide  that  the  pointes  E,G  are.  Firfi 
let  them  be  produced  on  that fide  that 
the  point es  F,H  are, an  diet  them  mete 
in  the  point  K.^And forafmuch  as  the 
line  EF  K  is  in  the  fuperficies  AB, 
therfore  all  the  points  which  are  in  the 
UneE  Fare  in  the fuperficies  A  B  (by  3 
the firA  of  this  booke )  But  one  of  the 
point es  which  are  in  the  right  line  E  F 
K  is  the point  K ,  therfore  the  point  K 
is  in  the  fuperficies  A  B.  '-^And  by  the 
famereafon  alfo  the  point  K  is  in  the 
fuperficies  C  D .  Wherforethetwo  fit - 
perficieces  A  B  and  C  D  being  produ¬ 
ced  do  mete  together,  but  by  fuppcfiiio 
they  mete  not  together, for  they  are ftp 
pofed  to  be  parallels  .Wherfore  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G  H  produced /ball  not  meete  together 
on  that fide  that  the pointes  F ,H  are. In  like fort  alfo may  we proue  that  the  right  lines  EF 
and  G  H produced  meete  not  together  on  that fide  that  the  pointes  E,G  are.  But  right  lines 
which  being  produced  on  nofide  mete  together,  are  paralfik  (by  the  lajl  definition  oftht 
firfi.)  Wherfore  the  line  E  Fisa  parallel  to  the  line  G  H. if  therfore  two  parallel  plaine  fit - 
perficieces  be  cut  by  fome  one  plaine  fuperficies  their  common  fictions  are  parallel  lines ; 
which  was  required  to  be proued. 


This  figure  here  fet  more  plainly  decl 
demonflration,ifye  ereft  perpendicularly 
fuperficies  the  three  fuperficieces  A  B,C  E 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonftration 


A  Corollary  added  by  Flufias. 

TfitVeo  fame fuperficieces  be  parallels  to  one  and  thefdfe fame  play  ft 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other, or  they  fimll  make  one  and  the  felfe fame  plat 

For  if  the  plaine  fuperficieces  D  G  and  GH 
being  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fuperfi- 
cies, namely,  to  A  B  be  not  alfo  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other,then  being  produced  they  fhall  con- 
currefby  the  conuerfe  of  the  fixt  definition  of  the 
eleuenth)  Let  them  concurre  in  the  rightline  G 
E.Then  I  fay  that  the  fuperficieces  G  D  and  G  H 
are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies. 

Draw  in  the  playne  fuperficies  A  B  a  right  line  at 
alladuentures  A  C.And  by  that  right  lyne  &the 
point  E  extende  a  playne  fuperficies,  cutting  the 
two  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  by  the  rightlines 
E  D  and  E  I.  -W herfore  tile  right  lines  A  C  and  D 
E,alfo  A  C  and  E I  are  parallels  by  this  propofiti- 
-on  .But  the  lines  D  E  and  El  forafmuch  as  they 
concurre  in  the  point  E  are  not  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other.  Wherefore  the  right  lines  D  E  and 
E  I  make  directly  one  right  line  (by  that  which  is 
added  after  the  50.  propofiton  of  the  firft.)  And 
therfore  the  plaine  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are 
in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies  .  For 


c 


o 


fobe 


U 


Vemotfira- 
tion  leading  to 
an  abfunlitie' 


W.  iiii. 


if 


/ 


ofSuclides  Elementes * 

the fide  that  the  point es  F,H  are,  or  on 
the  fide  that  the  pointes  E,  G  are.  Firfi 
let  them  be  produced  on  that fide  that 
the  point  es  F,H  are, and  let  them  mete 
in  the  point  K.^And forafimuch  as  the 
line  EF K  is  in  the  fuperficies  AB, 
therfore  all  the  points  which  are  in  the 
line  E  Fare  in  the fuperficies  A  B  (by  3 
the firfi  of  this  booke )  But  one  of  the 
point  es  which  are  in  the  right  line  E  F 
K  is  the point  K ,  therfore  the  point  K 
is  in  the  fuperficies  A  B.  ^Andby  the 
famereafon  alfo  the  point  K  is  in  the 
fuperficies  C  D .  Wherfore  the  two  fiu- 
perficieces  A  B  and  C  D  being  produ¬ 
ced  do  mete  together,  but  by  fuppofitio 
they  mete  not  together, for  they  are  fup 
pofed  to  be  parallels  .Wherfore  the  right  lines  E  F  and  G  B  produced. 


F0/.351, 


'Dmorllra- 
tion  leading  to 
m  abfurikie* 


perficieces  be  cut  by  fame  one  plaine  fuperficies  their  common  fie 
which  was  required  to  be proued. 


r 


jp 

1 

H 

- 

'the 

fit¬ 

test 


This  figure  here  fet  more  plainly  decll 
demonftrationdfye  eredt  perpendicularly  a, 
fuperficies  the  three  fuperficieces  A  B,C  D 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonftration  j 

'  ::  S  & 


A  Corollary  added  by  Flufias. 

Jft\h>o  fame fuperficieces  be  parallels  to  one  and  the felfe fame  playne fuperficies ;  they [hall  alfo  b$ 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other, or  they  [hall  make  one  and  the  felfe  fame  plaine  fiiperficies, 


For  if  the  plaine  fuperficieces  DG  and  GH 
being  parallels  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fuperfi- 
cies,namely,  to  A  B  be  not  alfo  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other,then  being  produced  they  fha.ll  con- 
curref  by  the  conuerfe  of  the  fixt  definition  of  the 
eleuenth)  Let  them  concurre  in  therightlineG 
E.Then  I  fay  that  the  fuperficieces  G  D  and  G  H 
are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies. 
Draw  in  the  playne  fuperficies  A  B  a  right  line  at 
alladuentures  A  C.And  by  that  right  lyne  &the 
point  E  extende  a  playne  fuperficies,  cutting  the 
two  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  by  the  rightlines 
E  D  and  E I.  „W herfore  the  right  lines  A  C  and  D 
E,alfo  A  C  and  E I  are  parallels  by  this  propofiti- 
-ori  .But  the  lines  D  Eand  El  forafmuch  as  they 
concurre  in  the  point  E  are  not  parallels  the  one 
to  the  other.  Wherefore  the  right  lines  D  E  and 
E  I  make  diredtly  one  right  line  (by  that  which  is 
added  after  the  30.  propofiton  of  the  firil.)  And 
therfore  the  plaine  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are 
in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies.  For 


VV.iiii.  if 


k 


The  eleventh  B  oo\e 

if  they  be  notjthen  part  of  the  right  line  D  I,namely5the  part  D  E  is  in  the  playne  fuperficies  DGj  and 
an  other  part  thero£,namely,E  I  is  on  high  in  an  other  fuperficies  G  H,which  by  the  firft  of  the  eleueth 
is  impoffible.Wherfore  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies. 
But  if  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  neuer  concurreathcn  are  they  parallels  by  the  6.  definition  of  the 
eleuenth. 


In  this  prop o- 
fiuonye  muft 
Wnder  Stand 
t  he  proportio  - 
Ml  partes  or 
feclions  to  be 
thofe  which 
aye  contained 
beswevethe 
parallel jupet' 
fates* 

Conduction. 

Demonjba- 

non* 


In  this  figure  here  fet,  ye  may  more  plainely  fee  the 
former  demo  nitration,  if  ye  eleuate  to  the  ground  fuper¬ 
ficieces  A  C  D  I,the  three  fuperficieces  A  B,D  G3&  G  Ia 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonftration. 


The  is.Tbeoreme.  The  n.Tropofition. 


If  two  right  lines  he  cut  by playne fuperficieces  being  parallels :  the  partes 
of the  lilies  deuided Jhall  be  proportional l. 

Fppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  CD  be  deuided  by  thefeplaine fuper¬ 
ficieces  being  parallels, namely  ,GH  ,KL,MN  in  the  points  A,E,B,C,F,D  ,T he 
1 fay  that  as  the  right  line  A  E  is  to  the  right  line  E  Bfo  is  the  right  line  CF  to 
the  right  line  F  D  .Draw  thefe  right  lines  AC,B  D  and  A  D .  And  let  the  lint 
A  D  and  the fuperficies  K  L  concurre  in  the  point  X.  K_And 
draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  E  to  the  point  X  and  an  o- 
ther from  the  point  X  to  the  point  F.  i^And  forafmuch  as 
thefe  two  parallel  fuperficieces  K  L  and  M  N  are  cut  by  the 
fuperficies  EB  D  X,  therfore  their  common  feclions  which 
are  the  lines  E  X  and  B  D,  are  ( by  the  16.  of  the  eleuenth ) 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other.  cAnd  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo 
forafmuch  as  the  two  parallel  fuperficies  G  H  and  K  Lbe  cut 
by  the fuperficies  AX  F  C,  their  common  feclions  A  C  and 
X  F  are  (by  the  1 6. of  the  eleuenth  parallels.  And forafmuch 
as  to  one  of  the fides  of  the  triangle  ABD ,  namely ,  to  the 
fide  B  D  is  drawne  a  parallel  line  E  X , therfore  (by  the  2.  of  k 
the  fxt)  proportionally  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  Bfo 
is  the  line  AX  to  the  line  X  D .  Againe forafmuch  as  to  one 
of  the  fides  of the  triangle  A  D  C, namely,  to  the  (ide  A  C  is 
drawen  a  parallel  line  X  F,  therfore  by  the  2. of the fixt,  pro¬ 
portionally  as  the  line  AX  is  to  the  line  X  Dfois  the  line  C 
F  to  the  line  F  D .  And  it  was proued  that  as  the  line  A  X  is 
to  the  line  X  Dfois  the  line  A  E  to  the  line  E  B ,  therefore 
alfo  (by  the  ii.  of  the fift )  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  B, 
fo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  line  F  D  .if  therfore  two  right  lines 

he  deuided  by  plame fuperficieces  being  parallels, the  parts  of the  lines  deuided fhal  be  proper - 
tionall :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 


ofSuclides  Element es : 


In  this  figure  it  is  more  ealy  to  fee  the  former  demonftrationj  if  ye  e- 
re£l  perpendicularly  vato  the  ground  fuperficies  ACBD,  the  thre.fu- 
perficiecesjGHjK  L,and  M  N,or  ifye  fo  eredi  them  that  they  be  equedi- 
ft an  tone  to  the  other. 


E 


jfThe  i6.Theoreme.  The  18. tpropojitmi. 

If  a  right  line  he  ereCted  per  pedicular  ly  to  a  plaine 
fuperficies :  all  the  fuperficieces  extended  by  that 
right  line }  are  ereffied  perpendicularly  to  the fielfe  B 
fame  plaine fuperficies. 


G 

H  i 

A 

£ 

V 

K 

L 

1 

E 

v  F 

*\ _ 

1 

M 

N  1 
1 

11  *-> 

1  ^ 

>  Vppofi  that  a  right  line  A  B  be  erelted perpendicularly  to  aground  fuperficies.T he 
?  I  fay,  that  all  the fuperficieces  pafing  by  the  line  A  B,  are  ere  tied  perpendicularly 
to  the  ground  fuperficies .  Extend  a  fuperficies  by  the  line  AB,and  let  the  fame 
be  ED,  &  let  the  comonfiction  of  the  plaine 
fuperficies  and  of  the  ground  fuperficies  be  d 
the  right  line  C  E .  And  take  in  the  line  C  E 
a  point  at  all  aduentures,  and  let  the fame  be 
E:  and  ( by  the  u. of  the first) from  the  point 
F  dr  awe  vnto  the  line  CE  a  perpendicular 
line  in  the  fuperficies  D  E,  and  let  the  fame 
be  F  G .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is 
erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground  fuper¬ 
ficies,  therefore  ( by  the  2  .definition  of  the  e- 
leuenth)  the  line  A  B  is  erected perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  are  in  the  ground  plaine  fuperficies, and  which  touch  it.Wher - 
fore  it  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  line  C  E.  Wherefore  the  angle  ABE  is  a  right  angle. 
And  the  angle  G  F  Bis  alfo  a  right  angle  ( by  conf ruction)  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  2  8.  of  the 
firfl)  the  line  A  B  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  F  G .  Buttheline  A  B  is  erected  perpendicularly  to 
the  ground fuperficies :  wherefore  ( by  the  8  .of  the  eleuenth)  the  line  F  G  is.  alfo  erected  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  And  forafmuch  as(  by  the  3  .definition  of the  eleuenth) 
a  plaine  fuperficies  is  then  erected perpendicularly  to  a  plaine  fuperficies,  when  all  the  right 
lines  drawen  in  one  of the  plaine fuperficieces  vnto  the  common fiction  of thofi  two  plaine fu¬ 
perficieces  making  the.rwith  right  angles,  do  alfo  make  right  angles  with  the  other  plaine fu¬ 
perficies  • and  it  is  proued  that  the  line  F  G  drawen  in  one  of  the  plaine  fuperficieces,  namely, 
in  X>  E,  perpendicularly  to  the  common fiction  of  the  plaine fuperficieces,  namely,  to  the  line 
C  E,  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies:  wherefore  the  plaine fuperficies  D  E 
is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  In  like fort  alfo  may  weproue,  that  all  the 
plaine fuperficieces  which  pa  fie  by  the  line  A  B,  are  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground fu¬ 
perficies  .  if  therefore  a  right  line  be  erected perpendicularly  to  a  plaine fuperficies  all  the fu¬ 
perficieces  pafing  by  the  right  line,  are  erected  perpendicularly  to  the fielfe fame  plaine fuper¬ 
ficies  :  which  was  required, to  be  demonstrated: 

•  -  *  €\  •  '  ,  -  .  .%  •  '  ,  -  ,  '  ■  •  *  .  .  .  * 


ConftruUion* 


Vemontfra- 
tion • 


In 


\ 


In  this  propo- 
finonye  mufl 
y  tide?  ft  and 
ibe  proportion 
nail  partes  or 
feclions  to  be 
thofe  which 
a^e  contained 
betwetietbe 
paralieljupex- 
fetes . 

ConElruction, 

Demonflra- 

tkn. 


7 he  eleuenth  ®  oo\e 

if  'hey  be  not,  then  part  of  the  right  line  D  I, namely  ..the  partD  E  is  in  the  playne  fuperficies  D  G,  and 
an  other  part  therof,namely,E  I  is  on  high  in  an  other  fuperficies  G  H,which  by  the  firit  of  the  eleueth 
is  impoffible.  Wherfore  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  lame  playne  fuperficies. 
But  if  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  neuer  concurre,then  are  they  parallels  by  the  6.  definition  of  the 
eleuenth.  i — — — — --i 


In  this  figure  here  fet,  ye  may  more  plainely  fee  the 
former  demonftration,  if  ye  eleuate  to  the  ground  fuper¬ 
ficieces  A  C  D  I,the  three  fuperficieces  A  B,D  G,&  G  I, 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonllration. 


The  is.  Theorems.  The  17.  Qropojition. 


If  two  right  lines  he  cut  by  playne fuperficieces  being  parallels:  the  partes 
of  the  lihes  deuided fall  be  proportionall. 


!  Fppofe  thatthefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  CD  be  deuided  by  thefeplaine fuper- 
\{f pieces  being  parallels, namely  ,GH  ,KL,MN  in  thefoints  A,E,B,C,F,D.The 
'  1 fay  that  as  the  right  line  A  E  is  to  the  right  line  E  B,fo  is  the  right  line  CF  to 
f  the  right  line  F  D  .Drarv  thefe  right  lines  AC,BD  and  A  D .  And  let  the  lint 
A  D  and  the fuperficies  K  L  concurre  in  the  point  X.  ^ylnd 
draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  E  to  the  point  X  and  an  ci¬ 
ther  from  the  point  X  to  the  point  F.  i^And  forafmuch  as 
thefe  two  parallel  fuperficieces  K  L  and  M  N  are  cut  by  the 
fuperficies  E-B  D  X,  therfore  their  common  feclions  which 
are  the  lines  E  X  and B  D,  are  (by  the  id.  of  the  eleuenth ) 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other.  <^And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo 
forafmuch  as  the  two  parallel  fuperficies  G  H  and  K  Lbe  cut 
by  thefuperfcies  AX  F  C,  their  common  feclions  A  C  and 
X  F  are(by  the  16. of  the  eleuenth )parallels.And forafmuch 
as  to  one  of  the fides  of  the  triangle  ABD,  namely,  to  the 
fide  B  D  is  drawne  aparallelline  E  X, therfore  (by  the  2.  of  x 
the  fixt )  proportionally  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  B,fo 
is  the  line  AX  to  the  line  X  D .  Againe forafmuch  as  to  one 
of  the  fides  of the  triangle  A  D  C, namely,  to  the  fide  AC  is 
drawen  a  parallel  line  X  F, therfore  by  the  2. of the fixt,  pro¬ 
portionally  as  the  line  A  X  is  to  the  line  X  D,fo  is  the  line  C 
F  to  the  line  F  D.  And  it  was  proued  that  as  the  line  AX  is 
to  the  line  X  D,fo  is  the  line  A  E  to  the  line  E  B,  therefore 
alfo  (by  the  1 1 .  of  the fift )  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  B, 
fo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  line  F  D  .If  therfore  two  right  lines 
he  deuided  by  plame fuperficieces  being  parallels, the  parts  of the  lines  deuided jhal  be  propor¬ 
tionall  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 


In  this  propo- 
ft  son  ye  mufl 
"ynder  stand 
ihe  proportio¬ 
nal!  partes  or 
Jeciions  to  be 
thofe  which 
are  contained 
bet  we  tie  the 
paraUeljupex- 
fictes » 

Construction, 

Demonjlra- 

non. 


The  eleuenth  2?  oolf 


if  they  be  not,then  part  of  the  right  line  D  I, namely,  the  part  D  E  is  in  the  playne  fuperficies  D  G,  and 
an  other  part  thero£namely,E  I  is  on  high  in  an  other  fuperficies  G  H,which  by  the  firft  of  the  eleueth 
is  impoffible.  Wherfore  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies. 
Butif  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  neuer  concurre^then  are  they  parallels  by  the  6.  definition  of  the 
eleuenth. 


In  this  figure  here  fet,  ye  may  more  plainely  fee  the 
former  demonftration,  if  ye  eleuate  to  the  ground  fuper¬ 
ficieces  A  C  D  I,the  three  fuperficieces  A  B,D  G,&  G I „ 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonftration. 


H 


The  is.Theoreme.  The  17.  (Pri 


If  two  right  lines  he  cut  hy  playne fuperficieces  being  parallels :  the  partes 
of  the  likes  deuided jhall  be proportionall. 

Fppofie  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  CD  be  deuided  hy  thefeplaine fuper - 
[  fcieces  being  parallels, namely,  GH,KL,MNin  the  points  A,E,B,C,F  ,D  .T he 
1 1  fay  that  as  the  right  line  A  E  is  to  the  right  line  E  B,fo  is  the  right  line  CF  to 
the  right  line  F  D  .Draw  thefe  right  lines  A  C,B  D  and  AD.  And  let  the  line 
A  D  and  the fuperficies  K  L  concurre  in  the  point  X.  cAnd 
draw  a  right  line  firom  the  point  E  to  the  point  X  and  an  0- 
ther from  the  point  X  to  the  point  F.  ififnd  for  af much  as 
thefe  two  parallel  fuperficieces  K  L  and  M  N  are  cut  by  the 
fuperficies  EB  D  X,  therfiore  their  common  Jeciions  which 
are  the  lines  E  X  and  BD,  are  (by  the  1 6.  of  the  eleuenth ) 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other.  ^And  by  the  fame  reafion  alfio 
forafmuch  as  the  two  parallel  fuperficies  G  H  and  K  Lbe  cut 
by  the fuperficies  AX  F  C,  their  common  Jeciions  A  C  and 
X  F  arefiby  the  16. of  the  eleuenth  parallels.  And forafmuch 
as  to  one  of  the fides  of  the  triangle  ABD,  namely,  to  the 
fide  B  D  is  drawne  a  parallel  line  E  X, therfiore  (by  the  2.  of 
the  fixt)  proportionally  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  Bfo 
is  the  line  AX  to  the  line  X  D .  Againe forafmuch  as  to  one 
of  the  fides  of the  triangle  A  D  C, namely,  to  the  (ide  AC  is 
drawen  a  parallel  line  X  F, therfiore  by  the  2. of the fixt,  pro¬ 
portionally  as  the  line  A  X  is  to  the  line  X  D,fo  is  the  line  C 
F  to  the  line  F  D.  And  it  was  proued  that  as  the  line  AX  is 
to  the  line  X  D,fo  is  the  line  A  E  to  the  line  E  B,  therefore 
alfo  (by  the  11.  ofthefift )  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  B , 
fib  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  line  F  D .  If  therfiore  two  right  lines 
be  deuided  by  plume fuperficieces  being  parallels, the parts  of  the  lines  deuided (hal  bepropor- 
tionall :  ivhicb  was  required  to  be  demonfir and. 


A  C 

a 

L 

E  3C 

T 

F 

K 

\ 

H 

»  b 

r 


in 


In  this  propo¬ 
rtion  ye  mufl 
'vnder&and 
the  proportion 
vail  partes  or 
Jeclions  to  be 
thofe  which 
are  contained 
betwevetbe 
paraUeljupex- 
ficus* 

Conduction* 

Demnfira- 

tkn* 


The  eleuenth  2?  oo^t 


e 

if  they  be  not,then  part  of  the  right  line  D  I,namely,the  part  D  E  is  in  the  playne  fuperficies  D  G,  and 
an  other  part  therof, namely  ,E  I  is  on  high  in  an  other  fuperficies  G  H^which  by  the  firfl  of  the  eleueth 
is  impoffible.  Wherfore  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies. 
But  if  the  fuperficieces  D  G  and  G  H  neuer  concurre^then  are  they  parallels  by  the  6.  definition  of  the 
eleuenth. 


1 

A 

Cc 

In  this  figure  here  fet,  ye  may  more  plainely  fee  the 
former  demonfiratioft,  if  ye  eleuate  to  the  ground  fuper¬ 
ficieces  A  C  D  I,the  three  fuperficieces  A  BjD  G,&  G  I, 
and  fo  compare  it  with  the  demonftration. 


TC 


The  u.Tbeoreme.  The  n-  (Pr 


If  two  right  lines  he  cut  by playne fuperficieces  being  parallels:  the  partes 
of the  titles  deuided fall  be  proportional 1. 

Ffpofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  CD  be  deuided  by  t he fe  plain  e Juper- 
[  faeces  being  parallels,  namely, GB,I<L,MN  in  the  points  A,E,B,C,F,D  .T he 
1 1  fay  that  as  the  right  line  A  E  is  to  the  right  line  E  Bfo  is  the  right  line  C  F  to 
the  right  line  F  D  .Draw  thefe  right  lines  A  C,B  D  and  A  D .  And  let  the  line 
A  D  and  the fuperficies  K  L  concurre  in  the  point  X.  \And 
draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  E  to  the  point  X  and  an  0- 
ther from  the  point  X  to  the  point  F.  iAnd  forafmuch  as 
thefe  two  parallel fuperfcieces  I<  L  and  M  N  are  cut  by  the 
fuperficies  E  B  D  X,  therfore  their  common  fecUons  which 
are  the  lines  E  X  and  B  D,  are  ( by  the  16.  of  the  eleuenth ) 
parallels  the  one  to  the  other.  <And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo 
forafmuch  as  the  two  parallel  fuperficies  G  H  and  K  L  be  cut 
by  the  fuperficies  AX  F  C,  their  common-  feclions  A  C  and 
X  F  arefby  the  id. of  the  eleuenth  )paraliels.And forafmuch 
as  to  one  of  the fdes  of  the  triangle  ABD ,  namely ,  to  the 
fide  B  D  is  drawne  a  parallel  line  E  X, therfore  (by  the  2.  of 
the  fixt)  proportionally  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  Bfo 
is  the  line  AX  to  the  line  X  D .  Againe forafmuch  as  to  one 
of  the  fdes  of the  triangle  A  D  C, namely,  to  the  fide  AC  is 
drawen  a  parallel  line  X  E,  therfore  by  the  2. of the fixt, pro¬ 
portionally  as  the  line  A  X  is  to  the  line  X  Dfois  the  line  C 
F  to  the  line  F  D.And  it  was proued  that  as  the  line  AX  is 
to  the  line  X  Dfois  the  line  A  E  to  the  line  E  B,  therefore 
alfo  (by  the  11.  ofthefift )  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  B, 
fo  is  the  line  C  F  to  the  line  F  D  .if  therfore  two  right  lines 

be  deuided  by  plume  fuperficieces  beingparallels,the parts  of  the  lines  deuided  fhal be  proper- 
tionall :  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 


A  C 

G 

L 

E  .*! 

T 

F 

K 

\ 

H 

B  V 

In 


ofSuclides  Element es : 


H 

A 

£ 

K 

L 

i 

E 

^  J 

A,  F  1 

, - ' ,  ir-r 

In  this  figure  it  is  more  eafy  to  fee  the  former  demonltration,  if yee- 
red  perpendicularly  vnto  the  ground  fuperficies  A  C  B  D,  the  threrfu- 
perficieces  3GH,K  L^and  M  N,or  if  ye  fo  ered  them  that  they  be  equedi- 
ftant  one  to  the  other. 


jpThe  i6.Theoreme.  The  iS.TrofioJttion . 

If  a  right  line  he  ere  tied  perpedicularly  to  a  plaine 
fuperficies;  all  the  fuperficieces  extended  by  that 
right  line ,  are  ereffied  perpendicularly  to  the  felfe 
fame  plaine fuperficies. 


>  Vppofi  that  a  right  line  A  B  be  erected perpendicularly  to  agr  T he 

"I fay,  that  all  the  fuperficieces  pafingby  the  line  AB,are  ereottu  perpendicularly 
to  the  ground  fuperficies .  Extend  a  fuperficies  by  the  line  AB,and  let  the  fame 
be  ED,  &  let  the  comonfiftion  of the  plaine 

fuperficies  and  of  the  ground  fuperficies  be  d  G  a  w 

the  right  line  C  E .  And  take  in  the  line  C  E 
a  point  at  all  aduentures,  and  let  the fame  be 
E :  and  ( by  the  n.ofthe fir  ft) from  the  point 
F  drawevnto  the  line  CE  a  perpendicular 
line  in  the  fuperficies  D  E,  and  let  the  fame 
be  F  G v  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is 
erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground  fuper¬ 
ficies,  therefore  ( by  the  z  .definition  of  the  e- 
leuenth)  the  line  AB  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  are  in  the  ground  plaine fuperficies, and  which  touch  it.Wher- 
fore  it  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  line  C  E.  Wherefore  the  angle  ABE  is  a  right  angle. 
And  the  angle  G  F  B  is  alfo aright  angle  ( by  con  fir  action)  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  zS.of  the 
firfi)  the  line  A  Bis  a  par allel  to  the  line  FG .  But  the  line  A  B  is  erebted perpendicularly  to 
the  ground fuperficies :  wherefore  (by  the  8. of  the  eleuenth)  the  line  F  G  is  alfo  entiled  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  And  forafmuch  as(  by  the  3  .definition  of the  eleuenth ) 
a  plaine  fuperficies  is  then  erected perpendicularly  to  a  plaine  fuperficies,  when  all  the  right 
lines  drawen  in  one  of the  plaine fuperficieces  onto  the  common fiction  of thofi  two  plaine fu¬ 
perficieces  making  therwith  right  angles,  do  alfo  make  right  angles  with  the  other  plaine fu¬ 
perficies  • and  it  is  proued  that  the  line  F  G  drawen  in  one  of  the  plaine  fuperficieces,  namely, 
in  D  E, perpendicularly  to  the  common fiction  of the  plaine fuperficieces,  namely,  to  the  line 
C  E,  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies:  wherefore  the  plaine fuperficies  D  E 
is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  In  like fort  alfo  may  weproue,  that  all  the 
plaine  fuperficieces  which  pafife  by  the  line  A  B,  are  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground fu¬ 
perficies  .  If  therefore  a  right  line  be  erected  perpendicularly  to  a  plaine fuperficies  all  the fu¬ 
perficieces  pafiing  by  the  right  line,  are  eretted perpendicularly  to  the felfe  fame  plaine fuper¬ 
ficies  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 


C  f 

»  d-, 

ConftruU&n* 


Demonstra¬ 

tion* 


In 


ofSuclides  Element es : 


H 

A 

C 

In  this  figure  it  is  more  eafy  to  fee  the  former  demonfiration,  if ye  e- 
reft  perpendicularly  vnto  the  ground  fuperficies  ACBD,  the  threfu- 
perficiecesjGHjK  L,and  M  N,or  if  ye  fo  ere£l  them  that  they  be  etjuedi- 
ftantone  to  the  other. 


flThe  i6.Theoreme.  The  iS.Tropofitwi . 

If  a  right  line  he  eretfed  jyerpedicularly  to  aplaine 
fuperficies :  all  the  fuperficieces  extended  by  that 
right  line,  are  ereCted  perpendicularly  to  the  felfe 
fame  plain  e fuperficies. 


E 


XI 


D 


B 


>  Vppofi  that  a  right  line  A  B  he  ereSted perpendicularly  to  agri  T he 

that  all  the  fuperficieces pafiingby  the  line  A  B,  are  ereuca  perpendicularly 
|yjy£  to  the ground fuperficies .  Extend  afuperficies  by  the  line  AB,  and  let  the  fame 
be  E  D,  let  the  cornon fiftion  of  the  plain  e 

fuperficies  and  of  the  ground  fuperficies  be  d 
the  right  line  C  E .  And  take  in  the  line  C  E 
a  point  at  all  aduentures,  and  let  the fame  be 
F:  and  ( by  the  ij. of  the fir  hi) from  the  point 
F  dr  awe  vnto  the  line  CE  a  perpendicular 
line  in  the  fuperficies  D  E,  and  let  the  fame 
be  F  G  And for af much  as  the  line  A  Bis 
erecled  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuper-  ' 
ficies,  therefore  ( by  the  2. definition  of  the  e- 
leuenth)  the  line  AB  is  erecled  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  are  in  the ground plaine  fuperficies, and  which  touch  it.Wher- 
fore  it  is  erecled  perpendicularly  to  the  line  C  E.  Wherefore  the  angle  ABE  is  a  right  angle . 
And  the  angle  GF  Bis  alfo aright  angle  ( by  confiruciion)  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  28 .  of  the 
firfi)  the  line  A  B  is  aparallelto  the  line  F  G .  But  the  line  A  B  is  erecled  perpendicular ly  to 
the  ground fuperficies :  wherefore  {by  the  8. of  the  eleuenth)  the  line  F  G  is  alfo  erecled  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  And f or afmuch  as  (by  the  3  .definition  of the  eleuenth ) 
aplaine  fuperficies  is  then  erecled  perpendicularly  to  a  plaine  fuperficies,  when  all  the  right 
lines  drawen  in  one  of the  plaine fuperficieces  vnto  the  common fiction  of thofe  two  plaine fu¬ 
perficieces  making  therwith  right  angles,  do  alfo  make  right  angles  with  the  other  plaine fu¬ 
perficies  • and  it  is  proued  that  the  line  F  G  drawen  in  one  of  the  plaine  fuperficieces,  namely, 
in  D  E, perpendicularly  to  the  common ficlion  of the  plaine fuperficieces,  namely,  to  the  line 
C  E,  is  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies:  wherefore  the  plaine fuperficies  D  E 
is  erecled perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  In  like fort  alfo  may  weproue,  that  all  the 
plaine fuperficieces  which  paffi  by  the  line  A  B,  are  erected perpendicularly  to  the  ground  fu¬ 
perficies  .  if  therefore  a  right  line  be  erecled  perpendicularly  to  a  plaine  fuperficies  all  the fu¬ 
perficieces  pafiing  by  the  right  line,  are  erected  perpendicularly  to  the fife  fame  plaine fuper¬ 
ficies  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated . 


ConjlruSm* 


Vemonttra- 

turn. 


In 


ofSuclides  Element es: 


?$*• 


In  this  figure  it  is  more  eafy  to  fee  the  former  demonftrationj  ifye  e- 
reft  perpendicularly  vnto  the  ground  fuperficies  ACBD,  the  threfu- 
perficieces  jGH,K  L,and  M  Njor  if  ye  fo  eredt  them  that  they  be  equedi- 
ftantoneto  the  other. 


flThe  1 6.  Theoreme.  The  iS.^ropoJition . 

If  a  right  line  he  ereCfed  perpedicularly  to  a  plain  e 
fuperficies :  all  the  fuperficieces  extended  by  that 
right  line }  are  ereCied  perpendicularly  to  the  felfe 
fame  plaine fuperficies. 


r\ 


E 


\i 


D 


B 


i  Fppofe  that  a  right  line  ABbe  ereBed perpendicularly  to  agr  The 

?  I  fay,  that  all  the fuperficieces  pafing  by  the  line  A  B,  are  ereutu  perpendicularly 
;  to  the ground fuperficies .  Extend  a  fuperficies  by  the  line  AB,  and  let  the  fame 
be  ED,  &  let  the  cornon feBion  of  the  plaine 
fuperficies  and  of  the  ground  fuperficies  be  d 
the  right  line  C  E .  And  take  in  the  line  C  E 
a  point  at  all  aduentures,  and  let  the fame  be 
F:  and  ( by  then. of  the first) from  the  point 
F  dr  awe  <vnto  the  line  CE  a  perpendicular 
line  in  the  fuperficies  D  E,  and  let  the  fame 
be  F  G .  And  for  afinuch  as  the  line  A  Bis 
erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground  fuper¬ 
ficies,  therefore  ( by  the  2. definition  of  the  e- 
leuenth)  the  line  A  B  is  erected perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  are  in  the  ground  plaine fuperficies, and  which  touch  it.Wher- 
fore  it  is  ereBed perpendicularly  to  the  line  C  E.  Wherefore  the  angle  ABE  is  a  right  angle. 
And  the  angle  G  F  Bis  alfo  a  right  angle  ( by  confiruBion)  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  2  8.  of  the 
firfi)  the  line  A  B  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  F  G .  But  the  line  A  B  is  ereBed  perpendicularly  to 
the  ground fuperficies :  wherefore  (by  the  S. of  the  eleuenth )  the  line  F  G  is  alfo  ereBed  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  And  for  afinuch  as(  by  the  3  .definition  of the  eleuenth ) 
a  plaine fuperficies  is  then  ereBed  perpendicularly  to  a  plaine  fuperficies,  when  all  the  right 
lines  drawen  in  one  of the  plaine fuperficieces  vnto  the  common feBion  of thofe  two  plaine fu¬ 
perficieces  making  thqrwith  right  angles,  do  alfo  make  right  angles  with  the  other  plaine fu¬ 
perficies  • and  it  is  proued  that  the  line  F  G  drawen  in  one  of  the  plaine  fuperficieces,  namely, 
in  D  E,  perpendicularly  to  the  common feBion  of the  plaine fuperficieces,  namely,  to  the  line 
C  E,  is  ereBed  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies:  wherefore  the  plaine fuperficies  D  E 
is  ereBed perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies.  In  like fort  alfo  may  weproue,  that  all  the 
plaine fuperficieces  which  pajfe  by  the  line  A  B,  are  ereBed  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fu¬ 
perficies  .  If  therefore  a  right  line  be  ereBed  perpendicularly  to  a  plaine  fuperficies  all  the fu¬ 
perficieces  pafing  by  the  right  line,  are  ereBed  perpendicularly  to  the felfe  fame  plaine fuper¬ 
ficies  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 


'  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 


ConfiruBion* 


Demonstra¬ 

tion, 


In 


7 he  eleuenth  Tiookt 


e 


In  this  figure  here  fet  ye  may  ered  per- 
pedicularlyat  your  pleafure  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  drawen  the  lines  D  CjGF3A  B* 
and  H  E,  to  the  ground  fuperficies  wherin 
is  drawen  the  line  CFB  E, and fo  plainly, 
compare  it  with  the  demonftration  before 
Put-  l 


f  The  17.  Theorems. 

■  J 

If  two  plains fuperficieces  cutting  the  one  the  other  be  er effect  pefpendku* 

larly  to  any  plains  fuperficies :  their  common  feffion  is  alfo  ereffed  perpen* 
dicnlarly  to  the  felfe  fame plaine fuperficies. 


Fppofe  that  thefe  two  plaine fuperficieces  AB  dr  B  C  cutting  the  one  the  other  be  e- 
yelled  perpendicularly  to  aground fuperficies,  and  let  their  common  feffion  be  the 


rwj y^kne  B  D  .  Then  l fay,  that  the  line  BD  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 


Demnftrati-  fuperficies .  For  if  not,  then  (by  the  11  .cf  the firfi ) 
on  leading  to  from  the  point  D  draw  in  the  fuperficies  AB  vnto 
animpQjiibi-m  rjgpt  [me  j)  j  a  perpendicular  line  D  E .  <^And 

in  the  fuperficies  G  B  draw  vnto  the  line  D  C  a  per¬ 
pendicular  line  JD  F .  Andforafmueb  as  the  fuper¬ 
ficies  A  B  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 


fuperficies, and  in  the  plaine fuperficies  A  B  vnto  the  \ 
common feffion  of  the  plaine  fuperficies  and  of  the  \L_ 
ground  fuperficies, namely,  to  the  line  D  A  is  ereffed 

a  perpendicular  line  D  E,  therefore  (by  the  conuerfe  _ _ _ X 

cf  the  s  .definition  of  this  booke  )  the  line  D  E  is  e- 

reffed perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  And  in  like fort  may  we  proue,  that  the  line 
D  F  is  ereffed  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  Wherefore  from  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  point, namely,  from  D ,  are  ereffed  perpendicularly  to  the  ground  fuperficies  two  right 


lines  both  on  one  and  the f elf  fame fide :  which  1. 
fore from  the  point  D  can  not  be  ereffed perpeno, 
right  lines  befides  B  D, which  is  the  common  feci 
therefore  two  plaine fuperfcieces  cutting  the  one 
plaine fuperficies, their  common  feffion  is  alfo  er 
fuperficies  .-which  was  required  to  beproued. 

Here  haue  I  fet  an  other  figure  which 
will  more  plainly  fliewe  vnto  you  the  for¬ 
mer  demonftration,  ifye  erede  perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  ground  fuperficies  A  C  the 
two  fuperficieces  A  B  and  B  C  which  cut 
the  one  the  other  in  the  line  BD. 

,  '  ’•  ,\ '  ':\'V 


1 ofiible.Wher - 
ies  any  other 
landFC.  If 
to  any 
fe fame  plaine 


The  iS.Theoreme ,  T he zohPropofition. 

af°bide  angle  he  contayned  lender  three playne fuperficiall  angles:euery 

two 


of-Bitclides  Elements s .  rc> 

two  of  thofe  three  angles,  1 vhkh  two  fo  euer  he  taken  ,  dre greater  then  thi 

third. 


Fppofe  that  the folule  angle  A  be  contayned  vnder  three  play  we  fuperfciall  an¬ 
gles, that  is  ,vnder  B  A  C,C  A  D ,  and  DAB.  Then  /  fay  that  two  ofthefe 
fuperfciall  angles  how fo  euer  they  be  taken ,  are  greater  then  the  third .  if  the 
angles  B  A  C,C  A  D  ,&■  DAB 


be  e quail  the  one  to  the  other, then  is  it  manifejl 
that  two  of them  which  two  fo  euer  be  taken  are 
greater  then  the  third .  But  if  not,  let  the  angle 
B  A  C  be  the  greater  of the  three  angles .  And 
vnto  the  right  line  A  B  and  from  tkepcynt  A 
make  in  the  playne  fuperfeies  BAG  vnto  the 
angle  DAB  an  equall  angle  B  A  E .  And  (  by 
the  2.  of  the  frf  )  make  the  line  A  E  equall  to 
the  line  A  D .  Igow  a  right  line  B  E  C  drawn e 
by  thepoynt  E,fhall cut  the  right  lines  A  B  and 
A  C  in  the  poyntes  B  and  C  *  draw  a  right  line from  «D  to  B,  and  an  other  from  D  to  C. 
And  forafmuch  as  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E,  and  the  line  A  B  is  common  to  the 
both ,  therefore  thef e  two  lines  D  A  and  A  B  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  A  E  and 
the  angle  DAB//  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  E  .Wherefore  (by  the  4. ofthefrB )  the  bafe  D  B 
is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  E .  Andforafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  D  B  and  D  C  are  greater  then 
the  line  B  G, of  which  the  line  D  B  is  prone  d  to  be  equall  to  the  line  B  E .  Wherefore  the  re- 
fidue, namely, the  line  D  C  is  greater  then  the  refdue, namely, then  the  line  E  C . Andforaf 
much  as  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E ,  and  the  line  AG  is  common  to  them  both * 
and  the  bafeT)  C  is  greater  then  the  bafe  EC,  therefore  the  angle  D  A  C  is  greater  then 
the  angle  EAC  .rAnd  it  isproued  that  the  angle  DAB//  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  E  :wher 
fore  the  angles  DAB  and  DAC  are  greater  then  the  angle  BAG.  If  therefore  a foltde 
angle  be  contayned  vnder  three  playne  fuperfciall  angles  euerytwoof  thofe  three  angles $ 
which  two  fo  euer  be  taken  are  greater  then  the  third:  which  was  required  to  be promd. 


In  this  figure  ye  may  playnely  behold  the 
former  demonftration ,  if  ye  eleuate  the  three 
triangles  a  b  d,ab  candAcpin  fuch  fort  that 
they  may  allmeete  together  in  the  poynt  a. 


1  he  ip.Theorcme.  The  2  iSPropoJitioft. 

finery folide  angle  is  comfy ehertdedlonder  playne  angles  lefjfe  then  fewer 
right  angles. 


Fppofe  that  A  be  afolide  angle  contayned  vnder  thefe fuperfciall  angles  BAG* 
DAC  and  D  A  B  .Then  I  fay  that  the  angles  B  A  C,  D  A  C  WD  A  B  are 
Is  }efe  thenfower  right  angles .  T ake  in  euery  one  of  thefe  right  lines  A  C  A  B  and 


n 


CotiAruflicu, 


Vemonftra* 

tion. 


Confitmhn 


Demon  (Iran- 
on  leading  to 
an  mpofobi-" 
title. 


7 be  eh 


In  this  figure  here  fet  ye  may  ere&  per- 
pedicularly  at  your  pleafure  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  drawen  the  lines  D  C,GF3A  B3 
and  H  E,  to  the  ground  fuperficies  wherin 
is  drawen  the  line  C  F  B  E,  and  fo  plainly 
compare  it  with  thedemonftration  before! 

Put*  l 


f  The  17.  Theoreme.  The  19.  Idropojition. 

If  two  plaine fuperficieces  cutting  the  one  the  other  be  ereCied  perpendicu * 
larly  to  any  plainefuperficies :  their  common  feffiion  is  alfo  eretied  perpen* 
dicularly  to  the  felfe  fame plaine  fuperficies. 

7  Ifpofe  that  thefe  Wo  plaine fuperficieces  AB  dr  B  C  cutting  the  one  the  other  be  e- 
relied  perpendicularly  to  a ground fuperficies,  and let  their  common feciion  be  the 

_ line  B  D  .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  line  B  D  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 

fuperficies .  For  if  not,  then  (by  the  n  .of  the firfi ) 
from  the point  JD  draw  in  the  fuperficies  AB  vnto 
the  right  line  D  A  a  perpendicular  line  D  E .  <^And 
in  the  fuperficies  G  B  draw  -vnto  the  line  D  C  a  per¬ 
pendicular  line  JD  F .  And forafmuch  as  the  fuper¬ 
ficies  A  B  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 
fuperficies, and  in  the  plaine fuperficies  A  B  vnto  the 
common fetiion  of  the  plaine  fuperficies  and  of  the 
ground  fuperficies, namely,  to  the  line  D  A  is  er tided 
a  perpendicular  line  D  E,  therefore  (by  the  conuerfe 
of  the  3  .definition  of  this  booke  )  the  line  D  E  is  e- 
r tided perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  And  in  like fort  may  we  proue ,  that  the  line 
D  F  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground  fuperficies .  Wherefore  from  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  point, namely ,  from  D,  are  erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies  two  rifiht 

^  ^  .  1.  w  J  J-I  -  /l  Z/1  /?_/.,  .  ...  A.  S  mm  '*"  J  "*  IO  ~  7  f 


lines  both  on  one  and  the  f elf  fame fide :  which  i. 
fore from  the  point  D  can  not  be  erected  perpenc 
right  lines  befides  B  D, which  is  the  common  feci 
therefore  two  plaine  fuperfcieces  cutting  the  one 
plaine  fuperficies, their  common  feciion  is  alfo  er 
fuperficies  :which  was  required  to  beproued. 

Here  haue  I  fet  an  other  figure  which 
will  more  plainly  fhewe  vnto  you  the  for¬ 
mer  demonftration,  if  ye  eredte  perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  ground  fuperficies  A  C  the 
two  fuperficieces  A  B  and  B  C  which  cut 
she  one  the  other  in  the  line  B  D. 


ofiible.Wher- 
'ies  any  other 
landBC.  if 
ularly  to  any 


The  i8.Theoreme.  Thezoffrofiofition. 

If  a  foil  de  angle  be  contayned  lender  three  playne fuperfcictU  anglesteuery 

two 


"Demon  flrati- 
en  leading  to 
an  impofiibi-^ 
litie , 


In  this  figure  here  fet  ye  may  eredl  per- 
pedicularlyat  your  pleafure  the  fuperficies 
wherin  are  drawen  the  lines  D  C 5GF,A  B, 
and  H  E,  to  the  ground  fuperficies  wherin 
is  drawen  the  line  C  FB  E,  and fo  plainly 
compare  ic  with  the  demonftration  before 
put. 


ffThe  n  .Theoreme. 

4 

If  two  plaine fuperfideces  cutting  the  one  the  other  be  erebled  perpendtcu* 
lady  to  any  plainejuperficies :  their  common fe  biion  is  alfo  erebled  perpen* 
dicularly  to  the felfe fame  plaine fuperficies. 

?Vppofi  that  thefe  Wo  plaine fuperficieces  AB&  B  Ccuttingthe  onethe  other  bee- 
relied  perpendicularly  to  aground fuperficies,  an  diet  their  common  fecit  on  be  the 

_ line  B  D  .  T hen  I fay ,  that  the  line  BD  is  erebled  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 

fuperficies .  For  if  not,  then  (by  the  it.  of  the frjl) 
from  the point  JD  draw  in  the  fuperficies  AB  vnto 
the  right  line  D  A  a  perpendicular  line  D  E .  <^And 
in  the  fuperficies  G  B  draw  vnto  the  line  D  C  a  per¬ 
pendicular  line  D  F .  Andfdrafinuch  as  the  fuper¬ 
ficies  A  B  is  erecied  perpendictdarly  to  the  ground 
fuperficies, and  in  the  plaine  fuperficies  A  B  vnto  the 
common fiction  of  the  plaine  fuperficies  and  of  the 
ground  fuperficies, namely,  to  the  line  D  A  is  erecied 
a  perpendicular  line  D  E,  therefore  (by  the  conuerfe 
of  the  3  .definition  of  this  booke  )  the  line  D  E  is  e- 
rebled perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  And  in  like fort  may  we  proue ,  that  the  line 
D  E  is  erecied  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies .  Wherefore  from  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  point, namely, from  D,  are  erecied  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies  two  right 
lines  both  on  one  and  the  fie  If  fame fide :  which  is  (by  the  i  s  .of the  eleuenth )  impofiible.Wher- 
fore from  the  point  D  can  not  be  ere  bled perpendicularly  to  the  ground  fuperficies  any  other 
right  lines  befides  B  D, which  is  the  common feblion  of  the  two fuperficieces  A  B  and  BC .  if 
therefore  two  plaine  fuperfcieces  cutting  the  one  the  other  be  erebled  perpendicularly  to  any 
plaine fuperficies, their  common  fiebiion  is  alfo  erebled  perpendicularly  to  thefilfe fame  plaine 
fuperficies :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

Hero  haue  I  fet  an  other  figure  which 
will  more  plainly  fhewe  vnto  you  the  for¬ 
mer  demonftration,  if  ye  eredte  perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  ground  fuperficies  A  C  the 
two  fuperficieces  A  B  and  B  C  which  cut 
she  one  the  other  in  the  line  B  D. 


'  "  V. 


The  1 8. Theoreme,  The  zobPropoJition. 

afolide  angle  be  contayned  lander  three  playne fuperf dull  anglesiettery 

two 


of'Buclides  Elementes,  FoL 5  3 : 

two  of  tbofe  three  angles,  *tohkh  two  fo  ener  he  taken  ,  dre greater  then  thi 
third. 

Vppofe  that  the  folide  angle  A  he  contained  under  three playne  fuperfiriall  an* 
fes,that  isyvnder  B  A  C  jC  A  D ,  and  D  AE.ThenI  fay  that  two  of thefe 
fuperfiriall  angles  how fo  ener  they  he  taken ,  are  greater  then  the  third .  if  the 
angles  BAC,CAD,^DAB 


he  e quail  the  one  to  the  other, then  is  it  manifefi 
that  two  of  them  which  two  fo  ener  he  taken  are 
greater  then  the  third .  But  if  not,  let  the  angle 
BA  Che  the  greater  of the  three  angles .  And 
unto  the  right  line  A  B  and  from  thepoynt  A 
make  in  the  pLyne  fuperficies  BAG  unto  the 
angle  DAB  an  e quail  angle  B  A  E .  And  (  hy 
the  2.  of  the  frfi  )  snake  the  line  A  E  e quail  to 
the  line  A  D .  Flow  a  right  line  B  E  C  drawn e 
hy  thefoynt  E,  [hall  cut  the  right  lines  A  B  and 
AC  in  the  foyntes  B  and  C  ••  draw  a  right  line from  «D  to  B,  and  an  other from  D  to  C. 
And forafnuch  as  the  line  DAw  e  quail  to  the  line  A  E,  and  the  line  A  B  is  common  to  the 
both ,  therefore  thefe  two  lines  D  A  and  A  B  are  e  quail  to  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  A  E  and 
the  angle  DAB/j  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  E  .Wherefore  ( hy  thc4.of the  first )  the  bafe  D  B 
is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  E .  And forafnuch  as  thefe  two  lines  D  B  and  D  C  are  greater  then 
the  line  B  C, of  which  the  line  D  B  is  protied  to  he  equall  to  the  line  B  E .  Wherefore  the  re- 
fdue, namely , the  line  D  C  is  greater  then  the  r efdue, namely , then  the  line  E  C  .And for af- 
tnuch  as  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E ,  and  the  line  A  C  is  common  to  them  both * 
and  the  bafe  D  C  is  greater  then  the  bafeE  C ,  therefore  the  angle  D  A  C  is  greater  then 
the  angle  EAC  And  it  isfroued  that  the  angle  DAB  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  E  :wher 
fore  the  angles  DAB  and  DAO  are  greater  then  the  angle  B  A  C  .  If  therefore  a folide 
angle  be  contayned  under  three  flayne  fuperfiriall  angles  euerytwoof  thofe  three  angles# 
which  two fo  ener  he  taken  are  greater  then  the  third:  which  wasrequired  t'  ' 


In  this  figure  ye  may  playnely  behold  the 
former  demonftration ,  if  ye  eleuate  the  three 
triangles  a:  d,ab  candAcpin  fuch  fort  that 
they  may  all  meete  together  in  the  poynt  a  *• 


The  ip.Theorcme.  The  ziSPropofttton. 

Euery  folide  angle  is  comprehended  Under  flayne  angles  lejfe  thenfower 
right  angles. 

Fppofe  that  Abe  a folide  angle  contayned  under  thefe fuperfiriall  angles  B  A  Cs 
D  A  C  andD  A  B .  Then  I fay  that  the  angles  B  A  C,  D  A  C  and  EiAEare 
yhlfie  thenfower  right  angles .  F ake  in  euery  one  of  thefe  right  lines  A  C  A  B  and 

AD 


u 


hi 

ConlhuBicn, 


Vemonffra* 

tion. 


Cotijlmtion 


ofBuclides  Element es .  FoL^  % : 

two  of  thofe  three  angles,  hid  two  fo  euer  he  taken  ,  dre greater  then  thi 
third. 

Vppofe  that  the folide  angle  A  be  contained  vnaer  three  playne  fuperficiall  an * 
gles,that  is /under  B  A  C,C  A  D ,  and  DAB.T hen  I  fay  that  two  ofthefe 
fuperficiall  angles  how fo  euer  they  he  taken  ,  are  greater  then  the  third .  if  the 
angles  B  A  C,C  A  D,fr  DAB 


he  e quail  the  one  to  the  other, then  is  it  manifefi 
that  two  of  them  which  two  fo  euer  he  taken  are 
greater  then  the  third .  But  if  not,  let  the  angle 
BA  C.  he  the  greater  of the  three  angles .  And 
vnto  the  right  line  A  B  and  from  the  pcynt  A 
make  in  the  playne fuperficies  BAG  'unto  the 
angle  DAB  an  e quail  angle  B  A  E .  And  ( by 
the  2.  of  thefrft  )  make  the  line  A  E  e quail  to 
the  line  A  D .  2 Xpw  a  right  line  B  E  C  drawn e 
by  the  poynt  E, [hall cut  the  right  lines  A  B  and 

A  C  in  the  poyntes  B  and  C  draw  a  right  line  from  «D  to  B,  and  an  other  from  t)  to  C. 
And  forafmuch  as  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E,  and  the  line  A  B  is  common  to  the 
both ,  therefore  thefe  two  lines  D  A  and  A  B  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  A  E  and 
the  angle  DABw  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  E  .Wherefore  ( by  the  4. of the  fir  FI )  the  hafe  D  B 
is  equall  to  the  hafe  B  E .  And forafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  D  B  and  D  C  are  greater  then 
the  line  B  C,  of which  the  line  D  B  is  prone  d  to  he  equall  to  the  line  B  E .  Wherefore  the  re~ 
fidue, namely,  the  line  D  C  is  greater  then  the  refidue, namely, then  the  line  E  Q.Andforaf 
much  as  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E ,  and  the  line  A  C  is  common  to  them  both, 
and  the  hafe  D  C  is  greater  then  the  hafe  EC,  therefore  the  angle  D  A  C  is  greater  then 
the  angle  EAC  And  it  is proued  that  the  angle  DAB//  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  E  :wher 
fore  the  angles  DAB  and  D  AC  are  greater  then  the  angle  BAG.  If  therefore  a folide 
angle  he  contayned  vnder  three  playne  fuperficiall  angles  euerytwoof  thofe  three  angles y 
which  two fo  euer  he  taken  are  greater  then  the  third  .-which  was  required  t'  ' 


•  v  ••  s 

V' 

In  this  figure  ye  may  playnely  behold 
former  demonftration ,  if  ye  eleuate  the  thr. 
triangles  ai  d,ab  c  and  a  c  d  in  fuch  fort  that 
they  may  all  meete  together  in  the  poynt  a  ✓ 


The  ip.Theorcme.  The  zifPropofom. 

liuery  folide  angle  is  comprehended  Under  playne  angles  lejje  then  fower 
right  angles. 


SipP  FPP°fe that  A  leaf Aide  angle  contayned  vnder  thefe fuperficiall  angles  B  AC, 
gSl  D  A  C  andD  A  B  .Then  I  fay  that  the  angles  B  A  C,  D  A  C  and  D  A  B  are 
~x&saghlefe  then  fower  right  angles .  T ake  in  euery  one  of  thefe  right  lines  A  C  A  B  and 

AD 


U 


ConfttuHicnr, 


TtmonFlra* 

lion. 


Conjunction 


w 


of-Euclicies  Element e si  Fob $  \  |  • 

f  ^0  0/ thofe  three  angles,  H vbich  two fo  euer  he  taken  ,  dire  greater  then  th§ 

third. 

•  — •  '*•  '  «  if-''-  •  •  '  •  ■'  .  .  'a 

Vppofe  that  the folide  angle  A  he  contained  vnder  three  play  ne  fupefciall  an¬ 
gles,  that  is, vnder  B  A  C,C  A  D ,  and  DAB.  Then  I  fay  that  two  of thefe 
fupefciall  angles  how fo  euer  they  be  taken ,  are  greater  then  the  third .  if  the 
angles  B  A  C,C  AD^DAB 
be  e quail  the  one  to  the  other, then  is  it  manifejl 
that  two  of  them  which  two  fo  euer  be  taken  are 
greater  then  the  third .  But  if  not,  let  the  angle 
BA  C.  be  the  greater  of  the  three  angles .  And 
vnto  the  right  line  A  B  and  from  tkepoynt  A 
make  in  the  playne fuperfcies  BAG  'unto  the 
angle  DAB  an  equall  angle  B  A  E .  And  (  by 
the  2.  of  thefrjl )  make  the  line  A  E  equall  to 
the  line  A  D .  Tpow  a  right  line  B  E  C  dr  awns 
by  thepoynt  H,fhall cut  the  right  lines  A  B  and  B 
A  C  in  the  poyntes  B  and  C  •  draw  a  right  line from  <D  to  B,  and  an  other  from  D  to  C. 
And forafnuch  as  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E,  and  the  line  ABw  common  to  the 
both ,  therefore  thefe  two  lines  D  A  and  A  B  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  A  E  and 
the  angle  D  A  B  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  kk  Wherefore  (by  the4.of the  first )  the  bafe  D  B 
is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  E .  And forafnuch  as  thefe  two  lines  D  B  and  D  C  are  greater  then 
the  line  B  C, of  which  the  line  D  B  is proued  to  be  equall  to  the  line  B  E .  Wherefore  the  re~ 
f due, namely, the  line  D  C  is  greater  then  the  refidue, namely, then  the  line  E  C  .And for af- 
much  as  the  line  D  A  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E ,  and  the  line  A  C  is  common  to  them  both , 
and  the  bafe  D  C  is  greater  then  the  bafe  EC,  therefore  the  angle  D  A  C  is  greater  then 
the  angle  E  A  C  .<Wnd  it  is  proued  that  the  angle  DAB«  equall  to  the  angle  B  A  E  :wher 
fore  the  angles  DAB  and  DAO  are  greater  then  the  angle  BAG.  If  therefore  a folide 
angle  be  contayned  vnder  three  playne  fiperfciall  angles  euerytwoof  thofe  three  angles $ 
which  two  fo  euer  be  taken  are  greater  then  the  third:  which  was  'required  tr  ” 


In  this  figure  ye  may  playnely  behold 
former  demonftration ,  if  ye  eleuate  the  thr^ 
triangles a  b  d3a  b  candAcpin fuch fort tha\ 
they  may  allmeete  together  in  thepoynt  a  „ 


v 


The  ip.'Theorcme. 


\ 


1 


V 


Eiiery  folide  angle  is  comprehended  Under  f  gles  leffe  then  fornr 

right  angles. 

Fppofe  that  Abe  a folide  angle  contayned  vnder  thefe fnpefciall  angles  BAG, 
DACWDAB.r hen  1  fay  that  the  angles  B  A  C,  D  A  C  andD  A  B  are 
lefe  thenfower  right  angles .  T ake  in  euery  one  of  thefe  right  lines  A  C  A  B  and 


ti 


Contfrufficrt, 


lion . 


Conflruction 


ftemnfkfa 

mn» 


< The  eleuenth  Booke 


A  D  apoyntat  all  adventures  and  let  the fame  he  B,C,D  .And  draw  thefe  right  lines  BC, 
C  D  and  D  B .  Andforafmuch  as  the  angle  Bis  a  folide  angle ,  for  it  iscontayned  rvnder 
three fuperficiall angles ,t hat  is,  vnder  C  B  A,  A  B  D  and  CBD,  therefore  (by  the  20. of 
the  eleuenth  )two  of  them  which  two  fo  ever  be  taken  are  greater  then  the  third .  Wherefore 
the  angles  C  B  A  and  A  B  D  are  greater 
then  the  angle  C  B  D  .•  and  by  the  fame  rea- 
fon  the  angles  B  C  A  and  A  C  D  arc  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  angle  BCD.-  and  moreover  the 
angles  C  D  A  and  A  D  B  are  greater  then 
the  angle  C  D  B.  Wherefore  thefe fixe  angles 
CBA,ABD,BCA,ACD,  CD  A, 
and  A  D  B  are  greater  the  thefe  thre  angles , 
namely,  C  B  D,B  CD,^CDB.  But  the 
three  angles  C  B  D,B  D  C,andB  C  D  are 
equall  to  two  right  angles*  Wherefore  the fixe 

angles  C  B  A,  A  B  D,B  C  A,  A  C  D,C  D  A,  and  A  D  B  are  greater  the  two  right  an¬ 
gles.  And forafmuch  as  in  every  one  of  thefe  triangles  A  B  C  ,and  A  B  D  and  A  C  D  three 
angles  are  e  quail  two  right  angles  (by  the  3  2. of  the firfi  )  .  Wherefore  the  nine  angles  of  the 
thre  triangles  ,that  is,  the  angles  C  B  A,A  C  B,B  A  C,A  C  D,D  A  C,C  D  A,  A  D  B, 
DBA  and  BAD  are  equall  to  fixe  right  angles .  of  which  angles  the fixe  angles  ABC, 
B  C  A, AC  D,C  DA,  AD  B  and  DBA  are  greater  then  two  right  angles .  Wherefore 
the  angles  remay ning ,  namely ,  the  angles  B  A  C,C  A  D  andT)  A  B  which  contayne  the 
folide  angle  are  lefie  then  fower  right  angles .  Wherefore  every  folide  angle  is  comprehended 
Tinder playne  angles  leffe  then  fower  right  angles:  which  was  required  to  be  proved. 

If  ye  will  more  fully  fee  this  demonfiration  compare  it  with  the  figure  which  I  put  for  the  better 
fight  of  the  demonftration  of  the  propofition  next  going  before.Onely  here  is  not  required  the  draught 
of  the  luxe  A  E. 

Although  this  demonflration  of  Euclide  be  here  put  for  folide  angles  contayned  vnder  three  fuper- 
ficiall  angles,yet  after  the  like  maner  may  you  proceede  if  the  folide  angle  be  contayned  vnder  fuperfi¬ 
ciall  angles  how  many  fo  euer.  As  for  example  if  it  be  contayned  vnder  fower  fuperficiall  angles ,  if  ye 
follow  the  former  conllru&ion,  the  bafe  will  be  a  quadrangled  figure ,whofe  fower  angles  are  equall  to 
fower  right  angles:  but  the  8.angles  at  the  bafesofthe4  triangles  fet  vpon  this  quadrangled  figure  may 
by  the  10  .propofition  of  this  booke  be  proued  to  be  greater  then  thofe  4.  angles  of  the  quadrangled  fi¬ 
gure  :  As  we  fawe  by  the  difcourfe  of  the  former  demonllration .  Wherefore  thofe  8.  angles  are  greater 
then  fower  right  angles:  but  the  iz. angles  of  thofe  fower  triangles  are  equall  to  8. right  angles.  Where¬ 
fore  the  fower  angles  remayning  at  the  toppe  which  make  the  folide  angle  are  leffe  then  fower  right 
angles  .And  obferuing  this  courfe  ye  may  proceede  infinitely. 

ypThe  20.  T heoreme.  T he  22.  Propofition . 

If  there  be  three  fuperficiall  plame  angles  of lobicb  two  how  foeuer  they 
be  taken  fi>e greater  then  the  third,  and  if  the  right  lines  alfo  ^ finch  con * 
tayne  thofe  angles  be  equall:  then  of  the  lines  coupling  thofe  equall  right 
lines  together  fit  is  pofiible  to  make  a  triangle. 

Fppofe  that  there  be  thre fvperficial angles  A  B  C,D  E  F,and  G  UK, of  which 
let  two,  which  two foeuer  be  taken, be  greater  then  the  third, that  is,  let  the  an¬ 
gles  A  B  C,and  DEE  be  greater  then  the  angle  G  H  K,and  let  the  angles  D  E 
_  f  and  G  H  K  be  greater  then  the  angle  ABC:  and  moreover  let  the  angles  G 
H  K  and  ABC  be greater  thenthe  angle  DE  F.And  let  the  right  lines  A  B,B  C,D  E,EF 
G  H, and  HK  be  equall  the  one  to  the  other,, and  draw  a  right  line from  the  point  A  to  the 


ofSuclides  Elementes *  FoL^* 

point  C,  and  an  other from  the  pint  D  to  the  pint  F,and  moreouer  an  Other from  the  pint 
G  to  the  pint  K.T hen  1 fay  that  it  is  pfible  of three  right  lines  e  quail  to  the  lines  A  C,D  F 


K 


this  propofi* 

tiwh 


and  G  K,  to  make  a  triangle ,  that  it,  that  two  of  the  right  lynes  AC,D  F,andG  K , 

which  two foeuer  he  taken ,  are  greater  then  the  third .  Flow  if  the  angles  A  BC,  D  E  F,  Tbefirft  caft» 

and  GHKbe  equall  the  one  to  the  other ,  it  is  manifest  that  thefe  right  lines  A  C,D  F, 

and  G  K  being  alfo  (by  the  4.of the  frjl)  equall  the  one  to  the  other  ±  itispfible  of  three 

right  lines  equall  to  the  lines  A  C,  D  F,  and  G  K  to  make  a  triangle.  But  if  they  be  not  Second  caft. 

equall, let  them  be  vnequall.And(  by  the  2  j  .of the  frjl )  vnto  the  right  line  H  K,  and  at  the  l  onftrutiion* 

pint  in  it  H,make  vnto  the  angle  ABC  an  equall  angle  K  H  L.And  by  the2.ofthefrf)to 

one  of  the  lines  A  B,BG,  D  E,E  F0G  H,  or  H  K  make  the  line  Ft  L  equal, &  draw  thefe  V  motif ra ■* 

right  lines  K  L  and  G  L.And forafmnch  as  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  are  equall  to  thefe  tion. 

two  lines  K  H  and  H  L,and  the  angle  B  is  equall  to  the  angle  KHL,  therfore  (by  the  4.  of 

the  firB)the  bafe  A  C  is  equalltothe  bafe  K  L.  And forafmuch  as  the  angles  ABCZ  and  G 

H  K  are  greater  then  the  angle  D  E  F,but  the  angle  GH  Lis  equall  to  the  angles  A  B  C,& 

G  H  if  .-therfore  the  angle  GH  L  is  greater  then  the  angle  t)  EE.  And forafmuch  as  thefe 
two  lines  G  H  and  H  L  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines D  E  and  E  F,  and  the  angle  GH  L  is 
greater  then  the  angle  D  E  F jherfore(by  the  2$. of  the frjl)the  bafe  G  Lis  greater  the  the 
hafe  DF .But  the  lines  G  K and  K  L  are  greater  then  the  line  G  L.  Wherforethe  lines  G  K 
&  I<  L  are  much  greater  then  the  line  D  F.But  the  line  K  Lis  equal  to  the  line  A  C.Wher - 
fore  the  lines  AC  and  G  Rare  greater  then  the  line!)  F.  In  like fort  alfo  may  wepoue  that 
the  lines  A  C  and  D  F  are  greater  then  the  line  G  if,  and  that  the  lines  G  K  and  D  F  are 
greater  then  thelyne  A  C.  Wherforeitispjfible  to  make  a  triangle  of  three  lynes  equall  to 
the  lines  AC,D  F,and  G  K  :  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated 


An  other  demonftratiom 


Suppofe  that  the  three fuprfciallangles  be  A  BC,DE  F,  and  G  HR,  of  which  angles  An  other  fa 
two  how  foeuer  they  be  taken, are greater  then  the  ihird.^And  let  them  be  contained  vnder  mnttmm* 
thefe  equall  right  lines  A  B,B  C,D  E,E  F,G  H,H  K, which  equall  right  lints  let  theft  lints 
AC,DF, andGK 
toy ne  together.  Then  / 
fay  that  it  is pofible  of 
three  right  lines  equal 
to  the  lines  AC,  D  F, 
and  G  K  to  make  a  tri¬ 
angle, which  againe  is 
as  much  to  fay,  as  that 
two  ofthofe  lines 
which  two  foeuer  he  ta¬ 
ken, are  greater  then  the  third; 1{ow  againe  if  the  angles  B,E,H,be  equall, the  lines  alfo  A  C 


XX. i.  X>  F, 


i Cvnifruflion* 


Dmonfir a- 
tm. 


T he  eleuentb  2?  oof^e 

D  F,and  G  K  are  equal!, and fo  two  of  them  fhall  be  greater  then  the  third.But  if not  Jet  the 
angles  B,E,H,  be  vnequall,and  let  the  angle  B  be  greater  then  either  of the  angles  E  and  H. 
T  herfore  ( by  the  2^.ofthefrFi )  the  right  line  A  C  is  greater  then  either  of  the  lines  D  F  & 
G  K.  c And  it  is  manifest  that  the  line  A  C  with  either  of  the  lines  D  F  or  G  K  is  greater 
4  hen  the  third .  I  fay  alfo  that  the  lines  D  F  and  G  K  are greater  then  the  line  AC.  Vnto 
the  right  line  A  B,and  to  the  goint  in  it  B,make  (by  the  22. of  the  first)  vnto  the  angle  G  H 
K  an  e quail  angle  A  B 
L,  and  vnto  one  of  the 
lines  A  B.,B  C^  D  E,E 
F,G  H  or  H  K,  make 
by  the  2.  of the  first)  an 
t quail  line  B  L.  And 
draw  a  right  line  from 
the  pint  A  toy  pint 
L,and  an  other  fro  the  * 
pint  L  to  the  pint  C. 

\_And forafmuch  as 
thefe  two  lines  A  B  & 

B  L  are  equal  to  thefe  two  lines  G  B  ,dr  H  K  the  one  to  the  other, and  they  containe  equal  an¬ 
gles  :  t  her  fore  ( by  the  4.  of  the  first }  the  bafe  A  L  is  equallto  thebafe  G  K.  And  forafmuch  as 
the  angles  E  and  H  be  greater  then  the  angle  ABC ,  of  which  the  angle  G  UK  is  equal  to  the 
angle  A  B  Ly  her  fore  the  angle  remayning, namely, the  angle  E  is  greater  then  the  angle  L  B 
C,  And  forafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  L  B  and  B  C,are  e quail  to  thefe  two  lines  D  E  and  E  E 
the  one  to  the  other, and  the  angle  E>  E  F  is  greater  then  the  angle  L  B  Cy  her  fore  (by  the  2 $. 
of the  fir  Ft )the  bafe  D  F  is  greater  then  the  bafe  L  C  ■:  and  it  is  proued  that  the  line  G  K  is  e- 
quatl  to  the  line  A  L.Wherfore  the  lines  D  F  dr  G  K  are  greater  then  the  lines  A  L  dr  LC. 
But  the  lines  A  Land  L  C  are  greater  then  the  line  A  C.  Wherfore  the  lines  D  F  dr  G  K  art 
much  greater  the  the  line  A  C  Wherfore  two  of thefe  right  lines  A  C,D  F  dr  G  K  which  two 
foeuer  be  taken  are  greater  then  the  third.  Wherfore  it  is  pffble  of  three  right  lines  equall 
to  the  lines  A  C,DF  and  GK  to  make  a  triangle  s  which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated . 

_  ,  ,  t  i  .  •  1  %  -  '  1 1 

3  ,  v  ‘.••V  ,L  O  Cl  ■  •  " '  '  '  ■ 

f  The  3.  Problems.  Theizy.  Prapojition..  .  . . 

Of  three plaine fuperfciall  angles,  two  of  "Which  how  foeuer  they  he  taken , 
are  greater  then  the  third, to  make  a folide  angle :  flow  it  is  necejfary  that 
thofe  three  fuperficiall  angles  be  lejfe  then  fower  right  angles. 


Vppofe  that  the fuperfciall angles  geuen  be  AB  C,  D  E  F,G  H  K :  of  which 
let  two  how  foeuer  they  betaken,  be greater  then  the  third  :  and  moreouer ,  let 
thofe  three  angles  beleffe  then  fower  right  angles .  It  is  required  of three fuper¬ 
ficiall  angles  equallto  the  angles  ABC ,  JD  EF?  and  G  H  K,to  make  a  folide 

s 


c 


of Suclides  Elementes :  335, 

$r  bodily  angle .  Let  the  lines  AB,B  C,D  E,E  F,  G  H,  and  H  K,  be  ■; made  equall :  and 
dram  a  right  line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  C,  (dr  an  other from  the  point  D  to  the  point 
F,  and  an  other  from  the  point  G  to  the  point  K .  Now  (by  the ^2.  oft  he  eleuenth)  it  is  pofi 
fible  of  three  right  lines  equall  to  the  right  lines  A  C,D  E,and  G  K,  to  make  a  triangle. 
Make  fuch  a  triangle,  and  let  the  fame  be  L  MM, 
fo  that  let  the  line  AC  be  equall  to  the  line  L  M, 
and  the  line  D  F  to  the  line  M  N,and  the  line  G  K 
to  the  line  L  N.  And  (by  the  s -of  the  fourth )about 
the  triangle  L  M  Nfidefcribe  a  circle  L  M  N,  and 
take  (by  the  1  .of the  third  )  the  centre  of  the  fame 
circle,  which  centre fall  either  be  within  the  tri¬ 
angle  LMN,or  in  one  of  the fides  therofor  with¬ 
out  it .  Firfletitbe  within  the  triangle,  and  let 
the fame  be  the  point  X,  dr  dr  awe  thefe  right  lines 
LX,  (MX,  and  NJC .  Ifj> that  the  Ime  a  s 

is  greater  then  the  line  LX .  F  OT  fJOty  theft  the  Hflt 

A  B  is  either  equall  to  the  line  L  X,  or  els  it  is  lefe 
then  it .  Fir  ft  let  it  be  equall .  And  forafmuch  as 
the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  L  X,  but  the  line  AB  isequall  to  the  line  B  C,  therefore  the 
line  L  X  is  equall  to  the  line  B  C :  and  vnto  the  line  L  X  the  line  X  M  is  ( by  the  is -definition 
of  thefrft )  equall :  wherefore  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  L  X 
and  X  M  the  one  to  the  other :  and  the  bafe  ^A  C  is  fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  bafe  L  CM. 
Wherefore  ( by  the  8. of thefirfi)  the  angle  ABC  is  equall  to  the  angle  LX  M  .  And  by  the 
famereaj on  alfo  the  angle  D  E  F  is  equall  to  the  angle  CM  X  N ,  andmoreouer  the  angle 
G  H  K  to  the  angle  NX  L .  Wherefore  thefe  three  angles  A  B  C,  D  E  F,  and  G II K,  are  e- 
qualllothefe  three  angles  LX  M,M  X  N,.&  N  X  L .  But  the  three  angles  L  X  M,M  X  N, 
.andN  X  L,  are  equall  to  fower  right  angles  (  as  it  is  manifef  to  fee  by  the  13  .of thefirfi, if a- 
ny  one  of thefe  lines  MX,  LX,  or  N  X,  be  extended  on  the fide  that  the  point  X  is)  .  Wher- 
f ore  the  three  angles  AB C,L)  E  F,andG  H  K,are  alfo  equall  to  fewer  right  angles .  But 
they  are  fuppofed  to  be  lefife  then  fower  right  angles :  which  is  impofible .  Wherefore  the  line 
A  B  is  not  equall  to  the  line  LX .  I fay  alfo  that  the  line  ^AB  is  not  lejfe  then  the  line  L  X. 
For  if  it  bepofible,  let  it  be  lefe :  and  ( by  the  2. of  thefrft )  vnto  the  line  A  B  put  an  equall 
line  X  O  :  and  to  the  line  B  C  put  an  equall  line  X  P,  ana  draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  O 
to  the  point  P  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  B  C, therefore  alfo  the  line 
X  0  is  equall  to  the  line  X  P  .  Wherefore  the  refidue  O  L  is  equall  to  the  refidue  M  P  .  Wher- 
fore(by  the  2.0 f the fixt)  the  line  L  M  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  O  P  •  and  the  triangle  LMX 
is  equianglc  to  the  triangle  0  P  X .  Wherefore  as  the  line  X  L  is  to  the  line  L  M,fo  is  the  line 
X  0  tothe  line  O  P .  Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  16 .of 'the f ft)  as  the  line  LX  is  to  the  line 
X  0,  fois  the  line  L  M  to  the  line  0  P  .  But  the  line  L  X  is  greater  then  the  line  10.  Wher- 
fore  alfo  the  line  L  Mis  greater  then  the  line  0  P  .  Butt  he  line  L  M  is  put  to  be  equall  to  the 
line  A  C :  wherefore  alfo  the  line  A  C  is  greater  then  the  line  0  P  .  Now  forafmuch  as  thefe 
two  right  lines  A  B  and  B  C  are  equall  to  thefe  two  right  lines  0  X  and  X  P,and  the, bafe  A  C 
is  greater  then  the  bafe  0  P,  therefore  (by  the  23.  of  thefirfi)  the  angle  A  B  C  is  greater  then 
the  angle  0  X  P  .  In  like fort  alfo  may  we  prone,  that  the  angle  I)  E  F  is  greater  then  the  an¬ 
gle  MX  N,  and  that  the  angle  G  H  K  is  greater  then  the  angle  N  XL  .  Wherefore  the  three 
angles  A  B  C,  D  E  F,  and  G  H  I(,  are  greater  then  the  three  angles  LX  M,  MX  N,  and 
NJX  L  .But  the  angles  A  B  C,  T>  E  F,  and  G  H  K,  are fuppofed  to  be  lefe  then  fower  right 
angles :  wherefore  much  more  are  the  angles  L  X  M,M  X  N,& NX  L  lejfe  then  fower  right 
angles. But  they  are  alfo  equall  to  fower  right  angles  .-which  is  impofible.  Wherefore  the  line 
A  B  is  not  lejfe  then  the  line  L  X:  and  it  is  alfo  proued  that  it  is  not  equall  vnto  it .  Wherfore 

XX.ij.  the 


ConfiruUkn* 


' Three  tafes 
in  this  prop6-> 


fit  ion. 

Thefirjl  cafe t 


A  necefary 
thing  to  be 
proued  befoye 
he  pi  oceede 
any  farther 
in  the  con-’ 
Jlructionof 
the  Problem* 

s 


*  Which  how 
to  fincie  out  is 
taught  at  the 
end  of  this  de 
monilration, 
and  aifo  was 
taught  in  the 
aifunrpt  put 
before  the  14. 
proportion  of 
the  tech  boke. 

Demonstra¬ 
tion  oftbs 
frit  cajet 


Second  cafe. 


the  line  A  B  is  greater  then  the  line  LX. 

Now from  the -point  X  raife  vpvnto  the  plaine fuperfcies  of  the  circle  LMN  a  perpendi¬ 
cular  line  X  R  (by  the  12. of  the  eleventh)  .  ^And  vnto  that  which  the  fquare  of  the  line 
kA  B  excedeth  the  fquare  of  the  line  X  L  *  let  the 
fquare  of  the  line  X  R  be  equall.  <^xlnd  draw  a  right 
line  from  the  point  R  to  the  point  L,  and  an  other 
from  the  point  R  to  the  point  M,  and  an  other  from 
the  point  R  to  the  point  N.  And  forafmuch  as the 
line  R  X  is  ereBed perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fu- 
perfcies  of  the  circle  LMN ,  therefore  ( 'by  corner¬ 
men  of  the  fecond  definition  of  the  eleuenth)  the  line 
RX  is  ereBed  perpendicularly  to  every  one  of  thefe 
lines  L  X ,  CM  X,  and  N^X .  ^Ana  forafmuch  as 
the  line  L  X  is  equall  to  the  line  X  CM,  &  the  line 
X  R  is  common  to  them  both ,  and  is  alfo  ereBed  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  them  both, therefore  (by  the  4. of  the 
frjl )  the  bafe  R  Lis  equall  to  the  bafe  R  CM .  And 
by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  line  R  N  is  equall  to  either  of  thefe  lines  R  L  and  R  M .  where¬ 
fore  thefe  three  lines  RL,R  M,  and  R  N,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  And  forafmuch  as 
t vnto  that  which  the fquare  of  the  line  A  E  excedeth  the fquare  of  the  line  L  X,  the fquare  of 
the  line  RX  is  fuppofed  to  he  equall,  therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  AB  is  equall  to  the 
fquare s  of  the  lines  L  X  and  R  X  .But  vnto  the fquares  of,  the  lines  L  X  and  X  R,  the  fquare 
of  the  line  LRis(by  the  47  .of thefrfl )  equall,  for  the  angle  LX  R  is  a  right  angle .  Where¬ 
fore  the  fquare  of the  line  A  Bis  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  R  L.  Wherefore  alfo  the  line 
A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  R  L.But  vnto  the  line  A  B  is  equall euery  one  of  thefe  lines  B  C,D  E, 
E  F,G  B,andB  K,and  vnto  the  line  R  L  is  equall  either  of  the  felines  R  M  and  R  N.Wher- 
fore  euery  one  of  thefe  lines  A  B,B  C,  D  E,E  F,G  B,and  B  K,  is  equall  to  euery  one  of thefe 
lines  R  L,RM,andRN .  And forafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  R  L  and  R  CM  are  equall  to 
thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  B  C,  and  the  bafe  L  M  is  fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  bafe  A  C,  ther- 
fore  ( by  the  8. of thefrsl )  the  angle  LRM  is  equall  to  the  angle  ABC  .  And  by  the  fame 
reafon  alfo  the  M  RN  is  equall  to  the  angle  BEE,  and  the  angle  LRN  to  the  angle 
GBK  .  Wherefore  of  three  fuperfciall  angles  LR  M,  M  RN,  and  LRN ,  which  are  e- 
quallto  three J uperf Ball  angles geue, namely, to  the  angles  A  B  C,X>  E  F,  fpGH  K,is  made 
afolide  angle  R,  comprehended  v rider  the  fuperfciall  angles  L  R  M,  M  R  N,and  L  R  2 %j 
which  was  required  to  be  done. 

But  now  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  be  in  one  of  the  fides  of  the  triangle,  let  it  be  in  the 
fide  M  N,  and  let  the  centre  be  X .  And  draw  a  right  line  from  the point  L  to  the  point  X. 
J fay  againe,  that  the  line  A  B  is  greater  then  the  line  LX.  For  if  not,  then  A  B  is  either  e- 
quall  to 
LX,  or 
els  it  is 
left  then 
it  .  Eirfi 
let  it  be 
equall. 

Now  the 
thefe 
two  lines 
AB  and 


■  K 


K 


ofcuclides  Elements. 

B  C,  that  is,  D  E  &  E  F  are  equallto  tbefe  two  lines 
M  X  andX  L,  that  is,  to  the  line  M  N .  But  the  line 
M  NJs fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  line  D  F.  Where¬ 
fore  alfo  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F  are  equall  to  the  line 
D  F :  which  (by  the  20,0ft  he f if  )  is  hn p  0 ft  blc .  W her  - 
fore  the  line  A  Bis  not  equall  to  the  line  LX  .  In  like 
fort  alfo  may  weproue,  that  it  is  not  lefe .  Wherefore 

the  line  AB  is  greater  then  the  line  LX  .And  nova  if  ^  H 

as  before  vnto  the  fame  fuperficies  of  the  circle  be  e- 
recled fro  the  point  X  a  perpendicular  line  R  X  rvhofe 
fquare  let  be  equall  vnto  that  which  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  B  exccdeth  the fquare  of  the  line  L  X,  and  if 
the  reft  of the  con  fraction  and  demonfi ration  be  ob- 
feruedin  this  that  was  in  the forma  cafe,  then  [hall  the  Prolleme  be  fins  fired. 

But  now  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  be  without  the  triangle  L  fCM  N,  and  let  it  be  in  the 
point  X .  And  draw  thefe  right  lines  L  X,M  X,and  NX .  I fay  that  in  this  cafe  alfo  the  line 
A  B  is  greater  then  the  line  L  X .  For  if not,  then  is  it  either  equall  or  lejfe .  Firf  let  it  be  e- 


quail.  Wherefore  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  BC  are 
equall  to  thefe  two  lines  M  X  and  X  L  the  one  to  the 
other,  and  the  bafe  AC  is  equall  to  the  bafe  CM  L . 

Wherefore  ( by  the  8. of the firf)  the  angle  ABCis 
equallto  the  angle  M  X  L :  and  by  the  fame  reafon 
alfo  the  angle  G  H  K  is  equall  to  the  angle  L  X  Ff. 

Wherefore  the  whole  angle  CM  X  N  is  equall  to 
thefe  two  angles  ABC  and  G  H  K  .  But  the  angles 
ABC  and  G  JFK  are  greater  then  the  angle  DEF . 

Wherefore  the  angle  MX  N  is  greater  then  the  an¬ 
gle  D  EF .  And  forafmuch  as  thefe  trvo  lines  D  E 
and  E  F  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  M  X  and  X  N, 
and  the  bafe  D  F  is  equallto  the  bafe  CM  N, there¬ 
fore  ( by  the  8  .of the  fir fi )  the  angle  M X  N  is  equall 
to  the  angle  DEF.  And  it  is  proued  that  it  is  alfo 
greater :  which  is  impofible .  Wherefore  the  line  B  is  not  equall  to  the  line  LX  .In  like 

fort  alfo  may  weproue,  that  it  is  not  lefe .  Wherfore  the  line  A  B  is  greater  then  the  line  L  X. 
And  againe  if  vnto  theplaine fuperficies  of  the  circle  be  erected  perpendicularly  from  the 
point  X  aline  X  R,whofe  fquare  is  equallto  that  which  the  fquare.  of  the  line  AB  exceeaeth 
the fquare  of the  line  L  X,  and  the  ref  of  the  conf  ruction  be  done  in  this  that  was  in  the  for¬ 
mer  cafes,  then jh  all  the  Probleme  be  fin  i fired. 

1 fay  more  oner-,  that  the  line  A  B  is  not  lejfe  then  the  line  LX .  For  if  it  bepofiblejet 
it  be  lejfe .  And  vnto  the  line  A  B,  put  ( by  the  2. of the  fir fl)  the  line  X  0  equall :  and  vnto 
the  line  B  Cput  the  line  X  F  equall :  And  draw  a  right  line from  the  point  0  to  the  point  P . 

XX.  itj.  And 


Third  cafe* 


An  ether  demo- 
gratia  to  prone 
that  the  line  A 
B  is  not  lefe  the 
the  line  L  X. 


This  was 
before  taught 
in  the  tenth 
bookie  in  the 
dffumpt  put 
before  the  14,* 
proposition* 


The  el euenth  Tool^e 

And  for  afmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  £  C, therefore  the  line  X  O  is  eqmll  to  the 
line  X  F  .  Wherefore  the  ref  due  0  L  is  equall  to  the  ref  due  M  P .  Wherefore  (by  the  2.  of  the 
fxt )  the  line  L  M,  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  P  0  .  And  the  triangle  L  X  M  iseqtu  angle  to  the 
triangle  P  X  O  .  Wherefore  (by  the  6. of  the fxt)  as  7_ 

the  line  L  X  is  to  the  line  L  M,fo  is  the  line  X  O  to 
the  line  P  O  .Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  16.  of the 
fft )  as  the  line  A  X  is  ,to  the  line  X  0,fo  is  the  line 
L  M  to  the  line  0  P  .  But  the  line  L  X  is  greater  their 
the  line  X  0  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  LM  is  greater 
then  the  line  0  P  .  But  the  line  L  M  is  equall  to  the 
line  A  C  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  A  C  is  greater  then 
the  line  0  P  .  Plow  for  afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  A  B 
and  B  C  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  0  X  &  X  P  the 
me  to  the  other,  and  the  bafe  A  C  is  greater  then  the 
bafe  0  P,  therefore  ( by  the  2$.  of  the frfl)  the  angle 
ABC  is  greater  then  the  angle  O  XP  .  And  in  like fort  five  put  the  line  X  R  equall  to  either ' 
of  thefe  lines  X  0  or  X  P,  and  draw  aright  line fro  the  point  0  to  the  point  R,  ive  may  prone 
that  the  angle  G  H  K  is  greater  then  the  angle  0  X  R  .  Vnto  the  right  line  L  X,  and  '■ vn - 
to  the  point  in  it  X,  make  (  by  the  23.  of  the  frfl  )<vnto  the  angle  ABC  an  equall  angle 
LX S  :  and  vnto  the  angle  G H K  make  an  equall  angle  LXT  .  And  ( by  the fecond 
of  the  frfl  )  let  either  of  thefe  lines  S  X  ,and  XT ,  be  equall  to  the  line  0  X .  And 
dr awe  thefe  lines  0  S,OT,qndST .  Andforafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  BC  aree- 
ijuall  to  thefe  two  lines  0  X  and  X  S,  and  the  angle  ABC  is  equall  to  the  angle  0  X  S,  there¬ 
fore  (by  the  4.. of  the frfl)  the  bafe  A  C,that  is,  L  cJM,  is  equall  to  the  bafe  O  S .  And  by  the 
fame  reafon  alfo  the  line  L  N  is  equall  to  the  line  O  T.  And for  afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  LM 
and  L  Pfoare  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  S  0  and  O  T-,  and  the  angle  c JM  L  Pfois  greater  then 
the  angle  S  0  T,  therefore  ( by  the  2 5.0ft  he 'frfl)  the  bafe  PM  Pfis  greater  then  the  bafe 
S  T .  But  the  line  CM  P(Js  equall  to  the  line  D  F .  Wherefore  the  line  D  F  is  greater  then 
the  line  S  T  .Now for  afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  D  E  and  E  F  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines 
S  X  and  X  T,  and  the  bafe  D  F  is  greater  then  the  bafe  S  T,  therefore  ( by  the  2$.  of the  frfl) 
the  angle  D  EF  is  greater  then  the  angle  S  XT  .But  the  angle  S  XT  is  equall  to  the  angles 
ABC  and  G  H  K .  Wherefore  alfo  the  angle  DEE  is  greater  then  the  angles  ABC  and 
G  H  K .  But  it  is  alfo  lefle :  which  is  impo foible. 

But  nova  let  vs  declare  how  tofinde  out  the  line  x  r  ,  whofe fquare fall  be  equall  to  that 
which  the fquare  of  the  line  a  b  exceedeth  the  fquare  of the  line  1  x.  Take  the  two  right  lines 
a  b  and  l  x  ,  and  let  ah  be  the  greater ,  and  vpon  a  b 
defer ibe  a  femicircle  a  c  b,  and  from  the poynt  a  apply 
into  the  femicircle  aright  line  a  c  equall  to  the  right 
line  l  x;  and  draw  a  right  line  from  the  poynt  c  to  the 
poynt  b  .And for  afmuch  as  in  the femicircle  acb  is  an 
angle  a  -e  b  , therefor  e(by  the  31. of  the  third)the  angle 
a  cb  .is  a  right  angle. Wherefore  (by  the  47 -.of the firft).  A 

the  fquare  of  the  line  a  b  isequalltothefquaresofthe  _ 

lines  a  c  and  c .  b  •  wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  ab 

is  in  power  more  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  a  c  by  the  fquare  of  the  line  cb:  but  the  line  a  c 
is  equall  to  the  line  t  x  therefore  the f q uare  oft  he  line  a  -  b  is  in  power  more  then  the fquare 
of the  line  l  x  by  the  fquare  of  the  line  c  b  .  if  therefore  vnto  the  line  c  b  we  make  the  line 
x  r  equall,  then  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  a  b  greater  then  the fquare  of  the  line  lx  by  the 
fquare  of the  line  xr;  which  was  required  to  be  doone. 


In 


Fol.nj. 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


In  this  figure  may  ye  more  fully  fee  the 
eonftru&ionand  demonftration  ofthefirft 
cafe  of  the  former  13  .Propofitio,  if  ye  eredt 
perpendicularly  the  triangle  x  r  n,  and  vh- 
to  it  bend  the  triangle  LMR,that  the  an¬ 
gles  r  ofeche  may  ioyne  together  in  the 
point  r.  And  fo  fully  vnderilanding  this 
cafe,  the  other  cafes  will  not  be  hard  to 
conceaue. 


f  The  21.  Theoreme.  The  24 .  Propofition. 

If  a  foltde  or  body  be  contaynedjmder  *  fixe  parallel  playne  . .  ...  .  . 

r  r  •  ^ 7  ,  r  1  ■  r  r  -  1  r  i  rL  i  * M.Dee- ( to auoide  camllation) 

Juperpaeces 3tbe  oppojite  plume juperficteces  of  the fume  bo*  ad(Jeth  t0  Euciides  propofition  this 
dy  ure  eumlland  par allelovr amines.  worde  fixe:  whome  i  haue  foiiow- 

J  ^  ed  accordingly,  and  not  Zamberts, 

Fppofe  that  this  folide  body  CD  HG  he  contained  rvnder  This  kinde  of  body  mencioned 
thefe  6 .parallel plains  piper pcieces,  namely,  A  C,G  F,  B  G.  in  the  propofition  is  called  a  Paial- 

cEFB,andA  E.Thcn  I  fay  that  the  oppofite fuperfcieces  2ltreC^e£if  ' 

_ _ of  the  fame  body, are  equal  and parallel ogrames,  it  is  to  wete, 

the  two  oppofites  A  C  and  G  F,  and  the  two  oppofites  B  G 
and  C  E,and  the  two  oppofites  F  B  and  A  E  to  be  e  quail, 

and  al  to  be  parallelogrammes.  For  forafmnch  asjwopa-  \  ^  Demonflra- 

rallel plaine fuperfcieces,  that  is,  B  G,  and  C  E  are  deni-  [a  1 Q  tion  that  the 

dedby  theplaine fuperfeies  AC,  their  common  ft  chons  -oppojite  fides 

are  ( by  the  16.  of  the  elcuenth )  parallels.  Wh  erf  ere  the  ’  ure  parallelo- 

line  A  B  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  C  D .  Again  e  for  a  [much  grammes, 

as  two  parallel  plaine fuperfcieces  F  B  and  A  E  are  deci¬ 
ded  by  the  plaine fuperfeies  A  C  their  common  fictions 
are  by  the fame  propofition, parallels.  Wherfore  thelyne 
A  E>  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  B  C.  And  it  is  aifo  proued, 
that  the  line  A  Bis  a  parallel  to  the  line  D  C.  Wherfore 
the fuperfeies  AC  is  a  parallelogramme.  In  like  fort  alfo  3 

maj  weproue,that  euery  one  ofthefi fitperfcices  C  E,  G  F,  BG,FB,  and  A  Fare  paralleled 
grammes. Draw  a  right  line from  the  point  A, to  the  point  H,and  an  other from  the  point  D 
to  the  point  F.Aud forafmnch  as  the  line  A 1 3  is  proued  a  parallel  to  the  line  C  D,  andthe  ijne  VemntflratiS 
b  h  to  the  hne  c  f,  therfore  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and B  H  touching  the  one  the  other,  are  fatfe  °Pf°" 
parallels  to  thefe ?  two  right  lines  D  C  and  C  F  touching  alfo  the  one  ''the  other,  and  not  being 
in  one  and  the felfefimeplaine  fuperfeies. Wherfore  ( by  theio.oftheeleuenth Jthey  compre-  A 
hend  equall  angles  Wherfore  the  angle  A  B  His  equal l  to  the  angle  D  C  F .  ^Andfo  rafmuc h 
as  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  b  Hare*  equall  t0  thefe  two  lines  D  C  and  CF 

and  the  anple  -a  n  His  proued  equall  to  the  angle  d  c  v  jherfore ( hi  the  a  of  the  ,  ^  ®  is  squall  to  DC,  becaufe 

quail  to  the  triangle  D  C  F  .And forafmnch  as  (by  the  4i.ofthefrf)the  fon,  isB  H  equall  to  C  F,  becaufe 
parallelogramme  B  G  is  double  to  the  triande  A  B  IF,  and  'the  parallelo-  ^“P^ciesFB  is  proued  a  pa- 
gramme  CF  is  alfo  double  to  the  triangle  DCF,  therfore  the  parallelo-S^^o^x^t^  *  34‘°f 

XX. nf  gramme 


\ 

\ 

A 

F 

\ 

\ 

ofSuclides  Elententes . 


Foil  jy. 


In  this  figure  may  ye  more  fully  fee  the 
eonftru&ion  and  demonftration  of  the  firlt 
cafe  of  the  former  13  .Propofitio,  if  ye  eredl 
perpendicularly  the  triangle  x  r  n,  and  vh- 
to  it  bend  the  triangle  ma,  that  the  an¬ 
gles  r  ofeche  may  ioyne  together  in  the 
point  r  .  And  fo  fully  vnderllanding  this 
cafe,  the  other  cafes  will  not  be  hard  to 
conceaue. 


Demonftra¬ 
tion  that  the 
oppofite  files 
are  parallek- 
grammes • 


f  The  2 1.  T heoreme.  X he  24.  (P ropofition . 

If  a  folide  or  body  be  contaynedfmder  *  fixe  parallel playne  . ,  .  . 

/  r  ■  n  r  1  ■  r  r  ■  1  r  i  r  i  *  M  Dee  ( to  auoide  cauuiatidn) 

Juperpcieces  fibe  oppojite  Plame Juper faeces  of  the fume  bo*  adcjet’h  to  Euciides  propofition  this 
dy  are  equall  and  parallelovrammes.  wordefixe:  whom  e  i  haue  folio  w- 

J  1  ^  ed  accordingly,  and  not  Zamberts, 

Vppofe  that  this  folide  body  C  D  II G  be  contained  rvnder  This  kinde  of  body  mencioned 
!  thefe  6 .parallel plaine  fuperficieces,  namely,  A  C,G  F,  B  (7,  propofition  is  called  a  Pai  al- 

C  EFB, and  A  E. Then  I  fay  that  the  oppofite fuperficieces  ^rL'foregTJenfoereof! 
of  the f ame  body, are  equal  and parallel 'ogrames,  it  is  to  rvete, 
the  two  oppojites  A  C  and  G  F,  and  the  two  oppofites  B  G 
and  C  E,and  the  two  oppoftes  F  B  and  A  E  to  he  e  quail, 
and  al  to  be parallelogrammes.  F cr  forafmuch  as  two  pa¬ 
rallel plaine  fuperfcieces ,  that  is,  B  G,  and  C  E  are  delu¬ 
ded  by  the  plaine fuperficies  A  C,  their  common  f  chons 
are  ( by  the  16.  of  the  elcuenth )  parallels.  Wherfore ■  the 
line  A  Bis  a  parallel  to  the  line  C  D .  Again  e  forafmuch 
as  two  parallel  plaine fuperficieces  EE  and  A  E  are  de  ai¬ 
ded  by  the  plaine fuperficies  A  C  their  common  feel  ions 
are  by  the fame  propofition, parallels.  VP  her  fore  thelyne 
A  D  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  B  C.  And  it  is  alfo  froued, 
that  the  line  A  Bis  a  parallel  to  the  line  DC.  Wherfore 
the  fuperfcies  A  C  is  aparallelogramme.  In  like  fort  alfo 
maj  weproue,that  entry  one  of thefe fuperfi fees  C  E,  G  E,  B  G,F  B,  and  A  E  areparallelo - ' 
grammes. Draw  a  right  line from  the  point  A, to  the  point  H,and  an  other  from  the  point  D 
to  the  point  F.Aud forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  prone  da  parallel  to  the  line  C  D,  and  thelyne  ^emmftmio 
e  h  to  the  hne  c  f,  therfore  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  andB  II  touching  the  one  the  other ,  are  oppo- 

parallels  to  thefe ?  two  right  lines  D  C  and  C  F  touching  alfo  the  one  'the  other,  and  not  being  a/tnM* 
in  one  and  the felfe fame  plaine  fuperficies. Wherfore  ( by  the  io.oftheeleuenth  )they  compre-  fivei^nti 
hend  equall  angles. Wherfore  the  angle  A  B  His  equall  to  the  angle  D  C  E.  ^Andforafnuch ' 
as  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  b  Hare*  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  D  C  and  CF, 

and  the  ancle  huh!  froued  equall  to  the  angle  d  c  F  .they  fore  ( In  the  a  of  the  ,  ^  ®  *s  eclua^ t0  becaufe 

quad,  to  the  triangle  D  C  F  .And forafmuch  as  (by  the  41  .of the  firf)the  fon,  is  BH  equall  to  CF,  becaufe 
parallelogram  me  B  G  is  double  to  thetrianfie  A  B II,  and  the  parallels-  thf  %~rficies  FB  isproued  apa- 
gramme  C  E  is  alfo  double  to  the  triangle  DCF,  therfore  the  paralldo-SeMt  oTproofoi'10""  34‘°f 

XX.iiij .  gramme 


. 


if 


of  Suclides  Elementes. 


FoI.qj* 


In  this  figure  may  ye  more  fully  fee  the 
eonftru <Sion  and  demonftration  ofthefirft 
cafe  of  the  former  13  .Propolitio,  if  ye  eredl 
perpendicularly  the  triangle  x  r  n,  and  vfc- 
to  it  bend  the  triangle  lmr,  that  the  an. 
gles  r.  ofeche  may  ioyne  together  in  the 
point  r.  And  fo  fully  vnderllanding  this 
cafe,  the  other  cafes  will  not  be  hard  to 
conceaue. 


y  The  2 1.  Theoreme.  T he  24.  Propofition. 

If  a  folide  or  body  be  contayned lander  *  fixe  parallel  playne  ..  ...  .  . 

r  r  ■  1  r  1  ■  r  r-  r  r  i  r  i  *MDee  ( to  auoide  camllation) 

Juperficteces ,tbe  oppojite  platne juper faeces  of  the fame  bo*  adtJeth  to  Euciides  propofition  this 
dy  are  e quail  and  parallelo grammes.  worde  fixe:  whome  1  haue  roiiow- 

J  1  r  &  ed  accordingly,  and  not  Zamberts, 

Vppofe  that  this  folide  body C  D  H  G  he  contained  vnder  This  kinde  of  body  mencioned 
!  thefe  6. parallel  plain  e  fuperfcieces,  namely,  A  C,G  F,  B  (7,  in  the  propofition  is  called  a  Paral- 

CE,F  B,and  AE.T hen  l  fay  that  the  oppofite fuperfcieces  JioTbe^rgTueiuhereof 
yjj  of  the  fame  body, are  equal  and parallelogrames  ,it  is  to  ivete, 
the  two  oppofites  A  C  and  G  F ,  and  the  two  oppofites  B  G 
and  C  E,and  the  two  oppofites  F  B  and  AEto  be  e quail, 
and  alto  beparallelogrammcs.  For forafmuch  as  Jwo  pa¬ 
rallel  plaine fuperfcieces,  that  is,  B  G,  and  C  E  are  deri¬ 
ded  by  the  plaine 'fuperficies  A  C,  their  common  fictions 
are  ( by  the  16.  of  the  elcuenth )  parallels.  Wh  erf  ere  the 
line  A  B  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  C  D .  Again  e  forafmuch 
as  trvo  parallel  plaine fuperfcieces  F  B  and  A  E  are  deui- 
ded  by  the  plaine  fuperficies  AC  their  Common fecHons 
are  by  the fame  propofition, parallels.  VE her  fore  theiyne 
A  D  is  a parallel  to  the  line  B  C.  And  it  is  alfo  proued, 
that  the  line  A  B  is  a parallel  to  the  line  I)  C.  Wherf  ore 
the  fuperficies  A  C  is  aparallelogramrne .  In  like  fort  alfo 

map  weproue,that  euery  one  of theft fitperfiejees  C  E,  G  F,  B  G,FB,  and  A  E  are  parallelo- J 
grammes. Draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  A, to  the  point  El, and  an  other  from  the  point  D 


Demonfl  ra¬ 
tion  that  the 
■oppofite  fides 
are  parallelo- 
grammes* 


parallels  to  thefe  two  right  lines  D  C  and  C  F  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other,  and  not  being  ^ 

in  one  and  the felfe fame  plaine  fuperficies. Wherf ore  ( by  the  10.  of  the  eleuenth  )they  compre-  ^ 
bend  equall  angles. Wherf  ore  the  angle  A  B  H  is  equal l  to  the  angle  D  C  F  .<^And forafmuch 
as  thefe  two  lines  A  B  and  b  Hare*  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  D  C  and  CF, 

and  the  angle  A  b  h  is  proued  equall  to  the  angle  d  c  f  ,therfore(by  the  4  .of  the  1  f  ^  ^  e5ua^ to  f*  C  a  becaufe 

firfi)  the  baft  A  H  is  equall  to  the  baft  D  F,  and  the  triangle  A  B  H  is  e-  LllbgTameTand^^tSm^re^ 
quail  to  the  triangle  D  C  F  .And forafmuch  as  (by  the  41.  of the  fir (l)tke  fon,  is  BH  equall  to  CF,  becaufe 
par allelogramme  B  G  is  double  to  the  triangle  A  B  El,  and  the  parallelo-  ti]-i'uP:ri’-ciesI'  ^  is  proued  a  pa 
gr ■ amme  CEis  alfo  double  to  the  triangle  DCF,  therfore  the  parallelo-  the  foil  is  o  u  rproofe?^  °*  S '  C  34° 

XX.iiij .  gramme 


of 


7 he  eleuenth  Tiooke 

gramme  B  G  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  C  E.ln  like  fort 
alfo  may  we  prone  that  the  par  dido  gramme  A  C  is  equall  to 
the  par allelo gramme  G  F, and  the  parallelograme  A  E  to  the 
parallelogramme  F  BJftherfore  a  folide  or  body  be  contained 
'under fixe  parallel plaine fuperficieces, the  oppofite  plaine fiuper 
ficieces  of  the fame  body  are  equal  dr  parallelogrammes  .which 
was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 

I  haue  for  the  better  helpe  of  young  beginners,  defcribed 
here  an  other  figure  whofe  forme  ifit  be  defcribed  vpon  pa¬ 
lled  paper  with  theletters  placed  in  the  fame  order  that  it  is 
here,and  then  if  ye  cut  finely  thefe  lines  A  G,D  E  and  C  F  not 
through  the  paper,  and  folde  it  accordingly,  compare  it  with 
the  demonfiration,and  it  will  fluke  of  all  hardenes  from  it. 

T  he  22.  T  he  or  erne.  The  2  s.  fropofition. 

If  a  Tarallelipipedo  he  cutte  of  a  plqyne fuperfi* 
des  beyng  a  parallel  to  the  two  oppofte  plqyne 
fuper fideces  of  the  fame  body:  then ,  as  the  bafe 
is  to  the  bafe y  fo  is  the  one  folide  to  the  other 
folide. 


ConjlrnUion • 


TJemmilra- 

thn* 


fppofe  that  this folide  A  B  CD  being  contained 
*  vnder  parallel  plaine  fuperficieces  (  and  therfore 
•J4&  called  aparallelipipedo)be  cut  of the  plaine fuper- 
ficies  V  E  firing  a  parallel  to  the  two  oppofite fuperficieces  of 
the  fame  body, namely, to  the  fuperficieces  A  R&  DH.T he 
J fay  that  as  the  bafe  A  E  F  W  is  to  the  bafe  EH  C  Fyfo  is 
the  folide  A  B  F  V  to  the folide  EGG  D.Exted  the  line  A 
Hon  either  fide,cf  put  vntoy  line  EH  as  many  equal  lines 
as  you  ml,  namely,  H  M,&  M  N:fr  likewife  vnto  the  line 
A  E,put  as  many  equal  lines  as  you  will, namely,  AK&  K 
L,(fi  make  per  fed  thefe  parallelogrames  LO,K  W,HZ,& 
M  S,and  likewife  make  per  feci  thefe  folides  or  bodies  L  P, 
K  E,D  M,andM  T.  Andforafmuch  as  thefe  right  lines , 
LK,K  A,and  A  E  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other, therfore 
thefe  parallelogrammes  LO,KW,  and  A  F,  are  alfo  ( by 
the  fir  ft  of the fixt)  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  and fo  alfo 
{  by  the fame  )are  thefe  parallelogrammes  I<X,KB ,  and  A 
G  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  And  likewife  ( by  the  a^.ofthe 
eleuenth )  are  the  parallelogrammes  L  T,K  P,  and  A  R,  e- 
qualfor  they  are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other. t^ind  by  the 
fame  reafon  alfo  the  parallelogrammes  E  C,H  Z,and  M  S 
are  equall  the  one  to  the  other ,  and  the  parallelogrammes 
H  G,H  I, and  1 N  are  equal  the  one  to  the  other.  And  more 
mer  the  parallelogrammes  D  HjJH  and  N  T  are  {by 

the  24.  oft  he  deuenth)equallthe  one  to  the  other,  for  they 


are 


are  oppofite :  wherefore  three  plain  e  fuperfcies  of  the  folides  JL  P,  PIC ,  and  A  V  ari 
equallto  three  plaine  fuperfcies  :  butvnto  echeofthcfe  three fuperfcieces  are  equall  the 
three  oppofite  fuperfcieces  ( by  the  2 4. of  the  eleueth )  Wherfore  the/e  three  folides  or  bodies  L 
P,K  R,  and  A  V ,  are  equal  the  one  to  the  other, by  the  S.  definition  of  the  eleueth  .And  by  the 
fame  reaf 'in  alfo  the  three folides,}-  D,D  M<fMT  are.  equal  the  one  to  the  other  Wherfore 
how  multiple  x  the  bafe  L  F  is, to  the  bafe  A  F,  fo  multiplex  is  thefolide  LFta  the folide  A 
V.Ana  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  how  multiplex  the  bafe  N  F  is  to  the  bafe  F  Hfo  multiplex  is 
ihef Aide  N  V  to  the folide  H  V  ifo.that  if  the  bafe  LF  be  equall  to  the  bafe  N^F,the folide 
alfo  L  Fjlall  be  equall  to  the  folide  V  N,and  if  the  bafe  L  F  exceeds  the  bafe  N  F,the folide 
alfo  LVjhall  exceede  the folide  FN, and  if  the  bafe  L  F  be  leffe  then  the  bafe  N  F, the  folide 
alfo  L  F j ball  be  leffe  then  the folide  F'NJ  by  the  1 .  and  14.  of  the f ft.)  Now  then  there  are 
foure  magnitudes, namely, the  two  bafes  A  F  and  F  H,and  the  two  folides  or  bodies  A  F  and 
F  Ft, of  which  are  ta  ke  their  equemultiplices, namely, the  equemultiplices  of the  bafe  A  F,  dr 
of  the folide  A  F,or  the  bafe  L  F, dr  the folide  LF,dr.the  equemultiplices  of  the  bafe  HF,dr 
of  the  folide  H  F  are  the  bafe  N  F,and  the folide  N  V. And  it  is  prouedthat  if  the  bafe  LF 
excedethe  bafe  N  F, thefolide  alfo  L  F  excedeth  the folide  N  F,dr  if it  be  equal, it  is  equal, 
and  fit  be  leffe, it  is  leffe. Wherfore  (by  the  6  Jefnitio  of  the f ft  )as  the  bafe  AF  is  to  the  bafe 
F  Hfo  is  the folide  A  F  to  the  folide  H  F.  iftherfore  aparallelipipedon  he  cut  of  a  play  ne fu - 
perficies  being  a  parallel  to  the  two  oppofite playne  fuperfcieces  of  the  fame  body,  then, as  the 
bafe  is  tat  the  bafefo  is  the  one folitie  to  the  other folide:  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


I  haue  for  the  better 
fight  o  f  the  cortrudtio  & 
demortration  of  the  for¬ 
mer  ay  .propofitio ,  here 
fet  another  figure,whofe 
forme  if  ye  defcribe  v'p- 
pon  parted  paper  ,and 
finely  cut  the  three  lines 
XI,BS,  and TY,  not 
through  the  paper  but 
halfe  way 3  and  then 
fold  it  accordingly,  and 
compare  it  with  the 
conrtrudtion  and  demo- 
ftration,you  fhall  fee 
that  it  will  geue  great 
light  therunto. 


L  h 

y 

3€ 

R.  a 

p 

A  T 

:  1 

3 

.  A 

E  J 

■i  -v  v  '• 

u  c 

Y 

V 

c? 

E 

H 

M  ^ 

d 

*  ■ 

1 

Ai 

*  * 

T 

N 

Here  Fhfas  addeth  three  Corollaries. 


Firffc  Corollary, 

V an  ^rKme.  cutte  °f  a  playnefuperficies  parallel  to  theoppofte  fuperfickcesfhe feftiom  of  the  Firft  Corolla* 
Frtjmcjkallbethe  one  to  the  other  in  that  proportion, that  the  feBions  of  the  bafe  art  the  one  to  the  ty* 
ether-  .  F#r 


Seta  xd  Card- 
ry. 

“theft  (didst 
IS phicbbe 
fpe&kgtboftn 
tbit  Corollary 
are  of  fame 
called fidii 
column:  $• 


T bird  Corol¬ 
lary* 


GamShftcmit. 


T heeleuenth  (Boo{e 

For  the  leftionsof  the  bafes,which  bafes(by  the  n.definifio  of  this  booke)are  parallelogram  mes, 
fhalllikewife  be  parallelogrammes >  by  the  16.  of  this  bo©ke(when  as  the  fuperficies  which  cutteth  is 
parilleiel  to  the  oppofite  fuperficieces)and  Ibalalfo  be  equiangle.  W herfore  if  vnto  the  bafes(by  produ¬ 
cing  the  right  lines)be  added  like  and  equall  bafes,as  was  before  Ihewed  in  a  parallelipipedon,of  thofe 
fe&ions  fiialbe  made  as  many  like  Prifmes  asye  will.And  lo  by  the  lame  reafon^namely,  by  the  commo 
excdTesequalitie,or  want  of  the  multiplices  of  the  bafes  &  of  the  feftions  by  the  y.  definitio  of  the  fifth 
may  beproued ,  thateuery  fe&ion  of  the  Prifme  muiltiplyed  by  any  multiplycation  whatfoeuer ,  fliall 
haue  to  any  other  fe&ion  that  proportion  that  tire  fe&iohs  of  the  bafes  haue. 

Second  Corollary. 

Solideswhofe  two  oppofite fuperficieces  are  poligonon  figures  like  equall  and  parallels  ,tbe  other  fit- 
perficies s¥phich  of  neceffitie  are  parallelogrammes, being  cutte of  'aplayne fuperficies  parallel  tothe  txvo 
oppofite  fuperficies  „■  thefellions  of  the  bafe  are  the  one  to  the  other  3  as  the feblions  of  the  folide  are  the 
one  to  the  other.  ,  » 


Which  thing  is  manifell,  for  fuch  folides  are  deuided  into  Prifmes ,  which  haue  one  comon  fide, 
namely,  the  axe  or  right  line ,  which  is  drawne  by  the  centers  of  the  oppofite  bafes.  Wherefore  how 
many  parallelogram es  or  bafes  are  let  vpon  the  oppofite  poligon  on  figures, offo  many  Prilmes  lhal  the 
whole  iblide  be  copofed.For  thole  poligonon  figures  are  deuided  into  lb  many  like  triangles  by  the  20. 
ofthefixth,which  deicribe  Prilmes.  Which  Prifmes  beingCut  by  a  fuperficies  parallel  to  the  oppofite 
fuperficieces5the  leflios  of  the  bafes  Ural  (by  the  former  Gorollary)  be  proportional  with  the  fedios  of 
the  Prifmes.  Wherefore  by  the  12  .©fthe  fifth ,  as  the  fedtioris  of  the  one  are  the  one  to  the  other, fo  are 
th.c  fefiions  of  the  whole  the  one  to-theother. 

Qfthefe  folides  there  areinfinite  kindes,accordingto  the  varietie  of  the  oppofite  and  parallel  po-  - 
ltgonon  figures,  which  poligonon  figures  doo  alter  the  angles  of  the  parallelogrammes  fet  vpon  them 
according  to  the  diuerfitie  of  their  fituation.But  this  is  no  let  at  all  to  this  corollary ,  for  that  which  we 
haue  proued  willalwayes  follow*  When  as  the  fuperficieces  which  are  fet  vpo  the  oppofite  like  &  equal 
poligonon  and  parallel  fuperficieces  are  alwayes  parallelogrammes. 

Third  Corollary. 

The forsfitydfilideseoMpofed  of  Prifmes  ft  eing  cutte  by  aplayne fuperficies  parallel  to  the  oppofite 
fuperficieces ^aret he  one  tothe  other -as  the  heades  or  higher  parts  cutte  are. 

For  ids  proued  that  they  are  the  one  tothe  other  as  the  bafes  are.Which  bafes  forafmuch  as  they 
are  parallelagratnmesjare  the  one  to  the  other  as  the  rightlines  are  vpon  which  they  are  fet  by, the  firit 
of  the  fixthjwhich  right  lines  are  the  heddes  or  higher  parts  of  the  Prilmes. 

The  4.  tprobleme.  The  z6.  Tropoftion.  V 


Vpon  d  right  lyne geuen  find  at  a  point  in  it  geuen  3  to  make  a  folide  angle 
equall  to  a folide  angle  geuen*  -bmd  f  u-:;> 


IFppofe  that  the  right  line  geuen  he  AB,  and  let  the point  in  it  geuen  he  A,  and 
let  the  folide  or  bodily  angle  geuen  he  D  being  contained  wider  thefe  fuperfici- 


j  all  angles  ED  C,E  B  F  and  F  D  C.It  is  required  upon  the  right  line  A  B,& 
the point  in  it  geuen  A  to  make  a folide  angle  equall  tothe  folide  angle  D. 


T ake  in  the  line  D  Fa  point  at  ail  aduentures,and  let  the  fame  be  F.  A  nd  (by  then,  of the 
eleventh )  fro  the  point  F.  Draw  vnto  the fuperficies  wherin  are  the  lines  ED  &  D  C  a  per - 
pendicedar  Ime  F  G, and  let  if fill  vpon  the  plaine fuperficies  in  the  point  G,  &  draw  aright 
line  from  the  point  D  to  the  point  G.  And  ( by  the  2  f  .of the  fir  ft )  vnto  the  line  A  B,and  at  the 
point  Amakevnto  the  angle  E  D  C  an  equallangleB  A  Lj  and  vntotheangleE  D  G  put 
the  angle  B  AK  equall:  and  by  the  2. of  the fr ft, put  the  line  A  K  equall  to  the  line  D  G,and 
( by  the  12.  of  the  eleuenth) from  the  point  K  raife  vp  vnto  the  plaine  fuperficies  BAL  a 
perpcndmUr  tine  K  H,and put  the  Urn  K  H  equall  to  the  Ime  G  Ft  and  draw  aright  lynt 


of  SucliJes  Elementes . 


Fo!.%9. 


from  the  point  H  to  the  point  A.  Now  I fay  that  the folide  angle  A contained  under  the  fu- 
perfciall  angles  B  A  L,B  A  H, and  H  A  L  is  equall  to  the  folide  angle  D  contained  under 
the fuperfciall  angles  ED  C, ED  F,and  F  D  C .  Let  the  the  lines A  B  and  HE  he  put  e- 
quall,and  draw  thefe  right  lines  HB,B  K  ,F  E,and  E  G  .^And for af much  as  the  line  EG  is 
creeled  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperf cies  ,therfore  by  the  2. definition  of the  eleuenth, 
the  line  F  G  is  alfo  erecled perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  are  in  the  ground fuper- 
feies  and  touche  it. Wherfore  either  of  thefe  angles  FGD  and  F  GE  is  a  right  angle ,  and 
by  the fame  reafon  alfo  either  of  the  angles  H  K  A  and  H  K  Bis  a  right  angle.  ^And  foraf- 
much  as  thefe  two  lines  K  A  &  A  Bare  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  G  D  &  D  E,  the  one  to  the 
other,  and  they  containe  equall 
angles  (by  confruchon).  Wher 
fore  (by  the  4.  of  the  firjl)  the 
bafe  K  B  is  equall  to  the  bafe  E 
G,  and  the  line  K  H  is  equall  to 
the  line  G  F,  and  they  coprehed 
right  angles.  Wherfore  the  line 
B  His  equall  to  the  line  F  E. 

Agayneforafmuch  as  thefe  two 
lines  A  K  and  K  H  are  equal  to 
thefe  two  lines  D  G  and  G  F, 
and  they  containe  right  angles. 

Wherfore y  bafe  A  H  is  ( by  the 
^.ofthefrjl )  equall  to  the  bafe 
D  F.And  the  line  AB  is  equall 
to  the  line  D  E  Wherfore  thefe 

two  lines  A  B  and  A  H  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  F  D  and  D  E,and  the  bafe  B  H  is  equall 
to  the  bafe  F  E.  Wherfore  (by  the  8. of the frit)  the  angle  B  AH  is  equall  to  the  angle  EDF« 
K_And  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  angle  H  K  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  F  G  C.  Wherfore  if  we 
put  thefe  lines  A  L  and  D  C  equall, and  draw  thefe  right  lines  K  L,H  L,G  C,and  F  C:  for - 
afmuch  as  the  whole  angle  B  A  Lis  equall  to  the  whole  angle  E  DC, of which  the  angle  B  A 
K  is  fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  angle  E  D  G,  therfere  the  angle  remay  ning,  namely ,  K  A  L 
is  equall  to  the  angle  remayning  G  D  C.And for  afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  K  A  and  A  L  arc 
equall  to  thefe  two  lines  G  D  and  D  C,and  they  containe  equall  angles,  therefore  by  the  4,  of 
thefrJl,  the  bafe  K  L  is  equallto  the  bafe  GC,  and  the  line  K  H  is  equall  to  the  line  GF, 
wherfore  thefe  two  lines  L  K  and  IC  H  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  C  G  and  G  F, and  they  to¬ 
tal  ne  right  angles  .Wherfore  the  bafe  H  Lis  ( by  the  4. of the firB '■)  equal  to  the  bafe  F  C.And 
for  afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  H  A  and  A  Lore  equall  to  thefe  two  F  D  and  D  C,and  the  bafe 
H  L  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  C,therfore)bythe2,ofthefrfl)theangleHAL  is  equallto  the 
angle  F  D  C,and  by  conftruciionjhe  angle  B  A  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  ED  C .  Wherefore 
unto  the  right  line  geuen, and  at  the  point  in  it geuen,, namely,. A, is  made  a folide  angle  equal 
to  the  folide  angle  geuen  D ;  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

In  thefe  twc-^usatJ  ^ 
here  put3you  may 
clearely  conceiue  the* 
nier  conftru&ion  and 
monftratioj  ifyeeredtpe! 
pendicularly  vnto  the 
ground  fuperficies  the  tri¬ 
angles  ALB  and  D  C  E,  & 
eleuate  the  triangles  A  L  H 
and  DCF  that  the  lynes 


LA 


Vemntfra- 
i  tom 


ofSudiJesElementes . 


Fol.ftp. 


from  the  point  H  to  the  point  A’.  Now  l fay that  the folide  angle  A contained  vnderthe  fu~ 
perficiall  angles  B  A  L,B  A  H,andH  A  L  is  equall  to  the  folide  angle  D  contained  vnder 
the  fuperficiall angles  E  D  C,E  D  F,and  F '  B  C.  Let  the  the  lines-  A  B  and  D  E  be  put  e- 
quall,and  draw  thefe  right  lines  H  B,B  K ,F  E,and E  G.^And for  afmuch  as  the  line  F  G  is 
creeled  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies,therfore  by jhe  2. definition  of  the  eleuenth, 
the  line  F  G  is  alfo  erected perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  are  in  the  ground fuper- 
ficies  and  touche  it. Wherfore  either  of  thefe  angles  F  G  D  and  F  G  E  is  a  right  angle,  and 
by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  either  of  the  angles  H  K  A  and  H  K  B  is  aright  angle.  ^ylnd  foraf- 
much  as  thefe  two  lines  K  A  &  A  B  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  G  D  &  D  E,  the  one  to  the 
other,  and  they  containe  equall 
angles  (by  contraction).  Wher 
fore  (by  the  4.  of  the  firfl)  the 
bafe  K  B  is  equall  to  the  bafe  E 
G,  and  the  line  K  H  is  equall  to 
the  line  G  F,  and  they  coprehed 
fight  angles.  Wherfore  the  line 
B  His  equall  to  the  line  F  E. 

Agayneforafmuch  as  thefe  two 
lines  A  K  and  K  H  are  equal  to 
thefe  two  lines  D  G  and  G  F , 
and  they  containe  right  angles. 

Wherfore y  bafe  A  His  ( by  the 
4.of the  firfl )  equall  to  the  bafe 
D  F.And  the  line  AB  is  equall 
to  the  line  D  E  Wherfore  thefe 

two  lines  A  B  and  A  Hare  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  F  D  and  D  E,and  the  bafe  B  His  equall 
to  the  bafe  F  E. Wherfore  ( by  the  8  .of the  fir  FI)  the  angle  B  AH  is  equall  to  the  angle  EDF . 
K_yfnd  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  angle  H  K  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  F  G  C.  Wherfore  if  we 
put  thefe  lines  A  L  and  D  C  equall, and  draw  thefe  right  lines  K  L,H  L,G  C,and  F  C:  for - 
afmuch  as  the  whole  angle  B  A  Lis  equall  to  the  whole  angle  E  D  C,  of which  the  angle  B  A 
K  is fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  angle  ED  G ,  therfere  the  angle  remay  ning,  namely ,  K  AL 
is  equall  to  the  angle  remayning  G  D  C.And for  afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  K  A  and  A  L  are 
equall  to  thefe  two  lines  G  D  and  D  C,and  they  containe  equall  angles,  therefore  by  the  4.  of 
the  frit,  the  bafe  K  Lis  equall  to  the  bafe  GC,  and  the  line  KH  is  equall  to  the  line  G  F, 
wherfore  thefe  two  lines  L  K  and  K  H  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  C  G  and  G  F, and  they  co- 
tarn  e  right  angles  .Wherfore  the  bafe  H  L  is  ( by  the  4.of the firfl )  equal  to  the  bafe  F  C.And 
for  afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  H  A  and  A  L  are  equall  to  thefe  two  F  D  and  D  C,and  the  bafe 
H  L  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  C,therfore  )by  the  8.0 ft  he  firfl; )  the  angle  HAL  is  equall  to  the 
angle  F  D  C^and  by  conflruciionjhe  angle  B  A  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  ED  C .  Wherefore 
'vnto  the  right  line  geuen, and  at  the  point  in  it geuen, namely, A, is  made  a folide  angle  equal 
to  the  folide  angle  geuen  D :  which  was  required  to  be  done . 


In  th<efe  tW' 
here  put3youmay 
clearely  conceiue  the’ 
mer  conftrudlion  and 
tnonftratioj  if  ye  eredt  pel 
pendicularly  vnto  the 
ground  fuperficies  the  tri¬ 
angles  ALB  and  D  C  E,  & 
eleuate  the  triangles  A  L  H 
and  DCF  that  the  lynes 


LA 


VemoHtfra* 

non* 


Fo/.%9. 


\  y\ 


of  EucltdesElementes. 

from  the  feint  H  to  the  point  A.  Now  [fdy  that  the foltde  angle  Acontained  ‘under  the  fu» 
perficiall  angles  B  A  L,B  A  H,and  H  A  L  is  equall  to  the  foltde  angle  D  contained  ‘under 
the  fuperfictall angles  E  DC, ED  F , and,  E  D  C.  Let  the  the  lines  A  B  and  D  E  be  put  e- 
quall,and  draiv  thefe  right  lines  H  B,B  K ,F  E ,and E  G . <^Andforafmucb  as  the' line  F  G  is 
erected  perpendicularly  to  the  ground fuperficies, therfore  by 'the 2., definition  of the  eleuenth, 
the  line  F  G  is  alfo  erected perpendicularly  to  all  the  right  lines  that  are  in  the  ground fuper- 
feies  and  touche  itWherfore  either  of  thefe  angles  F  G  D  and  F  GE  is  a  right  angle ,  and 
by  the fame  reafon  alfo  either  of  the  angles  H  K  A  and  HK  Bis  a  right  angle.  i^And  foraf- 
much  as  thefe  two  lines  K  A  &  A  Bare  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  G  D  &  D  E,  the  one  to  the 
other ,  and  they  containe  equall 
angles(by  Confiruchon).  Wher 
fore  (by  the  4.  of  the  the 

bafe  K  B  is  equall  to  the  bafe  E 
Gy  and  the  line  K  His  equall  to 
the  line  G  F,  and  they  coprehed 
right  angles.  Wherfore  the  line 
B  His  equall  to  the  line  F  E. 

Agayne,forafmuch  as  thefe  two 
lines  A  K  and  K  H  are  equal  to 
thefe  two  lines  D  G  and  G  F, 
and  they  containe  right  angles. 

Wherfore y  bafe  A  His  ( by  the 
4.0ft he frfl )  equall  to  the  bafe 
D  F .  And  the  line  AB  is  equall 
to  the  line  D  E  Wherfore  theft 

two  lines  A  B  and  A  H  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  F  D  and  D  E,and  the  bafe  B  H  is  equall 
to  the  bafe  F  E .  Wherfore  ( by  the  S. of  the frfi)  the  angle  B  AH  is  equall  to  the  angle  EDF, 
K_yfnd  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  angle  H  K  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  F  GC.  Wherfore  if  we 
put  thefe  lines  A  L  and  D  C  equall, and  draw  thefe  right  lines  K  L,H  L,G  C,and  F  C:  for - 
afmuch  as  the  whole  angle  B  A  Lis  equall  to  the  whole  angle  E  DC, of which  the  anqle  B  A 
K  is fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  angle  ED  G >  therfore  the  angle  remay  ning,  namely,  K  A  L 
is  equall  to  the  angle  remay  ning  G  D  C.Andforafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  K  A  and  A  L  arc 
equall  to  thefe  two  lines  G  D  and  D  C,and  they  containe  equall  angles,  therefore  by  the  4,  of 
thefrJl,  the  bafe  K  Lis  equall  to  the  bafe  GC,  and  the  line  K  H  is  equall  to  the  line  GF , 
wherfore  thefe  two  lines  L  K  and  I<  H  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  C  G  and  G  F, and  they  co- 
taineright. angles  Wherfore  the  bafe  H  Lis  (by  the  4.of the  frit )  equal  to  the  bafe  F  C.And 
forafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  H  A  and  A  Lare  equall  to  thefe  two  F  D  and  D  C,and  the  bafe 
H  L  is  equall  to  the  bafe  F  C, therfore )by  the  Loft  he  frfi )  the  angle  H  AL  is  equall  to  the 
angle  F  D  C,and  by  confiruclionjhe  angle  B  A  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  ED  C .  Wherefore 
‘unto  the  right  line  geuen, and  at  the  point  in  it geuen, namely, A, is  made  a foltde  angle  equal 
to  the  folide  angle  geuen  D :  which  was  required  to  be  done . 


In  thefe  two  figures 
here  putjyou  may  more 
clearely  conceiue  the  for¬ 
mer  conftru&ion  and  de- 
mohftratio,  if  ye  eredl  per¬ 
pendicularly  vnto  the 
ground  fuperficies  the  tri¬ 
angles  ALB  and  D  C  E,  & 
eleuare  the  triangles  A  L  H 
and  DCF  that  the  lynes 


LA 


Vemn$tr4‘- 
1  torn 


Conduction • 


Vemonftra- 

im. 


L'A  and  G  Dofthem  may  exa&ly  agree  with  the  lines!.  A  and  CD  of  the  triangles  erected.  For  fo  or* 
dering  them,  if  ye  compare  the  former  confirmation  arid  demonftration  with  them,  they  will  be  playne' 
vntoyou. 

Although  Euclides  demoftration  be  touching  folide  angles  which  are  contained  only  vnder  three 
fuperficiall  angles,  thatis,whofe  bafes  are  triangles  .  yet  by  it  may  ye  performs  the  Probleme  touching 
folide  angles  contained  vnder  fuperficiall  angles  how  many  foeuer,  that  is,  hauing  to  their  bafes  any 
Jcinde  of  Poligonon  figUres.For  eiiery  Poligonon  figure  may  by  the  so.  of  the  fixt,be  refolued  into  like 
tringles.  And  fo  alfo  lhall  the  folide  angle  be  deuided  into  fo  many  folide  angles  as  there  be  triangles 
in  the  bafe.  Vnto  euery  oneofwhichfolideanglesyoumay  by  this  proportion  deferibe  an  equall 
folide  angle  vpon  a  line  geuen,  and  atapointin  it  geueh.  And  fo  at  the  length  the  whole  folide  angle 
after  this  maner  deferibed  fhall  be  equall  to  the  folide  angle  geuen. 

The  s.T  heoreme.  The  27.  Tropojition > 

Vpon  a  right  line  geuen  to  deferibe  a  par allelipipedoft  like  and  in  like fort fi* 
tuate  to  a  par alle lip ipedon  geuen.  V  ! 

i  j  "  A.  ».V  ... 

Vppofe  that  the  right  line  geuen  be  A  B ,  and  let  the  parallelipipedon  geuen  be 
CD  .It  is  required  vpon  the  right  line  geuen  A  B  to  deferibe  a  parallelipipe- 
don  like  and  in  like  fort  ft tuate  to  the par allelipipedon  geuen ,  namely ,  to  C  D . 
Vnto  the  right  line  A  B  and  at  thepoynt  in  it  A  deferibe  (  by  the  26. of  the  ek- 


.  x  d 


uenth(a folide  angle  equall  to  the folide  angle  Q ,  and  let  it  be  contayned  vnder  thefe fuperfi- 
ciall angles  B  A  H,H  A  K,  and  K  A  B  ,fo  that  let  the  angle  BAH^  equall  to  the  angle 
£  C  V,and  the  angle  B  A  K  to  the  angle  E  C  G,andmoreouer  the  angle  KAH^  the  an¬ 
gle  G  C  F.^And  as. the  line  E  C  is  to  the  line  C  Gfo  let  the  A  B  be  to  the  line  AFL(by  the 
12.  of  the  fixth  )  and  as  the  line  G  C  is  to  the  line  CF  ,fo  let  the  K  A  be  to  the  line  A  H. 
Wherefore  ofequalitie  (  by  the  22.  of  the f ft )  astbehneFL  C  is  to  the  line  CFfo  is  the  line 
B  A  to  the  line  A  H  .Make  perfeff  the  par alle logramme  B  H  ,and  alfo  the folide  A  L .  Novo 
for  that  as  the  line  E.C  is  to  the  line  C  G,fo  is  the  line  B  A  to  the  line  AK,  therefore  the 
fidesvohich  contayne  the  equall  angles ,  namely,  the anglesFL  C  Gand  B  A  K  are proportion 
nall:wherefore(  by  the  fir Jl  definition  of  the fixth)  the parallelogramme  G  E  is  liketo'thepa- 
rallelogramme  K  B  .And  by  the  fame  reafbn  the  parallelogramme  K  H  is  like  totheparalle - 
logramme  G  F,and  moreouer  the  parallelogramme  FFLto  the  parallelogramme  HB  Wher- 
f ore  there  are  three  parallelogrammes  of  the  folide  CD  like  to  the  three  parallelogrammes 
of  the folide  A  L .  But  the  three  other fdes  in  eche  of thefe folides  are  equall  and  like  to  their 
oppofite fdes. Wherefore  the  whole folide  CD  is  like  to  the  whole folide  A  L.  Wherfore  vpon 
the  right  line  geuen  A  B  is  deferibed  the  folide  A  L  contayned  vnder  parallel playne fuperfi- 
cieces  like  and  in  like fort fituate  to  the folide  geue  C  D  contayned  alfo  vnder  parallel playne 
fuperficieces:  which  was  required  to  bedoone. 

This  demonfhation  is  not  hard  to  conceaue  by  the  former  figure  as  it  is  deferibed  in  a  playne,if  ye 

haue 


that  imagination  of  parailelipipedons  defcribedina  playne  which  we  before  taught  in  the  diffinitioci 
of  a  cube.  How'beit  I  haue  here  for  the  more  cafe  of  luch  as  are  not  yet  acquainted  with  folides  s  deF 


cribed  two  figures ,  whofe  formes  firft  deferibe  vpon  parted  paper  with  the  like  letters  noted  in  them* 
and  then  finely  cutte  the  three  midle  lines  of  eche  figure5and  fo  fold  them  accordingly ,  and  that  doone 
compare  them  with  the  conftru&ion  and  demonrtration  of  this  17.  propofition  *  and  they  will  be  very' 
eafy  to  conceaue. 


T  be  23 .  T  heoremti. 


The  zSJPropoJitioth 


If  a  parallelipipedo  he  cutte  by  a  plaine fuperficies  drawne  by  the  diagonall 
lines  of  thofe  playne  fuperficieces  K/hicb  are  oppofite :  that  folide  is  by  this 
playne  fuperficies  cutte  into  two  equal l partes. 


B 


q 


Fppofe  that  the  parallelipipedori 
A  B  be  cutte  by  the  playne  fuper¬ 
ficies  C  D  E  F  drawne  by  the  dia¬ 
gonal  lines  of}  plaine  fuperficieces 
which  are  oppofite, namely ,  of the  fuperficieces 
C  F  and  DE.f hen  I fay  that  the  parallelipi- 
pedon  ABw  cutte  into  two  equall  partes  by  the 
fuperficies  C  D  E  F .For  forafrnuch  as  (  by  the 
34.ofthefirfl  )  the  triangle  CGFh  equall  to 
the  triangle  C  B  F  ,and  the  triangle  A  D  E  to 
the  triangle  D  E  H,  and  the parallelograme 
C  A  is  equall  to  theparallelogramme  B  E, j for 
they  are  oppofite, and  the parallelogramme  G  E 
is  aljo  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  C  H ^and 
theparallelogramme  C  E, is  the  common  feclion  by  fuppofition:  Wherfore  the prifme  contai¬ 
ned  -under  the  two  triangles  CGF,WDAE,  and  Under  the  three  parallelogrammes 
G  E,  A  C  ,and  C  E  is  (by  the  S  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  equall  to  the  prifme  contayned 
under  the  two  triangles  C  F  B  WD  EH  and  vnder  the  three  parallelogrammes  CH, 
B  E,andC  E  .For  they  are  cotaynedvnder playne  fuperficieces  equall  both  in  multitude  and 
in  magnitude .  Wherefore  the  whole par allelipipedon  A  B  is  cutte  into  two  equall  partes  by 
the playne fuperficies  C  D  E  V:  which  was  required  fo  be  demonftrated 7 


/r2 

/K 

E 

A 

L 

© 


Demn/trad 
tion ♦ 


YYi. 


A 


*  Looks  at  the 
end  of  the  de- 
monjlration 
what  is  Vft~ 
dersi&nded  by 
finding  lines. 


E 


John  Bee  his 
figure. 

By  this  figure 
it  appeareth 
why  fuck  ?■,  if 
tnes  were  cal¬ 
led  wedges:  of 
the  veiy  fhape 
of  a  'Wedge, as 
is  the  jo  tide 
DSFG  A- 
C,&c, 


A  diagonal!  line  is  aright  line  which  in  angular  figures  is  drmne 
from  one  angle  and  extended  to  his  contrary  angle  as  you  fee  in  the  figure 

AB. 

Defcribe  for  the  better  fight  of  this  demonftration  a  figure  vpon  parted 
paper  like  vnto  that  which  you  defcribed  for  the  za.  propofition  onely  altering 
the  letters :  namely,  in  fteade  of  the  letter  A  put  the  letter  F,and  in  fteade  of  the 
letter  H  the  letter  C  :  moreouer  in  fteade  of  the  letter  C  put  the  letter  H,  and 
the  letter  E  for  the  letter  D,and  the  letter  A  for  the  letter  E,and  finally  put  the 
letter  D  for  the  letter  K  And  your  figure  thus  ordered  compare  it  with  the  de- 
monftratio,  only  imagining  a  fuperficies  to  paife  through  the  body  by  the  dia¬ 
gonall  lines  C  F^and  D  E. 

f  The  24.  Theorems  The  29.  Tropojhion. 

[ Tarallelipipedons  confifting  ypon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe  }  andjm* 
der  one  and  the  felfe fame  altitude  fifth  ofe* ft  anding  lines  are  in  the  felfe 
fame  right  lines ^are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

Fppofe  that  that  the  fe  parallelipipedons  C  M  and  C  N  doo  con  fill  vpon  one 
and  the  felfe fame  bafe,  namely  A  B ,  and  let  them  be  vnder  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  altitude, whofe funding  lines,  thatis,theforver fdes  ofeche  folide  which 
j fall  vpon  the  bafe,as  the  lines  A  F,C  D,B  H,L  M  of the  folide  C  M,  and  the 
lines  C  K,  A  G,and  L  N 
of  the  folide  C  N.,7#  be  in  the  D 
felfe  fame  right  lines  or  paral¬ 
lel  Urns  F  N3  D  K .  T hen  I  fay 
that  the  folide  C  M  is  equall  to 
the folide  C  N  .For forafmuch 
as  either  ofthefe  fuperficieces 
CBDH,C  BEK  is  a paralle¬ 
logramme, therefore(by  the  34. 
of  the  firjl )  the  line  C  B  is  e- 
qnall  to  either  ofthefe  lines  D  Q 

H  and  E  K.  Wherefore  alfo  the 
line  D  H  is  equall  to  the  line 
E  K  .Take  away  E  H  which  is 
common  to  them  both ,  where-  M  * 

fore  the  ref  due  namely  DE«  e  quail  to  the  ref  due  H  K.  Wherforealfo  the  triangle  DOB 
is  eqrnll  to  the  triangle  H  K  B .  And  the  parallelogramme  D  G  is  equal!,  to  the parallelo- 
gramme  H  N .And by  the fame  reafon  the  triangle  A  G  F  is  equallto  the  triangle  M  L  N, 
and  the  parallelogramme  C  F  is  equallto  the  parallelogramme  B  M  .But  the  parallelograme 
CG  is  equal l  to  the  parallelogramme  B  N ,  by  the  24,of  the  tenth  for  they  are  oppofite  the 
one  to  the  other.  Wherefore  theprifme  contayned  vnder  the  two  triangles  FAG  and  D  CE 
and  vnder  the  three  parrallelogrames  A  D,D  G,  and  C  G  is  equall  to  theprifme  cotajned 
vnder  the  two  triangles  MLN  and  H  B  K ,  and  vnder  the  three  par allelogrames,  that  is, 
B  M,N  H  ,and  B  N  .Put  that folide  common  to  them  both,whofe  bafe  is  the  parallelograme 
A  and  the  oppofite fide  vnto  the  bafe  is  thefuperfeies  G  E  H  M.  Wherefore-the  whole pa- 

rallelipipedon  C  M  is  equall  to  the  whole  parallelipipedon  C  N  :Wherf ore  parallelipipedons 
con  fifing  vpon  one  and  the felfe fame  bafe, and  vnder  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude, who  fe 
fianding  lines  arc  in  the  felfe  fame  right  lines,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other:  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  demons!  rated. 


V'x 

F  j9 

i  B 

Although 


of Suelides  Element es . 


Although  this  demonftration 
be  not  hard  to  a  good  imaginati¬ 
on  to  conceaue  by  the  former  fi¬ 
gure  (  which  yet  by  M,  Dees  refor¬ 
ming  is  much  better  then  the  figure 
of  this  propofition  commonly  def- 
cribed  in  other  copyes  both  greake 
and  lattin)  -.yet  for  the  eafe  of  thofe 
which  are  young  beginners  in  thys 
matter  offolides ,  I  haue  here  fetan 
other  figure  whofe  forme  if  it  be 
defcribed  vpon  patted  paper ,  with 
the  like  letters  to  euery  line  as  they 
be  here  put, and  then  if  ye  finely  cut 
not  thorough  but  as  it  were  halfe 
way  the  three  lines  l  a,n  m  g  F,and 
xheDj  & fo folde it accordingly,& 
compare  it  with  the  demonftratio, 
it  will  geue  great  light  thereunto. 


Stading  lines  are  called  thofe  fower  right  lines  of  euery  parallelipipedon  which  ioyne  together  the 
angles  of  the  vpper  and  nether  bafes  of  the  fame  body.  Which  according  to  the  diuerfitie  of  the  angles 
of  the  folides ,  may  either  be  perpendicular  vpon  the  bafe,or  fall  obliquely .  And  forafmuch  as  in  thys 
propofition  and  in  the  next  propofition  folio  wing, the  folides  compared  together  are  fuppofed  to  haue 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe ,  it  is  manifett  that  the  Handing  lines  are  in  relpedl  of  the  lower  bale  ift 
the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines,'namely,in  the  two  fides  ofthe  lower  bafe .  But  becaufe  there  are  put  two 
folides  vpon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bale, and  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  lame  akitude,the  two  vpper  bales 
of  the  folides  may  be  diuerlly  placed.Por  forafmuch  as  they  are  equal!  and  iike(by  the  z4.of  this  booke) 
either  they  may  be  placed  betwene  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines :  and  the  the  Handing  lines  are  in  either 
folide  fayd  to  be  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  lines, or  right  lines -.namely, when  the  two  fides  of  eche  ofthe 
vpper  bafes  are  contayned  in  the  felfe  lame  parallel  lines  :  but  contrariwife  if  thofe  two  fides  of  the  vp¬ 
per  bafes  be  not  contayned  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  or  right  lines,neither  fhal  the  Handing  lines  which 
are  ioyned  to  thofe  fides  be  fayd  to  be  in  the  felfe  fame  parallel  or  right  lines .  And  therefore  the  Han¬ 
ding  lines  are  fayd  to  be  in  the  felfe  fame  right  lines,when  the  fides  of  the  vpper  bafes ,  at  the  leatt  two 
ofthe  fides  are  contayned  in  the  felfe  fame  right  lines :  which  thing  is  required  in  the  fuppofition  of  this 
2,9, propofition  .But  the  Handing  fines  are  fayd  not  to  be  in  the  felfe  fame*  right  lines  ,  when  none  ofthe 
two  fides  of  the  vpper  bafes  are  contayned  in  thefelfe  fame  right  lines,  which  thing  the  next  propofiti¬ 
on  following  fuppofeth. 

1!  The  2f.  Theoreme.  The  30.  Propofition. 

Ptirallelipipedons  con  fifing  Topon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe,  and  Tender 
thefelfe fame  altitude,  u vhofe funding  lines  are  not  in  the  felfe fame  right 
lines,  are  equal!  the  one  to  the  other. 

Ffpofe  that  thefe  P arallelipipedons  c  m  and  c  n5  do  confif  vpon  one  and  the  felfe 
tJsSSft"*  ^e>  namety’ A  B  5  vnder  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude ,  whofe  funding 

lines, namely ,  the  lines  a  f5c  d5b  h  ^and  l  wi,of  the  Parallelipipedon  c  m,  and  the 
funding  lines  a  g,c  e  jB-  k  ^and  l  n,  ofthe  Parallelipipedon  c  n5  let  not  be  in  thefelfe fame 
right  lines .  Then  I  fay ,  that  the  Parallelipipedon  c  m  Js  equallto  the  Parallelipipedon  c  n. 
Forafmuch  a*  the  upper fuperfcieces  fh^c  K,of the  former  P arallelipipedons ,  are  in  one 
and  the  felfe  fame fuperfcies  (  by  reafon  they  are fuppofed  to  be  of  one  and  the felfe fame  alti¬ 
tude  ) :  Extend  the  lines  v  d  and  m  h  ,  till  they  concur  re  with  the  lines  n  g  and  k  e  (fuffi- 
ciently  both waies  extended  :for  in  diuers  cafes  their  concurfe  is  diuers)  .  Let  v  d  extended, 
meetewith  n  g3  and  cut  it  in  the  point  x  :  and  with  k  e  in  the  point  p  .  Let  likewife  m  h 
extended,  meete  with  n  g  (fuficiently  produced)  in  the  point  o  3  and  with  k  e  in  the  point 
r  .  And  dr  awe  thefe  right  lines  a  x,l  o,c  p,  and  b  r  .  T{ow  (by  the  2  9  .ofthe  eleuenthfhe 
folide  c  m  ,  whofe  bafe  is  the  par allelogr amme  a  c  b  h^and  the  parallelogramme  oppofte  vn- 

rr.ij  to 


St  Sdittg  lines. 


ConfiruUm, 


A  ../i- 

are  in  the felfe fame  right  lines  wand  uk.  But  the  folide  c  o,i vhofe  bafe  is  the  parade- 
logramme  acb  l  ,  and  the  oppofite fuperftcks  'unto  it  is'  xpro,«  equall  to  thefolide  c  n, 
ivhofe  bafeis  the  parallelogramme  acb  t,  and  the  oppofite fuperftcies  'unto  it  is  thefuperft- 
cies  o  e  k  a,  for  they  are  vpon  one  and  thefelfe fame  bafe,  namely,  acb  i.  ^  and  their  ft an- 
dinglines  a  g,a  x,  c  e,  c  p,l  s,lo,b  k  ,  and  b  R^are  in  the felfe fame  rightlines  n  x, 
and?  k.  Wherefore  alfo  the folide  c  m9  is  equall  to  the folide  c  n.  Wherefore  Parallelipi- 
pedons  confifting  vpon  one  and  the felfe  fame  bafe, and 'under  the felfe  fame  altitude ,  who  ft 
Handing  litres  are  not  in  the  felfe  fame  right  lines,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other  :  which 
%v as  required  to  be  proued. 

This  demonftra- 
tion  is  forawhat  har¬ 
der  then  the  former 
to  conceaue  by  the  fi¬ 
gure  defcribed  in  the 
plaine(andyet  before 
M.  Dee  inuented  that 
figure  which  is  placed 
for  it,  it  was  much 
harder)by  reafon  one 
folide  is  contained  in 
•an  other .  And  there¬ 
fore  for-  the  clerer 
light  therof,  defcribe 
vpo  palled  paper  this 

figure  here  put  with  '  f\/  W 

the  like  letters  and 
finely  cut  the  lines 
AC,  CB,  EG,  BL, 

EPK,  ROHM, and 
folde  it  accordingly 
that  euery  line  may 
exactly  agree  with  his 
co  rrefpon  dent  lyne 
(which  ©bferuingthe 
letters  of  euery  line 


ivAV;1. 

t.  k 


Bemnftra- 
tion > 


to  it  is  f  d  h  m,  is  equall  to  the  folide  c  o  ,  whofe  bafe  is  a  c  b  l  and  the  oppoftte  fide  the 
parallelogramme  x  p  a.  o  ,for  they  confifte  'upon  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe,  namely,  vpon 
the  parallelograme  acil,  whofe ftanding  lines  a  f9  a  x9  l  m5  l  o3  c  d  sc  p9  b  h  jwd  b  r5 

E  P  R  E 


LDees  figure. 


ofSuclides  Elementes . 


ye  Gull  eafily  do  )  and  fo  copare  your  figure  with 
the  demonftration  jand  it  will  make  it  very  plaine 
vnto  you. 

The  26.Theoreme.  The  3  i.Tropofit. 


[ Tarallelipipedons  conJiJlingTjp * 
on  equall  bafes  3  and  being  lender 
one  and  the felfe fame  altitude } 
are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 


Fppofe  that  uppon  thefe  equall 
bafes  A  B ana  CD  do  confifte 
thefe  parallelipipedons  A  E  and 
j  C  F,  being  under  one  dr  the  felf 
fame  altitude.  The  I  fay, that  the  folide  A  E 
is  equall  to  the folide  C  F  .  First  let  the fun¬ 
ding  lines, namely, H  K,B  E,A  G,L  M,0  P, 
D  F,CX,  andRS ,  be  erected perpendicular¬ 
ly  to  the  bafes  A  B  and  C  D,  and  let  the  an¬ 
gle  o A  LB  not  be  equall  to  the  angle  CRD. 
Extend  the  lineC  R  to  the point  T .  \^And 
{by  the  2 3. of the fir (l )  upon  the  right  line 
RT ,  and  at  the  point  in  it  R,  defcribe  un- 


T wo  Cafes  in 
this  prcpofi- 
tkn , 

7 be  fir ft  cafe* 
<  cnfiruflm. 


7  F  I 


IFe  are  behol¬ 
ding  to  M.Dee 
for  inventing 
this  figure,  with 
ether, which  till 
his  reforming 
were  as  much 
Wiijhappenat 
this  was, and fo 
both  in  the 
Greece  and  La- 
tine  copier  re¬ 
main*. 


Vemonttra- 

tiortn 


*A.vO! 


v  v» 

A 

V*  •  •  • 


The  eleuenth  Hooke 


to  the  angle  LB  an  equall  angle  1*  RV. 
i_And  (  by  the  third  of  the  frit)  gut  the 
line  R T  e quail  to  the  line  LB,  and  the 
line  R  V  equall  to  the  line  ^A  L  .  <^And 
(by  the  3 1 .  of  the  fir fl )  by  the  point  V  draw 
'vnto  the  line  R  T  a  parallel  line  V  W :  and 
make  per fecle  the  bafe  R  W,  and  the folide 
J  V.  Now  forafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  T  R 
and  R  V  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  B  L  and 
L  A  ,  and  they  containe  equall  angles,  there¬ 
fore  the parallelogramme  R  W  is  equall  and 
like  to  the  parallelogramme  A  B .  Againe , 
forafmuch  as  the  line  LB  is  equall  to  the 
line  R  T,  and  the  line  L  CM  to  the  line  R  S 
(for  the  lines  L  M  and  R  S  are  the  altitudes 
of  the  Parallelipipedons  A  E  and  C  E,which 
altitudes  are  fuppofed  to  be  equall )  and  the 
containe  right  angles  by  fuppofition  there¬ 
fore  the  parallelogramme  R  T  is  equal ■  and 
like  to  the  parallelogramme  B  CM .  And  C 
the  fame  reafon  alfo  the  parallelogram;.  ■■ 
L  G  is  equall  and  like  to  the  parallelograms 
S  F .  Wherefore  three  parallelogrammes  of 


'S  Fl 


thefolide  AE  are  squall  and  like  to  the  three  par allelogrammcs  of  the  folide  TV  .But 
thefe  three  parallelogrammes  are  equall  and  like  to  the  three  oppofite  fides >'•>.  Wherefore 
the  whole  P arallelipipedon  eyl  E  is  equall  and  like  to  the.  whole  Paralielipipedon  T  V. 
Extend  (  by  the  fee  ond petition  )  the  lines  D  R  and  W  V,  untill  they  concurre  ,  and  let 
them  cone iirre  in  the  point  ff.  And  (by  the  31.  ofthefrf )  by  the  point  T  dr  awe  unto 
the  line  R  pfa  parallel  line  T  a ,  and  extend  duely  the  lines  T  a  and  D  0  untill  they 
concurre,  and  let  them  concur  re  in  the  point  ^  .  And  make  perfecle  the  folides  plfT and 
R1  .  Now  the  folide  T,whofe  *  bafe  is  the  parallelogramme  RT,  and  the  oppofite  fde 
nmto  the  bafe  the  parallelogramme  pfb,  is  equall  to  the  folide  YV,whofebafeistbeparal- 
lelograrnme  R  T,  and  the  oppoftefde  unto  the  bafe  the  parallelogramme  V  Z.For  they  con- 
fife  upon  one  and  the felfe  fame  bafe, namely,  R  T,  and  are  under  one  and  the  felfe fame  al¬ 
titude,  and  their  Banding  lines,  namely,  Rpf,RV,T  a,T  W,S  N^,Sd,Y  b,and  T  Z, 
are  in  the  felfe  fame  right  lines,  namely ,  gW,  and  NJZ .  Rut  thefolide  TV  isprouede- 
quall  to  the  folide  <^AE.  Wherefore  alfo  thefolide  T  ppp  equall  to  the  folide  AE  .  Now 
forafmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  RVWT  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  pfT  (by  the 
3  S. ofthefrf)  and  the  parallelogramme  AB  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  RW:  there¬ 
fore  the  parallelogramme  pVT  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  <JdB,  and  the  parallelo¬ 
gramme  CD  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  A  B\  ( by  fuppoftion)  .Wherefore  the  paralle¬ 
logramme  CD  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  fff .  And  there  is  a  certaine  other fuper¬ 
feies,  namely,  D  T .  Wherefore  ( by  the  7. of  the f ft)  as  the  bafe  CD  is  to  the  bafe  D  T,f> 
is  the  bafe  p)fT  to  the  bafe  D  T .  And  forafmuch  as  the  whole  P  arallelipipedon  Cl  is  cut  by 
the  plain  e fuperfeies  R  F , which  is  a  parallel  to  either  'of the  oppofite  plaine fuperfcieces,ther - 
fore  as  the  bafe  C  D  is  to  the  bafe  D  T,fo  is  thefolide  ■  CF  to  the folide  R I  (by  the  2  3. of  the 
eleuenth)  .^yindby  the  fame  reafon  alfo, forafmuch  as  the  whole  Paralielipipedon  pfl  is 
cut  by  the  plaine fuperfeies  R  T ,which  is  a  parallel  to  either  of  the  oppofte  plaine fuperfcieces , 
therefore  as  the  bafe  p)T  is  to  the  bafe  D  T,fo  is  the folide  pVT  to  the folide  R1  .But  as  the 
bafe  C D  istothebafe  D  T,fo isthe bafe  pVT  tothebafe  T  D  .  Wherefore  (by  the  n.of 
thefft)  as  the folide  CF  is  to  the folide  R 1,  fo  is  the  folide  pTT  to  the folide  R 1 .  Wherefore 
either  of thefe folides  C  F  and  pfTfaueto  the  folia  R I  one  and  the fame  proportion.  Wher- 
fore  the  folide  C  F  is  equallto  the  folide  pTT .  Bn  it  isproued  that  the  folide  ppT  is  equall 
to  thefolide  A  E .  Wherefore  alfo  the folide  C  F  is  equall  to  thefolide  A  E. 


But  now  fuppofe  that  the 
fading  lines,  namely,  A  G,H  K, 

B E,LM,CX,0  P,  D  F,  and 
R  S,  be  not  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  bafes  A  B  and  C  D . 
Then  alfo  1  fay,  that  the  folide 
A  E  is  equall  to  the  folide  C  F. 
Draw  ( by  the  11  .of  theeleueth ) 
unto  the  ground  plaine  fuperf¬ 
cieces  A  B  and  C  D  from  thefe 
pointes  ICfE,  G,M,P,  F,X,S,  - 
thefe  perpendicular  lines  I<  N,  LJ 
E  T,G  V,MZ,P  W,F  T,X  gj 
and  S I .  nTnd draw  thefe  right 
lines  NT,N  V,  Z  V,Z  T,WT, 
Wpf,  I  pf^andl  T.  Now(by 
that  which  hath  before  bene  pro¬ 
ved  in  this  31.  Propoftion  )  the 


Mr 


£ 


*  Note  novo  foV? 
the  bafe  rejpec- 
tiuelj  is  taken  «* 
for  fo  may  alte- 
ratio  of  refects 
alter  the  name 
of  the  bowndes 
eyther  of  folides 
or  plajnes. 


Second  cafe. 


*  There  you 
perceaue  hour 
the  bafe  is  di- 
mrflyconfi- 
dered  &  cho - 
fen t  as  before 
weadaertijei 
you* 


folide  K  Z  is  equal!  to  the  folide 
P  I,  for  they  confifl  vpon  equal 'l 
*  bafes,  namely  ,  K  M,  and  P  S, 
and  are  vnder  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  altitude ,  ivhofe  funding 
lines  alfo  are  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  bafes .  But  the  folide 
K  Z  is  equall  to  the  folide  A  E 
( by  the  2 p  .of  the  eleuenth )  :and 
the  folide  P  I  is  (by  the  fame)  e-  _ 
quail  to  the  folide  C  F,  for  they  ^ 
confif  vppon  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  bafe ,  and  are  vnder  one 
f?  the  felfe  fame  altitude, whofe 
funding  lines,  are  vpon  the felfe 
fame  right  lines .  Wherefore  alfo 

■the  fohae  A  E  is  equall  to  the  folide  C  F  .Wherefore  Parallelipipedons  conffingvpon  equall 
bafes  and  being  vnder  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude, are  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  which 
•was  required  to  be  demonfrated. 


The  deraonftration  of  the  firft  cafe  of  this  propofition  is  very  hard  to  conceaue  by  the  figure  des¬ 
cribed  for  inn  a  playne.  And  yet  before  M.  Dee  inuented  that  figure  which  we  haue  there  placed  for  it, 
it  was  much  harder.For  both  in  the  Greke  and  Lattin  Euclide, it  is  very  ill  made.anditis  inamaner  im- 
pollible  to  conceaue  by  it  the  conftrudtion  and  demonftration  thereto  appertayning.  Wherefore  I  haue 
here  deferibed  other  figures,,  which  firft  deferibe  vpon  palled  paper ,  or  fuch  like  matter  and  then  order 
them  in  maner  following. 


p 

X  E 

F  ? 

0 

C  ]L 

D  0 

F 

s 

y 

I  F 

'  “s 

D 

R_ 

T 

d 

S 

N  d 

b  % 

y 

b 

V 

K 

V 

(t  W 

T 

-• 

As  touching  the  folide  A  E  in  the  firft  cafe ,  I  neede  not  to  make  any  new  defeription .  For  it  ts 
playne  inough  to  conceaue  as  it  is  there  drawne-  Although  you  may  for  your  more  eafe  of  imagination 
deferibe  of  palled  paper  a  parallelipipedon  hauing  his  fides  equall  with  the  fides  of  the  parallelipipedoa 
A  E  before  deferibedjand  hauing  alfo  the  fixe  parallelogramraes  thereof  (contayned  vnder  thole  fides) 

equiangle 


of Suchdes  Element es.  34,4* 

equiangle  with  the  fixe  parallelogrammes  of  that  figure,ech  fide  and  eche  angle  equall  to  his  correfpon 
dent  fide,and  to  his  correfpondent  angle.  ; 

But  concerning  the  other  folide.  When  ye  haue  defcribed  thefe  three  figures  vpon  pafled  pa¬ 
per:  Where  note  for  the  proportion  of  eche  line,  to  make  your  figure  of  palled  paper  equall  with  the  fi¬ 
gure  before  defcribed  vpon  the  playne,let  your  lines  t>  p  ,c  x,  r  s,d  f,  &c.  namely  ,the  refl  of  the  Han¬ 
ding  lines,of  thefe  figures,be  equall  to  the  Handing  lines  o  p,c  x,r  s,d  f,  &c.  of  that  figure  .Likewife 
let  the  lines  o  ct,c  r,r  d,d  o,&c.namely,thefides  which  cotayne  the  bafes  of thefe  figures  be  equal  to 
thelines  o  c,c  r,r  d3d  o,&c.  namely,to  the  fids  which  cotayne  the  bafes  of  that  figure.  Moreouer  let 
the  lines  p  x,x  s,s  f,f  p,&c.namely,the  rell  ofthe  lines  which  cotaine  the  vpper  fuperficieces  of  thefe 
figures, be  equal  to  the  lines  p  x,x  s,s  f,f  p,&c.namely,to  the  rell  of  the  lines  which  cotaine  the  vpper 
fuperficieces  of  that  figure(to  haue  defcribed  all  thofe  forefaid  lines  of  thefe  figures  equal  to  all  the  lines 
of  that  figure, would  haue  required  much  more  fpace  then  here  can  be  (pared :  I  haue  made  them  equall 
onely  to  the  halues  of  thofe  lines, but  by  the  example  of  thefe  ye  may,ir  ye  will  defcribe  the  like  figures 
hauing  their  lines  equall  to  the  whole  lines  of  the  figure  in  the  playne,eche  line  to  his  correfpondent 
line). When  I  fay  ye  haue  as  before  is  taught  delcribed  thefe  three  figures,  cut  finely  the  lines  ic,n, 
f  d  of  the  firfl  figure, and  the  lines  s  r,y  Xyandi^  of  the  fecond  figure  -.likewife  thelines  s  r,n  q_,z  vv, 
and  y  T,of  the  third  figure ,  and  fold  thefe  figures  accordingly ,  which  ye  can  not  chufe  but  doo  if  ye 
marke  well  the  letters  of  euery  line. 


The  three  former  figures  being  aft  er  this  fort  defcribed, fet  them  vpon  this  figure  here  defcribed 
vpon  a  playne,as  vpo  their  bafes,namely,  the  lines  O  C,C  R,RD,D  O  :R  T,T  ►£,  D,  D  R:VR,RT, 
T  W,W  a,  V  Q^and  Qjtof  thefe  three  figures  vpon  the  lines  correfpondent  vnto  them  in  this  figure. 
And  they  fo  Handing  compare  them  with  the 
conflruCtion  and  demonflration  of  the  firfi  cafe, 
and  they  will  geue  great  light  vnto  it .  This  alfo 
ye  muH  note,thatifye  make  thelines  of  thefore 
faya  three  figures  equall  to  the  lines  of  the  figure 
of  the  plaine  defcribed  before  in  the  demofirati-  $ 
on  of  the  firfi  cafe  :  then  m  ufi  ye  make  a  neW  bale 
for  them  like  vnto  this,  which  is  eafy  to  doo ,  if 
ye  draw  a  pallelogramme  equall  and  like  to  the 
parallelogram  me  O  C  T  and  the  cut  of  from 

the  fame’  a  parallelogram  me  D  R  T  ►{<  equall 
and  in  like  fort  fituate  to  the  parallelogramme 
D  R  T  of  that  figure :  &  vpon  the  line  R  T  defcribe  two  parallelogrammes,  the  one  equall  like ,  and 

in  like  fort  fituate  to  the  parallelogramme  R  T  Qjt  of  that  figure,  and  the  other  equall,  like  and  in  like 
fort  fituate  to  the  parallelogramme  R  T  V  W  of  the  fame  figure .  The  lines  of  this  bafe  which  I  haue 
here  put  are  equall  onely  to  the  halues  of  thelines  of  that  figure  in  the- demonflration. 

As  touching  the  fecond  cafe  ye  neede  no  new  figures ,  for  itisplayne  to  fee  by  the  figures  (now 
reformed  by  M.Dee)  defcribed  for  it  in  the  playne ,  elpecially  ifye  remember  the  forme  of  the  figure 
of  the  i?.pfbpofition  of  this  booke,  Only  that  which  there  ye  c'onceaue  to  be  the  bafe,imagine  here  in 
both  the  figures  of  this  fecond  cafe.to  be  the  vpper  fuperficies  oppofite  to  the  bafe,  and  that' which  was 
there  fuppofed  to  be  the  vpper  fuperficies  conceaue  here  to  be  the  bafe .  Ye  may  defcribe  them  vpon 
pafled  paper  for  your  better  fight,  taking  hede  ye  note  the  letters  rightly  according  as  die  conftru&ioa 
required:,  - 


ConJlrtiUkn * 

Uemovftra » 

tion . 


Fluff  as  dcmo'nftrateth  this  propofition  an  other  way  taking  onely  the  bales 
of  the  folide$,and  that  after  this  maner. 

Take  equall  bafes(which  ..  .  •  , ,, 


yet  for  the  furer  vnderflan- 
ding  let  be  vtterly  vnlike) 
namely ,  A  E  B  F  and  ADC 
H,and  let  one  of  the  fides  of 
eche  concurre  in  one  &  the 
fame  right  line  AED,&the 
bafes  being  vpon  one  and 
the  felfe  lame  playne  let 
there  be  fuppofed  to  be  fet 
vpon  the  parallelipipedons 
vnderone  &the  felfe  fame 
altitude.  Then  I  fay  that  the 
folide  fet  vpo  the  bafe  AB  is 
equal  to  the  folide  fet  vpon 
the  bafe -A  H .  Bythepoync 
£  draw  vnto  the  line  A  C  a 


rv  "x 


* 


parallel 


CvnjlrHCtion . 


] Vmonttra - 
mn . 


7 eleuenth  cBoo%e 


parallel  line  EG,  which  if  it 
fall  without  the  bafe  AB» 
produce  the  right  line  H  C 
to  the  poynt  I .  Now  foraf- 
m  uch  as  A  B  and  A  H  are  pa- 
rallelogrmaes ,  therefore  by 
the  24.  of  this  booke,  the 
triangles  A  C I  and  E  G  L 
ihall  be  cqualiter  the  one  to 
the  other  :  and  by  the  4.of 
the  firft,they  fhal  be  equian- 
gle  and  equall ;  and  by  the 
foil  definition  of  thefixth, 
and  fourth  Propofition  of 
the  fame,they  ihall  belike, 

Wherfore  Prifmes  ere&ed 
vppon  thofe  triangles  and  y  ■ 

vnder  the  fame  altitude  that  thefolides  ABandAHa,-e,{hallbeequaIl  andlike,  by  the  8. definition 
of  this  booke.  For  they  are  contayned  vnder  like  playne  fuperficieces  equall  both  in  multitude  and  mag 
nitude.Adde  the  folide  fet  vpon  the  bafe  ACLE  common  to  them  both  .Wherefore  the  folide  fet  vp¬ 
pon  the  bafe  A  E  G  C,is  equall  to  the  folide  let  vpon  the  bafe  A  E  L I.  And  forafmuch  as  the  fuperficie¬ 
ces  A  E  B  F,and  A  D  H  C  are  equall  (by  fuppofition) :  and  the  part  taken  3\vay  A  G  is  equall  to  the  pare 
taken  away  A  L  :  therefore  the  refidue  B I  ihall  be  equall  to  the  refidueGD  .Wherefore  as  AG  is  to 
G  D  as  A  L  is  to  B I  ( namely,  equalls  to  equalls).  But  as  A  G  is  to  G  D,fo  is  the  folide  fet  vpon  A  G  to 
the  folide  fet  vpon  G  D  by  the  zy .  of  this  booke,  for  it  is  cut  by  a  playne  fuperficies  fet  vpon  the  line 
G  E,which  fuperficies  is  parallel  to  the  oppofite  fuperficieces  .  Wherefore  as  A  Lis  to  BI ,  fois  the 
folide  fet  vpon  A  L  to  th e  folide  fet  vpon  B I .  Wherefore  (  by  the  1 1  .of  the  fifth)  as  the  folide  fet  vpon 
A  G  (  or  vpon  A  L  which  is  equall  vnto  it Jis  to  the  folide  fet  vpon  G  D,fo  is  the  fame  folide  fet  vpon 
A  G  or  A  L  to  the  folide  fee  vpon  B  I.Wherefore(by  the  2  .part  of  the  9.  of  the  fifth)the  folides  fet  vpon 
G  D  and  B I  ihall  be  equall  .  Vnto  which  folides  ifye  adde  equall  folides,  namely ,  the  folide  fet  vpon 
A  G  to  the  folide  fet  vpon  G  D,and  the  folide  fet  vpon  A  L  to  the  folide  fet  vpon  B  I:  the  whole  folides 
fet  vpon  the  bafe  A  H  and  vpon  the  bafe  A  B  ihall  be  equall.  Wherefore  Parallelipedons  confifting  vpon 
equall  bafes  and  being  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  lame  altitude  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other:  which  was 
required  to  be  proued. 


/mu’,  -no  ■; 


5C.S 


be  27. 1  beoreme.  The  32.  Propofition. 

.  ~ . -i * .  I  •»  Ji  '"**  <  **• "  "  '  •  cu  e’  e.i  v;  e  _ 

fparallelipipedons  being  Crider  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude >  are  in  that 
proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  their  bafes  are. 


'iff  Vppofe  that  thefe  parallelipipedons  A  B  andC  D  be  vnder  one  dr  the  felfe  fame 
!  altitude: T hen  l  fay  that  thofe  parallelipipedons  odf  B  and  C  D  are  in  that  pro* 
i portion  the  one  to  the  other, that  their  bafes  are, that  is, that  as  the  bafe  A  E  is  to 


-  the  bafe  C  Ffo  is  theparallelipipedon  A  B  to  theparallelipipedon  CD.  Vpon  the 


v 


K 


F 


line  F  G  deferibe  ( by  the  4$ 
ofthefrsl )  theparallelo- 
gramme  F  H  equall  to  the 
paralklogramme  A  E  and  e- 
quiangle  with  the  parallel/) - 
gramme  CF .  And  vpon  the 
bafe  F  H  deferibe  a  parallels 
pipedo  of  the  felfe  fame  alti¬ 
tude  that  the  parallelipipedo 
C  D  is, dr  letji  fame  be  G  K. 

How  (by  the  31.  of  the  ele- 
uenth )  the  parallelipipedon  A  Bis  equall  to  theparallelipipedon  G  Kfor  they  confiftvpon  e~ 

quail 


ri 


\ 

\ 

\ 

z 

\ 

A 


of-Buclides  Elementes . 

quail  bafes, namely  ,AE  and  F  H,and  are  vnder  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude.  And forafi 
much  as  the  parallelipipedon  C  K  is  cut  by  a  plaine fuperfcies  D  G,  being-parallel  to  either  of 
the  oppofite  plaine fuperficieces,  therfore  ( by  the  2 $.  of  the  eleuenth )  as  the  bafe  H  F  is  to  the 
bafe  F  Cfo  is  the  parallelipipedon  G  K  to  parallelipipedon  C  D  :  but  the  bafe  B  F  is  equal  to 
the  bafe  A  E,  and  the  parallelipipedon  G  Id  is  proued  equall  to  the  parallelipipedon  AB> 
Wherforc  as  the  bafe  A%E  is  to  the  bafe  C  F,fo  is  the  parallelipedon  A  B,  to  the  parallelipipe¬ 
don  C  D  .Wherfore  parallelipipedons  being  vnder  one  and  the felfe fam#  altitude, are  in  that 
proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that  their  bafes  are :  which  was  required  to  be  demonflrated. 

I  neede  not  to  put  any  other  figure  for  the  declaration  of  this  demonftration,  for  it  is  eafie  to  fee 
by  the  figure  there  defcribed.Howbeit  ye  may  for  the  more  full  fight  therof5defcribe  folides  of  pafiod 
paper  according  to  the  conllruftion  there  fet  forth,  which  will  not  be  hard  for  you  to  do.,  if  ye  remem¬ 
ber  the  deferiptions  of  fuch  bodies  before  taught* 

.  A  Corollary  added  by  Flufas . 

Equall  parallelipipedons  cot  dined  vnder  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude  fhaue  alfo  their  bafes  equal. 
For  if  the  bafes  fhould  b  e  vnequalfthe  parallelipipedons  alfo  ihould  be  vnequal  by  this  32  propofitio , 
eAnd  equall  parallelipipedons  hkuing  equall  bafes,  haite  alfi  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude.  For  if 
they  ihould  haue  a  greater  altitude,  they  Ihould  exceede  the  equall  parallelipipedons  which,  hauethe 
felfe  fame  altitude:  But  if  they  ihould  hauealeife  they  ihould  want  fo  much  of  thofe  felfe  fame  equal 
parallelipipedons. 

The  2StTheoreme.  The  33  -Lropofetion. 

Like  parallelipipedons  are  in  treble  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  of  that 
in  Hthich  their fides  of  like  proportion  are. 

y  Vppofe  that  thefe  parallelipipedons  A  B  and  CD  be  like ,  &  let  the fides  A  E  and 
C  F  be fides  of like  proportion.  T hen  I fay,  the  parallelipipedon  A  Bis  vnto  the 
parallelipipedon  C  D  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the fide  A  E  is  to  the 
| fide  C  F .  Extend  the  right  lines  A  E,GE  and  H  E  to  thepointes  K,L,M.  And 

( by  the  2.  of  the  fir fi  )  vnto  the 
line  C  F  put  the  line  E  Id  equal, 
and  vnto  the  line  F  N  put  the 
line  E  L  equall,  and  moreouer 
vnto  the  line  F  R  put  the  line  E 
M  equall,  and  make  perfect  the 
parallelogramme  Id  L,  and  the 
parallelipipedon  K  0.  Nowfor- 
afmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  E  K 
and  E  L  are  equall  to  thefe 
two  lines  C  F  and  F  N,  but  the 
angle  Id  E  L  is  equall  to  the 
angle.  C  F  N  ( for  the  angle 
^AE  G  is  equall  to  the  angle 
C  F  M  by  reafon  that  the  folides 
A B and  CD  are  like ) . Wher¬ 
fore  the  parallelogramme  Id  L 
is  equall  and  like  to  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  C  N,  and  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  the  parallelogramme  Id  M  is  equall  and 

like 


\ 

l\ 

V 

\ 

\ 

N 

M 

K 


GnJlrutthNs, 


Dmonfiu* 
thn . 


V 

\ 

K 

\ 

\ 

fc 


The  eleuenthTiookg 

tike  io  the  parallelogramme  C- 

R,  and  moreouer  theparallelo-  ® 

gramme  O  E  to  the  parallelo- 
gramme  F  D.  Wherefore  three 
par allelo grammes  of  the  paralle- 
lipipedon  KO  are  like  and  e quail 
to  three par allelogrammes  of  the 
parallelipipedon  CD:  but  thofc 
three  (ides  are  e  quail  and  like  to 
the  three  oppofite  fides.-wherfore 
the  whole  parallelipipedon  K  O 
is  equal  and  like  to  the  whole  pa- 
rallelipipedon  C  D.  Make perfect 
theparallelogramme  G  K .  And 
'Upon  the  bafes  G  K  and  K  L 
make  perfect  to  the  altitude  of 
the  parallelipipedon  A  B,the pa- 
rallelipipedons  E  X  &  LP.And 
forafmuch  as  by  reafon  that  the 

parallelepiped ons  A  B  &  C  D  are  like,  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  C  F,fo  is  the  line  E  G,  to 
the  line ;  F  N,  and  the  line  EH  to  the  line  F  R.  But  the  line  C  F  is  equal l  to  the  line  E  K,and 
the  line  F  N  to  the  line  E  L,  and  the  line  F  R  to  the  line  E  M,  therefore  as  the  line  A  E  is  to 
the  line  E  K,fo  is  the  line  G  E  to  the  line  E  L ,  and  the  line  H  E  to  the  line  EM  (by  construc¬ 
tion  ).  But  as  the  line  A  E  is  to  the  line  E  K,fo  is  theparallelogramme  AG  to  the  parallelo- 
gramme  G  K  (by  the frjl  of  the  fixt)  .And  as  the  line  G  E  is  to  the  line  E  L,fo  is  the  paralle- 
logramme  G  K  to  the  parallelograme  K  L.  And  moreouer  as  the  line  HE  is  to  the  line  E  M, 
fo  is  theparallelogramme?  Eto  the  parallelogramme  KM.  Wherefore  (by  the  n.ofthe 
fft )  as  the  par  allelogramme  A  G  is  to  the  para  llelogramme  G  K ,fo  is  theparallelogramme 
G  K  to  the parallelogramme  K  L,  and  the  parallelograme  P  Eto  theparallelogramme  K  M. 
But  as  tnc parallelogramme  A  G  is  to  the  parallelogramme  G  K,  fo  is  the  parallelipipedon 
A  B  to  the  parallelipipedon  E  X,  by  the former  propofition,  and  as  the  parallelogramme  G  K 
is  to  the  parallelogramme  K  L,fo  by  the fame  is  the  parallelipipedon  X  Eto  the  parallelipipe¬ 
don  ?  L:  and  agayne  by  the  fame,  as  theparallelogramme  P  E  is  to  the  parallelogramme  K- 
M,fo  is  the  parallelipipedon?  L  to  the  parallelipipedon  K  O.Wherfore  as  the  parallelipipedo 
A  B  is  to  the  parallelipipedon  E  X,fo  is  the  parallelipipedon  EX  to  the  parallelipipedon  P  L, 
and  the  parallelipipedon  P  L  to  the parallelipipedon  K  0.  But  if  there  be  fower  magnitudes 
in* continuall  proportion,  the frfi  jbalbe  vnto  the  fourth  in  treble  proportion  that  it  is  to  tht 
fecond  (by  the  io.  definition  of thefift ) .  Wherefore  the  parallelipipedon  A  B  is  vnto  the  pa - 
rallelipedon  K  O  in  treble  proportion  that  the  parallelipipedon  A  B  is  to  the  parallelipipedon 
E  X.  But  as  the  parallelipipedon  A  B  is  to  the  parallelipipedo  E  X,fo  is  the  parallelogramme 
AG  to  the  parallelogramme  G  K,  and  the  right  line  A  E  to  the  right  line  E  K.  Wherefore 
alfo  the  parallelipipedon  A  B  is  to  the  parallelipipedon  K  O  in  treble proportio  of  that  which 
the  line  A  E  hath  to  the  line  E  I(.  But  the  parallelipipedon  KO  is  equall  to  the parallelipi - 
peden  C  D ,  and  the  right  line  E  K  to  the  right  line  C  F.  Wherefore  the  parallelipipedon  A  B 
is  to  the  parallelipipedon  C  D  in  treble  proportion  that  the fide  of  like  proportion, namely ,  A- 
E  is  to  the fide  of  like  proportion, namely,  to  C  F.  Wherefore  like  parallelipipedons  are  in  tre¬ 
bleproportion  the  one  to  the  other  of  that  in  which  their fides  of  like  proportion  are :  which 
was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 


Became 


Fol.^6. 


31 


i  ■  < 


:;,r03 cijsarr-'i 
■  iV  USE  '{Sib  ?Hm5  1:.  =  . 

'Ip.-CT  _ 

•  T  -  t  '  n  ,  [  \  »  I  )  •  ■ 

•*  •: :  r«i  hr.u  .i- *  • 


.,'Adnoh  3-: :  v.  ' 

,b..  I 


r*i 


• r  ,  .  ii 

io  J 


£ 


H 


CP 


fCertainemofi profitable  Corollaries  Annotations,  Theo* 

rentes,  and  Problemes,  with  other  praBifes ,  Logisiicall,  and 
c Mechanically  partly  ;upon  this  33 .  and  partly  svp  on 
the  34.  36.  and  other  following, 
added  by  after  John  ‘Dee. 

«J[  0/  Corollary,  r. 

I .  Hereby  it  is  manifeft,  that  two  right  lines  may  be  found,  which 
fall  bane  that  proport  ion, the  one  to  the  other,  that  any  two  like  ParaHelifi- 
pedons,  and  in  like  fort  defcribed,geuen,haue  the  one  to  the  other . 

S  uppofe  Qjnd  X  to  be  two  like  Parallelipipedons,  and  in  like  fort  defcribed  .  Of  Q  take  any  o 
the  three  lines,  of  which  it  is  produced  :  as  namely,R  G.  Of  X,  take  that  rightline  ofhis  production 
wmch  line  is  aunlwerable  to  R  G  in  proportion  (which  molt  aptly,  after  the  Greke  name,  maybi 

AAa.j,  alkc 


m 


of-Euclides  Elements, 

f  Corellary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft  float  if there  be fiower  right  lines  in  *  continual! pro * 
portion,  as  the  fir  ft  is  to  the  fourth, fo fhall  the  Tarallelipipedon  defcribed 
of  the firft  line, be  to  the  tarallelipipedon  defcribed  of  thefecond,  both  the 
tarallelipipedons  being  like  and  in  like  fort  defcribed.  For  the  line »  «> 

the  fourth  in  treble  proportion  that  it  is  to  the  fecond :  and  it  hath  before  bene 
proued  that  the  Parallelipipedon  defcribed  of  the  firft,  is  to  the  Parallelipipedon 
defcribed  of  the  fecond,  in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  full  line  is  to  the  fourth. 


Becaufe  the  one  of  the  figures  before, 
defcribed  in  a  plaine,  pertayning  to  the 
demonftration  of  this  33.  Propofition,  is 
not  altogether  fo  eafie  to  ayounge  begin¬ 
ner  to  conceaue,  I  haue  here  for  the  fame 
defcribed  an  other  figure,  which  if  ye  firft 
drawe  vpon  palled  paper ,  and  afterward 
cut  the  lines  &folde  the  fides  accordingly, 
will  agree  with  the  conftru&ion  &  demon¬ 
ftration  of  the  fayd  Propofition .  Howbeit 
this  ye  mult  note  that  ye  mull  cut  the  lines 
O  QJ$C  M  R  on  the  contrary  fide  to  that 
which  ye  cut  the  other  lines .  For  the  fo- 
lides  which  haue  to  their  bafe  the  paralle- 
logramme  LIC  arefet  oh  vpward  and  the 
other  downward: Ye  may ifyethinke  good 
defcribe  after  the  fame  maner  of  palled  pa¬ 
per  a  body  equall  to  the  folide  C  D :  though 
that  be  ealieinough  to  conceaue  by  the  fi¬ 
gure  thereof  defcribed  in  the  plaine.' 

• •  o  ;  i  ft r 


L  -  f 

W. 

-  •  -  '  • 

f 

0 

IT'. 

G) 

?  '  V.  J  . 

ol  /.I  • 

0  c 

. 

- 

■  ■:---•■  ■ 

r» 

<?' 

X 

X  .  ... 

a 


*  Note  tbit 
famous  Lent- 
ma. 


7  be  doubling 
of  the  Cube * 

*  Note . 

*  All  their 
•tv  ayes  of  exec tt - 
ting  the  Lem-' 
ma  are  m  Euto- 
tias  comment a~ 
rses'rpo  Archi¬ 
medes  boo^e  de 
Sghera  &  Cy- 
Isndro:  sphere 
y.  rchtmedes  V- 
feth  the  fame 
Lemma. 


vxc 

called  Omologall  to  R  G)& 

Ice  that  be  T  V.  By  the  1 1  .of 
the  fixth,  to  R  G  and  T  V, 
let  the  third  line  in  propor¬ 
tion  with  them  be  founde, 
and  let  that  be  Y.  By  the 
fame  i  r .  ofthe  fix th,to  T  V 
and  Y,  let  the  thirde  right 
line  be  fond, in  the  fayd  pro 
portion  of  T  V  to  Y:  &  let 
that  be  Z.I  fay  now  that  R  G 
hath  that  proportion  to  Z, 
which  Q^Jiath  to  X .  For  by 
conftrudhon,  we  haue  fower 
right  lines  in  continuall  pro- 
piotion,namely,R  G,T  V,Y, 
and  Z.  Wherfore  by  Eucltdes 
Corollary,  here  before,  R  G 
is  to  Z,  as  Qjs  to  X.Wffere- 
fore  we  haue  foud  two  right 
lines  hauing  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other ,which  any  two  like  Parallelipipedons  oflike  deferip^ 
cion,geuen,  haue  the  one  to  the  other  :  which  was  required  tp  be  done* 

-LiOffwtd  Sa  i'A-  1  if.'  V  .  j 

«•  A - ,M  #  .  •  -  .,r-s  ..  A  \t  y  ...  • 

lA  Corollary.  2. 

*Afs  a  Csnuerfe,  of  my  former  Corollary,  doth  it  follow* :  To  finde  two  like  ‘Parallelipipedons  of 
like  definition,  which  fall  haue  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, that  any  two  right  lines ygeuen, 
haue  the  one  to  the  other. 

Suppofe  the  two  right  lines  geuen  to  be  A  and  B  :  Imagine  offeure  right  lines  in  continuall  pro- 
portion,A,to  be  the  firlt,  and  B  to  be  the  fourth  :  (or  contraruvife,  B  to  be  firft,  &  A  to  be  the  fourth). 
The  fecond  and  third  are  to  be  found, which  may,  betwene  A  &•  B,  be  two  meanes  in  continuall  pro¬ 
portion  :  as  now,  *  fuppofe  fuch  two  lincs,found  :  and  let  them  be  G  aud  D  .  Wherefore  by  Euclidcs 
Corollary,  as  A  is  toB  (if  A  were  taken  as  firft  )  fo  fhall  the  Parallelipipedon  deferibed  of  A,  be  to  the 
like  Parallelipipedon  and  in  like  fort  deferibed  of  C  :  being  the  fecond  of  the  fower  lines  in  continual! 
proportion  :  it  is  to  wete,  A,C,D,and  B  .  Or,  if  B  fhall  be  taken  as  firll,  (and  that  thus  they  are  orderly 
in  continuall  proportion,  B,D,C,  A, )  then,  by  the  fayd  Coroilary,  as  B  is  to  A,  fo  fhall  the  Parallelipi¬ 
pedon  deferibed  ofB,  be  vnto  the  like  Parallelipipedon  and  in  like  fort  deferibed  ofD .  And  vnto  a  Pa¬ 
rallelipipedon  of  A  or  B,  at  pleafure  deferibed,  may  an  other  of  C  or  I>  be  made  like,  and  in  like  fort  fi- 
tuated  or  deferibed,  by  the  27. of  thiseleuenth  booke .  Wherefore  any  two  right  lines  being  geue,&ct 
which  Was  required  to  be  done. 

Thus  haue  I  moft  briefly  brought  to  your  vnderftanding,  if  (firft  )  B  were  double  to 
A,  then  what  Parallelipipedon  foeuerjwere  deferibed  of  A, the  like  Parallelipipedon 
and  in  like  fort  deferibed  of  C,  (hall  be  double  to  the  Parallelipipedon  deferibed  of  A* 
And  fo  likewife  (fecondly)  if  A  were  double  to  B,  the  Parallelipipedon  of  D,  fhoulde  be 
double  to  the  like, of  B  deferibed,  both  being  like  fituated. Wherefore  if  of  A  or  B,were 
Cubes  made,  the  Cubes  ofCf^M^eproued  double  to  them  r  as  that of  C,  to  the 
Cube  of  A :  and  the  Cubeofp  t;o  thp  Cube  ofB  ;  in  the  fecond  cafe .  *  And  fo  of  any 
proportion  els  betwene  A  and  B  . 

Now  alfo  do  you  moft  clerclypcre-eaue  the  Mathematical!  oecafion, where  by  (firft  of 
all  men  )  Hippocrates,  to  double  any  Cube  geuen  ,was  led  to  the  former  Lemma:  Betwene 
any  two  right  tines  geuen, to  finde  two  other  right  lines, Which  fhallbe  With  the  two  firfi  lines,  in  conti - 
nuall  proportion:  After  whofe  time  (many  yeares)  diuine  ‘Plato, Heron  fPhilo,eyippollonimt 
Diodes  fPap\ms,Sporm,<Hdlenechmm,csArchytM  Tarentinw (who  made  the  wodden  doue  to 
flye )  Erato IfhenesfiNjcomedes, with  many  other  ( to  their  immortall  fame  and  renowme) 
publifhed,  *  diuers  their  witty  deuifes,  methods,  and  engines  ( which  yet  are  extant) 
whereby  to  execute  thys  Problematical!  Lemma.  Butnotwith  Branding  all  the  trauaiies 
of  the  forefayd  Philofophers  and  Matbematiciens,  yea  and  all  othersdoinges  and  con- 
triuinges(vnto  this  day)  about  the  fayd  Lemma,yet  there  remaineth  fufficient  matter, 
Mathematically  fio  to  demonfir  ate  the fame, that  wo  ft  exactly  0  readily, it  may  alfi  be  M echanically 
trait  fid :  that  who  foeuerfhail-achieue  that  feate,ihaHnot  be  counted  a  fecond  Jrchi- 
-  ..  h.-. :  .1.  ■  medes. 


The  ekuentb'Bookg 


- . i 


y 


ofSuclides  Element es . 

modes , but  rather  a  pereles  Mathcmaticien,and  tJWathematicorum  Hr  keeps.  X  will  fundry 

wayes  (in  my  briefe  additions  and  annotations  vpon  Euclide)  excite  you  thereto,  yea  Ntteipkath 

and  bring  before  your  eyes  fundry  new  wayes,by  mcinuented  :  and,  in  this  booke  fo 

placed,as matter thereof,to my inueiitions appertayningpnay gene occafion .‘Leauing  Toub?k°ofthe 

the  farther,  full,  &abfolute  my  concluding  ofthe  Lemma,  to  an  other  place  and  times  Cube,  °  1 

which  will, now,  more  copendioufly  be  done :  fo  great  a  part  therof,being  before  hand 

in  thys  booke  publilhed. 

«[[  A  Corollary  added  by  Plumas, 

Haratlelipipsdovs  confuting  vpon  equall  bafes, are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as  their  alti¬ 
tudes  are .  For  if thofe  altitudes  be  cut  by  a  plaine  fuperficies  parallel  to  the  bafes  /.  the  fe&ions  fhall 
be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as  thefe&ions  of  the  bafes  cut,  by  the  ay. of  this  booke  .  Which 
fe&ions  of  the  bafes  are  the  one  to  the  other  in  that  proportion  that  their  fides  or  the  altitudes  of  the 
folides  are,by  the  firlt  of  the  fixt .  Wherefore  the  folides  are  the  one  to  the  other  as  their  altitudes  are. 

But  if  the  bales  be  vnlike,  the  felfe  lame  thing  may  be  proucd  by  the  Corollary  of  the  ay  .of  this  booke. 

Which  by  the  a  y  .Propofition  was  proued  in  like  bafes . 


£ 


B 


The  ip.  Theoreme.  The  34.  Propofition. 

hi  e quail  arallelipipedons  the  hafies  are  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes „ 
jindP arallelipipedons  Tvhofe  bafes  are  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes,  are 
equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

yppofe  that  thefe  F  arallelipipedons  A  B  dr  C  D  be  equall  the  oiie  to  the  other. T hen 
Pp’  1 fay,  that  the  bafes  of  the  P  arallelipipedons  A  B  and  C  D  are  reciprokall  to  their 

_ SI  altitudes,  that  is,  as  the  bafe  E  H  is  to  the  bafe  NP,fois  the  altitude  of  the  folide 

CD  to  the  altitude  of  the folide  A  B .  Firjl  let  the funding  lines  AG,E  F,L  B,H  K,  of the 
folide  A  B,&  the fading  lines  C  M,  N  X,0  D,andF  R,  of  the folide  C  D,be  erectedperpe- 
dicularly  to  the  bafes  EH&NP.Thel fay, that  as  the  bafe  E  H  is  to  the  bafe  NF,fo  is  the 
line  CM  to  the  tine  A  G.Njnv  if 
the  bafe  E II  be  equal  to  the  bafe 
N  P,and  the  folide  A  B  is  equall 
to  the  folide  C  D ,  wherefore  the 
line  C  tJM.  is  equall  to  the  line 
AG* .  For  if  the  bafes  E  H  and 
N  P  being  equall,  the  altitudes 
A  G  and  CM  be  not  equall,  nei -  ] 

ther  alfo  jhall  the  folide  A  B  be 
equall  to  the  folide  CD,  but 
they  are  fuppofed  to  be  equall. 

Wherefore  the  altitude  CM  is  not  vne  quail  to  the  altitude  A  G .  Wherefore  it  is  equall.  And 
therefore  as  the  bafe  E  His  to  the  bafe  P  N,fo  is  the  altitude  CM  to  the  altitude  A  G.Wher- 
fore  it  is  manifef, that  the  bafes  of  the  P  arallelipipedons  A  B  and  CD  are  reciprokall  to 
their  altitudes . 

But  now fuppofe  that  the  bafe  EH  be  not  equall  to  the  bafe  N  P  .But  let  the  bafe  E  H  be 
the  greater .  Now  the folide  A  B  is  equall  to  the  folide  C  D  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  altitude  C  M 
is  greater  then  the  altitude  AG*  .  For  if  not, then  againe  are  not  the  folides  A  B  and  C  D 
equall:  but  they  are  by fuppofition  equall .  Wherefore  {by  the  2. of  the  firjl )  put  unto  the  line 
AG  an  equall  line  C  T .  And  vpon  the  bafe  N  P  and  the  altitude  being  C  T,  make  perfecle 
a folide  c  otained  under  parallel  plaine fuperfickces,and  let  the fame  beCZ.  Andforafmuch 

AA.ij,  as  the 


K 


\ 

Ml 

1 

\ 

X 

T 

\ 

H 

\ 

°N 

Two  tafes  in 
the  fir jlpart 
of  this  props* 
tion. 

Fir  ft  cafe, 
Tvhich  alfo 
way  be  two 
Tvaycs. 

Firjl  Hay* 


*  This  follow, 
etb  alfo  of  the 
Corollary  ad - 
ded  ofFmjlas 
after  then, 
propofition  of 
this  booke. 


Second  way, 

*  This  alfo 
follow  eth  of 
the  former 
Corollary . 


Thtewutrfe 
of  bath  the 
partes  of  the 
firfi  cafe, 

I. 


3* 


Second  cafe,* 

C  .■AimEPm* 


oe 


3 


G 


K 


A 


\i 

\1 

\ 

N 

X 

T 

\ 

°\1 

7 he  eleuenth  <Boo%e 

<ss  the [elide  A  Bis  equall  to  the folide  C  D,  and  there  is  a  certaine  other folide, namely, C  Z, 
hut  vnt o  one  and  the /elf  e  fame  magnitude  equa.ll  magnitudes  haueone  and  the  [elf e fame 
proportion  (by  the  7. of  the  fft ) .  Wherefore  as  the  folide  A  B  is  to  the  folide  C  Z,(bis  the  fo - 
tide  CD  to  the  folide  CZ. But 
as  the  folide  A  B  is  to  the  folide 
€ Z,fo  is  the  bafe  EH  to  the 
bafe  N P  (by  the  32.  of  the  ele¬ 
venth  )  •  for  the  folides  A  B  and 
CZ  arevnder  equall  altitudes. 

<LHnd  as  the  folide  C  D  is  to  the 
folide  CZ,fo  is  the  bafe  M  P  to  ] 
the  bafe  P  T,and  the  line  MC  to 
the  line  CT.  Wherefore  (by  the 
1 1 .  of  the  fft )  as  the  bafe  E  H  is 

to  the  bafe  N  P,  fo  is  the  line  C  M  to  the  line  C  T .  But  the  line  C  E  is  equall  to  the  line  A  G\ 
Wherefore  (by  the  7.  of the  fft )as  the  bafe  E  H  is  to  the  bafe  N  P,fo  is  the  altitude  CM  to  the 
altitude  A  G.  Wherforein  thefe  P  arallelipipedons  A  B  and  C  D  the  bafes  are  reciprokall  to 
their  altitudes. 

But  norPagaine fuppofe  that  the  bafes  of  the  P  arallelipipedons  A  B  and  C  D  be  recipro- 
kall  to  their  altitudes,  that  is,  as  the  bafe  EH  is  to  the  bafe  NP,fo  let  the  altitude  of  the  fo¬ 
lide  CD  be  to  the  altitude  of  the  folide  A  B.E hen  I fay,  that  the folide  A  B  is  equall  to  the 
folide  C  D  .For  againe  let  the  fanding  lines  be  eretfed  perpendicularly  to  their  bafes. 

And  now  if  the  bafe  EH  be  equall  to  the  bafe  N  P  :  but  as  the  bafe  E  H  is  to  the  bafe 
N  P  ,fo  is  the  altitude  of the folide  CD  to  the  altitude  of  the  folide  AB .  Wherefore  the  al¬ 
titude  of  the folide  CD  is  equall  to  the  altitude  of the folide  AB  .But  P  arallelipipedons  con - 
fifing  vpon  equall  bafes  andrmder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude , are  (  by  the  31.  of  the 
eleuenth  )  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  folide  A  Bis  equall  to  the folide  C  D . 

But  now fuppofethaf  the  bafe  EH  be  not  equall  to  the  bafe  N  P  :  but  let  thebafeEH 
he  the  greater .  Wherefore  alfo  the  altitude  of  the folide  C  D,  that  is,  the  line  C  M  is  greater 
then  the  altitudeof the folide  A  B,  that  is,  then  the  line  A  G .  Put  againe  (by  the  3.  of  the 
firfi  )  the  line  C  T  equall  to  the  line  A  G,  and  make per  fecle  the folide  CZ .  Him  for  that 
as  the  bafe  E  H  is  to  the  bafe  N  P,fo  is  the  line  MC  to  the  line  AG  .But  the  line  AGise - 
quail  to  the  line  C  T .  Wherefore  as  the  bafe  E  H  is  to  the  bafe  HfP , fo  is  the  line  C  M  to  the 
line  C  E .  But  as  the  bafe  E  H  is  to  the  bafe  N  P,fo  (by  the  32.  of the  eleuenth  )  is  the folide 
A  B  to  the folide  C  Zfor  the folides  A  B  and  C  Z  are  vnder  equall  altitudes.  And  as  the  line 
C  M  is  to  the  line  CT,fo(  by  the  1.  of  the fixt )  is  the  bafe  MP  to  the  bafe  P  T,  and  (  by 
the  3  2. of  the  eleuenth  j  the folide  C  D  to  the  folide  C  Z .  Wherefore  alfo  (  by  the  11.  and  9. 
of thefift )  as  the  folide  AB  is  to  the folide  C  Z,fo  is  the folide  CD  to  the folide  C  Z .  Wher - 
fore  either  of  thefe folides  A  B  and  C  D  haue  to  the folide  C  Z  one  and  the  fame  proportion . 
Wherefore  (by  the  7 .  of thefift )  the folide  A  B  is  equall  to  the folide  CD  :  which  was  requi « 
red  to  be  demonfirated. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  Banding  lines, namely,  F  E,B  L,G  A,K  H:X  N,DO,MCt 
and  RP,  be  not  ercciedperpendicularly  to  their  bafes .  And  (by  then,  of  the  eleuenth  )  from 
the  pointes  F,  G,  B,  KrX,  CM,  D,  R,  draw  unto  the  plaine fuperficies  of  the  bafes  E  H  and 
<2'(P  perpendicular  lines ,  and  'let  thofe perpendicular  lines  light  vpo  the  pointes  S,E,V$ 
Z:  W,  T,  d,  and  and  make  perfect e  the  P  arallelipipedons  F  Z,  and  X  1  fay  that t 

euenin  this  cafe  alfo,  if  the  folides  AB  and  CD  be  equall,  their  bafes  are  reciprokall  to 
their  altitudes,  that  is,  as  the  bafe  EH  is  to  the  bafe  N  P,fo  is  the  altitude  of  the  folide  C  D 
to  the  altitude  of  the  folide  AB .  Forforafmuch  as  the  folide  A  B  is  equall  to  the  folide 

CD 


ofSuclides  Elementes \ 


T he  eleuenth  Tdwke 

{landing  lines  are  in  the  felfe  fame  right  lines.  And  the  folide  D  T  is  equall  to  the  folide  D  C, 
for  they  conftsle  vpon  one  and  the fife fame  bafe,  namely,  X  R,  and  are  under  one  and  the 
'  fife fame  altitude,  whofe funding  lines  are  in  the felfe fame  right  lines .  Wherefore alfo  the 

Jt9egmraU  folide  A  B  is  equall  to  the  folide  C  D  .  Wherefore  in  equall  Parallelipipedons  the  ba/es  are 
*  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes .  And  Parallelipipedons  whofe  bafis  are  reciprokall  with  their 
altitudes, are  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


The  demoriftration  of  the  firft  cafe  of  this  Proportion  is  eafie  to  conceaue  by  the  figure  as  it  is  deferi- 
bedin  theplaine.  But  ye  may  for  your  more  full  fight  defenbe  Parallelipipedons  of° palled  paper,  ac¬ 
cording  as  the  conllrudlion  teacheth  you. 

And  for  the  fecond  cafe,  if  yeremeber  well  the  forme  of  the  figures  which  you  made  for  the  feconi 
cafe  of  the  3 1  -Proportion :  and  deferibe  the  like  for  this,taking  heede  to  the  letters  that  ye  place  them 
like  as  the  collru&ton  in  this  cafe  requireth,ye  lhall  moll  eafily  by  them  come  to  the  full  vnderftanding 
of  the  conflru<2ionand  demonllration  of  the  laid  cafe. 


M.Iohn  IDeefis  fun  dry  Inuentions  and  Annotations  fpery  necejfary , 

here  to  be  added  and  confidered. 


A  Their eme. 


Cenjtmtm • 


\wa\  ’AY. 

.'•W-  \  * 

.<:\p 


Iffower  right  lines  be  in  continuall proportion ,md  vpon  the Jquare  ofthefirft.as  a  bafe ,  be  erec¬ 
ted  a  reClangle  parallelipipedon,  whofe  heith  is  the  fourth  line:  that  rebiangle  parallelipipedon  is  equal 
to  the  Cube  made  of  the  fecond  line ,  And  if  vpon  the  Jquare  of  the  fourth  line  ,asa  bafefe  erelled  a 
reblangle parallelipipedon  y)frhoJe  heith  is  the  firft  line ,  that  parallelipipedon  is  equall  to  the  Cube 
made  of  the  third  line* 


Suppofe 

c  d,e  r,and  g  h 
to  befower  right 
lines  in  cotinuall 
proportion  :  and 
vpo  thefquareof 
a  8  f which  let  be 
a  i)as.abafe,let 
be  eredted  a  rec- 
tagle  parallelipi- 
pedo,  hauing  his 
heith  ik,  equall 
to  gh, the  fourth 
line.  And  let  that 

taralielipipedon 
fe  a  k. Of  the  fe¬ 
cond  line  c  o,let 
aCubebemade: 
whofe  iquare 
bafe,let  denoted 
with  c  qj: and  let 
1ms  heith  be  no¬ 
ted  by  let 

the  whole  Cube 
be  fignifiedby  c- 
jl.  I  fay  that  a  x  is 
equall  to  c  l.  Let 
the  like  coflrudli- 
,on  be  for  the 
cube  of  the  third 
line:  that  is, vpon 
the  fijuare  of  g  a 
(  which  fuppofe 
to  be  g-m)  lets  ha 
redtangle  paralle¬ 
lipipedon.  be  e- 


ve&ei 


of  Buddies  Elementes. 


Fol.W. 


reded,hauyng  his  heith  n  o, equall  to  a  b  ,the  firftline  :  which  parallelipipedon  let  be  noted  with  6  o. 
And  fuppofe  the  cube  of  the  third  line  (s.  Fjto  be  e  m  :  whofe  lquarebafe,let  be  noted  by  e.  r  :  and  hys 
heith  by  km.  Ifaynow  (fecondly)  that  g  o  isequaltoEM.  For  the  firil  part  confider,  that  a  i  ( the 
fquare  bafe  of  A  KJ  is  to  c  the  fquare  bafe  of  c  L,as  a  e  is  to  the  third  line  e  p,by  the  z.CoroUary  of 
the  zo.ofthe  fixth.  But  as  a  b  ,  is  to  e  f,  fofby  alternate  proportion)  is  c  d  to  g  h,  toe  d. The  cubes 
roote,  is  c^L,the  fame  cubes  heith  equalled  to  g  h  is  I K  (  by  conftru&ion)equall :  wherefore,as  a  x 
is  to  c  q_,  fo  is  q_l  to  I  K.  The  bafes  therefore  and  heithes  of  A  K  and  c  l,  are  reciprocally  in  proporti¬ 
on  :  wherefore  by  the  fecond  part  of  this  34.  propofition,  AK  and  c  l  are  equall.  For  proofe  of  the  fe¬ 
cond  part  of  my  theoreme,  1  fay,  that  as  a  b,  c  d,  e  F,andG  h,  are  in  continuall  proportion  forward, 
foare  they  backward  in  continuall  proportion,  as  by  the  fourth  ofthefift  maybeproued  .  Wherefore 
now  confidering  g  h  to  be  as  firft,andfo  a  b  to  be  the  fourth:  the  fquare  bafe  g  N,is  to  the  fquare  bafe 
E  r,  as  g  h  is  to  c  d,  by  the  z.  corollary  of  the  zo.  of  the  fixth:  But  as  g  h  is  to  c  d,  fo  is  e  f  to  a  b,  by 
alternate  proportion :  to  the  Cubik  roote  e  f,  is  r  m  (the  heith  of  the  fame  Cube  e  m)  equall.  And  to 
a  B,is  the  heith  n  o  equall, by  conftrudion-.wherforeas  g  n  is  to  e  R,foisR  m  to  n  o.  Therfore  by  the 
fecond  part  of  this  3  4.  propofition,  g  ois  equall  to  e  m  .  If  fowre  right  lines  (therefore)  be  in  continu¬ 
all  proportion  &  c.  as  in  the  propofition:  which  was  required  to  be  demonftrated. 

A  Corollary  logifticall. 

Of my  former  T  heoremc  it  follow  eth :  e// ny  two  numbers  being geuen,  betWene  Which  two  We 
Would  haue  tWo  other  numbers,  middle ,  in  continuall  proportion  :  T  hat  if  We  multiply  the fquare  of 
the firfi  number geuen,  by  the  other geuen  number  (as  if  it  Were  the  fourth):  the  roote  Cubik, f  of  that 
of  come  or  product,  fall  be  the  fecond  number  fought .  ^And farther,  if  We  multiply  the  fquare  of  the 
other  number  geuen,  by  the  fir  ft  geuen  number ,  the  rooteCubike  of  that  of  come Jhall  be  the  thirde 
number  fought. 

For(  by  my  Theoreme)  thofereftangleparallelipipedos  made  ofthefquares  of  the  firfi  &  fourth, 
multiplied  by  the  fourth  &  the  fir st, accordingly,  are  equall  to  the  Cubes  made  of  the  fecond  &  third 
numbers:  Which  We  make  our  two  middle  proportionals .  Wherefore  ofthofe  garallelipipedons  (as 
Cubes  )  the  Cubikrootes,  by  good  and  vfitall  arte  fought  and  found,  gene  the  very  two  middle  num¬ 
bers  defired.  And  Where  thofe  number s ,  are  not  by  logifticall  confideration  accounted  Cubik,  num¬ 
bers, ye  may  vfe  the  logiflical fecret  of approching  nere  to  theprecife  verytyefo  that  therof most  eafily 
you  J hall  perceaue,thatyourfayle  is  of  the  fence  neuer  to  beperceaued:  it  is  to  Wete,  as  in  a  lyne  of  an 
inch  long,  not  to  Want  or  exceede  the  thoufandthoufand  part:  orfartheryou  may  ( infinitely  approche 
at  pleafure,.  O  Mechanical! frendy  be  of  good  comfort  ,put  to  thy  hand:  Labor  improbus,  om¬ 
nia  vincit. 

A  Problemc. 


DemnfiratiS 
of  the  firfi 
part. 

Vemouflratio 
of  the  Jecond 
part* 


To  fin de  two 
middle  proper 
ticnals  be- 
t  we  tie  two 
numbers  geue. 


Note  the  pr<se 
tife  of  app  et¬ 
ching  to  pre¬ 
cis  ties  in  Cu- 
bil^mtes. 


rm 


I. 


Fppori  a,  right  lined  play  nefuperficies geuen, to  apply  4  reft  angle  parallelipipedon  geuen. 


:  01: 


y 


Or  we  may  thus  exprefte  the  lame  thing. 

Vppon  a  right  lined  playne f up  erficies geuen,  to  ereft  a  rectangle  parallelipipedon,  equall  to  a  rec¬ 
tangle  parallelipipedon  geuen. 

5rr-- -  'j  ••  •  >■')<•>.  ■■  ri;:i  ,  -  - : -f-  :/• 

Suppofe  the  right  lined  playne  fuperficies  geuen  to  be  b  :  and  the  reflangle  parallelipipedon  ge¬ 
uen  to  be  a  m  .  Vppon  b  ,  as  a  bafe  mult  a  m  be  applyed :  that  is,  a  redangle  parellipipedon  mull  be  ere- 
ded  vppon  b  , 
as  a  bafe,whi- 
che  fhall  be  e- 
quall  to  am. 

By  the  lafte  of 
the  fecond,  to 
the  right  ly- 
ned  figure  b  , 
let  an  equall 
fquare  be 
made  :  which 
fuppofe  to  be 
FRx.*produce 
one fide  of  the 
bale  of  the  pa 


AAa.iiij, 


rallelipipedon 


*  This  is  the 
way  to  apply 
any  fquare 
geuen,  to  a 
linealfo  geue * 
fujficienty  tx- 
tended. 


i 


A  problems  5» 
worth  the  „ 
featch'mg  ,, 
for. 


rf 


5W  eleuenth  'Boole 

A 


i 


falleliptped© 
am,  which 
let  be  a  c , 
extended  to 
the  point  p. 
let  the  o- 
ther  fide  of 
the  fayde 
bafe  ,  con  - 

curringwith  ■&  /T\ 

a  c ,  be  c  e.  ^  '*■' 

As  c  g  is  to 
f  r  ( the  fide 
©jrthefquare 
b  r  x  )  fo  let  * 

the  fame  f  JT 

•s  be  to  a  line 
cut  of  from 

c  p  fufficiently  extended :  by  the  ri.of  the  fixth  :  and  let  that  third  proportionallline  be  c  p.  Let  the 
rectangle  parallelogramme  be  made  perfe£t,as  c  D  .It  is  euident ,  that  c  d,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  f  r  x 
by  the  i7.of  the  fixth  rand  by  conftru&ion  f  r  x,is  equall  to  b.  Wherfore  c  d, is  equall  to  b. By  the  iz. 
of  the  fixth,as  c  p,is  to  a  c,fo  let  a  n  (the  heith  of  a  m  jbe  to  the  right  line  o.I  fay  that  a  folide  perpen¬ 
dicularly  eroded  vppon  the  bafe  b  ,  haninge  the  heith  of  the  line  o  ,  is  equall  to  the  parallefipipedon  a 
M.For.c  d  is  to  a  G,as  c  p  is  to  a  c  by  the  firfte  of  the  fixth ,  and  b  is  proued  equall  toco  :  Wherfore 
by  the/,  of  the  fifth ,  b  is  to  a  g  as  c  p  is  to  a  c  :  But  as  c  p  is  to  a  c  ,ib  is  a  n  to  o ,  by  confttudion : 
Wherefore  b  is  to  a  g  as  a  n  is  to  o  .  So  than  the  bafes  b  and  a  g  are  reciprocally  in  proportion  with 
the  heithes  a  n  and  o  .By  this  34  therefore,  a  folide  ereded  perpendicularly  vppon  b  as  a  bafe ,  hatting 
the  height  o,is  equall  to  a  m  .  W herefore  vppon  a  right  lyned  playn  fuperficiesgeuen ,  we  haue  applied 
a  redangle  parallelipipedon  geuen :  Which  was  requifite  to  be  donne. 


A  Probleme  2 . 


rectangle  parallelipipedon  being  geuen  t»  make  an  other  equall  to  it  of  any  heith  afigned . 

Suppofe  the  redangle  parallelipipedon  geuen  to  be  a,  and  the  heith  afsigned  to  be  the  right  line 
3  tNowmuftwemakea  redangle  parallelipipedon,equal  to  a:  Whofe heith  mull  be  equall  to  b.  Ac¬ 
cording  to  the  manner  before  vfed,we  miifi  frame  our  coftrudion  to  a  reciprokall  proportio  betwene 
the  bafes  and  heithes. Which  will  be  done  if,as  the  heith  afsigned  beareth  itfelfe  in  proportion  to  the 
heith  of  the  parallelipipedon  giuen  :fo,one  of  the  fides  of  the  bafe  of  the  parallelipipedon  giuen,  be  to 
a  fourth  line, by  the  n.of  the  fixth  found. 'For  that  line  founde,and  the  other  fide  ot  the  bafe  of  thege- 
uen  parallelipipedon,  con  tayne  a  parallelogramme ,  which  doth  feruefor  the  bafe  ,  (which  onely  ,  we 
■wan  ted) to  vfe  with  our  giuen  heith : and  fo  is  the  Probleme  to  be  executed* 


Notes. 

JEuclide  in  the  27-ofthis  eleuenth  hath  taught,  how,ofa  right  line  gcue, to  defcribe  a 
paraliepipedoj  like,  &  likewife  fituated,  to  a  parailelipipedo  geue :  I  haue  alfo  added, 
Howito  a  parallepipedon  geuen,an  other  may  be  made  equall ,  vppon  any  right  lined 
bafe  geuen,or  of  any  heith  afsigned ;  But  if  either  Euclide,or  any  other  before  our  time 
(anfwerably  to  the  2  5  .of  the  fixth, inplayns  jhad  among  folids  inuented  this  proposi¬ 
tion' Tnw  vnequall  and  vnli\eparallelipipedons  being  geuen ,  to  defcribe  a  parallelipipedon  equall  to 
the  one^and  like  to  the  other  ,we  would  haue  geuen  them  their  deferued  praile:andl  would 
alfo  haue  ben  right  glad  to  haue  ben  cafed  of  my  great  trauayles  and  difcourfes  about 
the  inuenting  thereof. 

Here  ends  l- Dee  his  additions  vppon  this 

34. Propofition ,  \ 


Theso.T  heoreme.  T  be ,?  sJPropoJition, 


of Suclides  Elementes.  350, 

glesbe  deflated  on  high  right  lines ,  comprehending  together  loith  thofe 
right  lines  H vhich  containe  the fuperficiall  angles  squall  angles }eche  to  his 
corefyodent  angle  }and  if  in  eche  of the  eleuated  lines  he  take  a  point  at  all 
anentures  y  and  from  thofe  pointes  be  dr awen  perpendicular  lines  to  the 
ground  playne  fuperfcieces  inlohkh  are  the  angles  geuen  at  the  begin* 
fling y  and  from  the pointes  ‘Uvhich  are  by  thofe perpendicular  lines  made  in 
the  two playne  fuperfcieces  he  ioyned  to  thofe  angles  lohich  "Mere  put  at 
the  beginning  right  lines :  thofe  right  lines  together  K>ith  the  lines  eleua * 
ted  on  high Jhall  contayne  e quail  angles # 


Vppofe that thefe two recliline fuperficiall angles B  AC ,  and  ED  F be equall 
the  one  to  the  other:  and  from  the  pointes  A  and  D  let  there  be  eleuated  vpward 
thefe  right  lines  A  G  and  D  M,  comprehendinge  together  with  the  lines  put  at 
the  bcginninge  equall  angles,  ech  to  his  correfondent  angle,  that  is,  the  angle  M 
D  E  to  the  angle  GAB,  and  the  angle  MD  F  to  the  angle  G  AC,  and  take  in  the  lines  A  G 
and  D  M  pointes  at  all  auetures  and  let  the fame  be  G  and  M.And  (by  the  u.  of the  eleueth ) 
from  the  pointes  G  and  M  draw  vnto  the  ground playne fuperfcieces  wherein  are  the  an¬ 
gles  BAG  and  E 

D  F  perpendicular  .4 

lines  G  L  and  CM 
N  and  let  them  fall 
in  the  fayd  playne 
fuperfcieces  in  the 
pointes  N  and  L, 
and  dr  awe  a  rirbt 

c* 

line  from  the  point 
L  to  the  point  cxf 
and  an  other  fom 
thepointe  Njo  the 

pointe  D .  T  hen  I fay  that  the  angle  G  A  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  MD  N.  Fro  the  greater  of 
the  two  lines  A  G  and  D  CM ,  (  which  let  be  AG  )  cut  of  by  the  3 .  of  the  fir B  the  line  A  B 
equall  vnto  the  line  D  M.And  (by  the  31.  of thefrsi)bj  the  point  H, dr awe  vnto  the  line  G 
L  a  parallel  line, and  let  the fame  be  H  K.  Now  the  line  G  Lis  erected perpendicularly  to  the 
grounde  playne fuperfies  BAL:  Wherforealfo(  by  the  8.  of  the  eleuenth  )  the  line  H  K  is 
creeled perpedicularly  to  the fame  grounde  plaine fuperficies  B  A  C.Drawe  ( by  the  12.  of the 
frfi)  fro  the  pointes  K  and  N  vnto  the  right  lines  A  B,  A  C,D  F,&  D  E  perpedicular  right 
lines, and  let  the  fame  be  I<  C,  N  F,  K  B,  N  E.  And  dr  awe  thefe  right  lines  H  C,C  B,  M  F, 
F  E.Now forafmuch  as  (by  the  47.  of  the frfi  )  the fquare  of the  line  U  A  is  equall  to  the 
fquares  of the  lines  H  K  and  K  A, but  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  K  A  are  equall  the fquares 
of the  lines  K  C  and  C  A  .-Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  'H  A  ’is  equall  to  the  fquares  of 
the  lines  H  K  ,I<C  and  C  A .  But  by  the  fame  vnto  the  fquares  of  thelinesHK  and 
K  C  is  equall  the  fquare  of  the  lineHC  :Wheref ore  the  fquare  of  the  line  H  A  is  equall 
to  the fquares  of  the  lines  H  C  and  C  A  ;wherforethe  angle  HC  A  is  (by  the  48.  of thefrf)a 
right  angle .  d_And  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  angle  MFD  is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore 
the  angle  HC  A  is  equall  to  the  angle  CM  F  D  But  the  angle  H  AC  is  (by ftppoftio)  equal 
to  the  angle  c JM  D  F.Wherfore  there  are  two  triangles  CM  D  F  and  H  AC  hauing  two  an¬ 
gles  of  the  one  equall  to  twoo  angles  of the  other ,  eche  to  his  correfpondent  angle, and  one fide 
of  the  one  equall  to  one fide  of  the  other, namely,  that fide  which fubtendeth  one  of the  equall 

angles, 


Conflruftm. 


VemonHrs* 
tion . 


7 he  eleiienth  Tioolyt 

angles, that  is, the  fide  H  A  is  squall  tv  the fde  D  \M  by  confiruHion .  Wherefore  the fdes 
remayning  are  (by  the  26.  of the first)  e quail  to  the  fides  remayning  •  Wherefore  the fide  A  C 
is  equall  to  the  fide  D  F.Jn  like fori  may  weproue  that  the fide  A  B  is  equall  to  the fide  D  E, 
if ye  dr  awe  a  right  line  from  the  point  H  to  the  point  B,and  an  other  from  the  point  M  to  the 
point  E  ,F  or  forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  H  is  (  by  the  47.  ofthefirfie)equalltothe 
fquares  of  the  lines  ^AIC  and  K  H,  and  ( by  the fame  )  vnto  thefquare  of  the  line  A  I<  are 
equall  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  andB  K.  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B,B  K , 
■and  K  H  arc- equall  to  thefquare  of  the  line  A  H .  But  vnto  the  fquares  of the  lines  B  K  and 
Kfl  is  equall  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  H  (by  the  47.  of  the  fir fi  )  for  the  angle  ti  KB  is 
a  rig ht  angle  for  that  the  line  H  K  is  erected perpedicularly  to  the  ground play  ne  fuperficies: 
Wherefore  the',  fquare  of  the  line  A  H  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  Band  BH. 
Wherefore  (by  the  42  .of the  firfi)  the  angle  AB  His  aright  angle.  And  by  the  fame  rea- 
fon  the  angle  DEM  is  a  right  angle.  Now  the  angle  B  AH  is  equall  to  the  angle  EDM, 
for  it  is fo fuppofed,  and  the  line  AN  is  equall  to  the  line  DM.  Wherefore  (by  the  26.  of 
the  firfie)  the  line  A  Bis  equall  to  the  line  D  E.  Now forafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  is  equall 
to  the  line  D  F ,  and  the  line  AB  to  the  line  D  E ,  therefore  thefe  two  lines  A  C  and 
A  Bare  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  F  D  and  D  E .  But  the  angle  alfo  C  A  B  is  by  fuppofiti - 
on  equall  to  the  angle  F  D  E. Wherefore  (by  the  4.of the  firfie  )  the  bafie  BC  is  equall  to  the 
bafie  E  F,and  the  triangle  to  the  triangle, and  the  reFl  of  the  angles  to  the  resie  of  the  angles. 
Wherefore  the  angle  AC  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  D  F  E.  And  the  right  angle  AC  K  is  equal 
to  the  right  angle  D  F  N.Wherfore  the  angle  remayning ,  namely, B  C  K,is  equall  to  the  an. 
gle  remayning,  namely,  to  E  F  N.And  by  the fame  reafo  alfo  the  angle  C.B  K  is  equal  to  the 
angle  F  E  N.Wher 

fore  there  are  two  4 

triangles  B  C  K,& 

E  F  Nfauing  two 
angles  of  the  one 
equal  to  two  angles 
of  the  other,  eche  to 
his  correfpondent 
angle,  and  one  fide 
of the  one  equall  to 
one  fide  of  the  0- 
ther,  namely ,  that 

fide  that  Beth  betwene  the  equall  angles ,  that  is  the fide  B  C  is  equall  to  the  fide  E  F  .-Where¬ 
fore  (by  the  26.  of  the firtt)the fides  remaininge  are  equallto  the  fides  remayningWherf ore 
the fide  C  K  is  equall  to  the fide  F  N:  but  the  fide  AC  is  equall  to  the fide  D  F .  Wherefore 
thefe  two  fides  A  C  and  C  K  are  equall  to  thefe  two fides  D  F  and  F  N ,  and  they  contayne 
equall  angles  .Wherefore  (by  the  4.0ft  he  fir  FI )  the  bafie  A  K  is  equall  to  the  bafie  D  N^,  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  A  His  equallto  the  line  D  M ,  therefore  thefquare  of  the  line  AH  is 
equall  to  thefquare  of the  line  D  M.  But  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  AH  are  equall  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  A IC  and  K  H(by  the  47. of the firfi) for  the  angle  A  I<  His  a  right  angle . 
And  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  M  are  equall  the  fquares  of  the  lines  D  Njind  N  M, for  the 
angle  D  N  Mis  a  right  angle  Wherefore  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  K  and  K  H  are  equall  tv 
the  fquares  of the  lines  D  N  and  N(M:of which  two, the fquare  of  the  line  A  K  is  equall  tv 
the fquare  of  the  line  D  N  (for  the  line  A  K  isproued  equall  to  the  line  A  N)  .Wherefore  the 
refidue, namely, the  fquare  of the  line  K  His  equal  to  the  refidue,namely,to  thefquare  of  the. 
line  NM .  Wherefore  the  line  HK  is  equall  to  the  line  M  N .  <^And  forafmuch  as  thefe  two 
lines  H  A  and  A  K  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  CMDandD  N,the  one  to  the  other, and  the 


baje  BK  is  eqmllto  the  bafe  M  N :  iherfore  ( by  the  8. of  the frjl)  the  angle  HAKis  equall 
to  the  angle  M  D  N .  If  therefore  therehe  two fuperfciall  angles  'equall,  and fro  the  pointes 
of  thofe  angles  be  eleuated  on  high  right  lines, comprehending  together  with  thofe  right  lines 
which  were  put  at  the  beginning,equall  angles, ech  to  his  corejpondent  angle,  and  if  in  ech  of 
the  erected  lines  be  taken  a  point  at  all  aduentures  ,and from  thofe pointes  be  drawenperpen- 
dicular  lines  to  the  plaine  fuperficieces  in  which  are  the  angles  geuen  at  the  beginning,  and 
from  the  pointes  which  are  by  the  perpendicular  lines  made  in  the  two  plaine fuperficieces  be 
ioyned  right  lines  to  thofe  angles  which  Were  put  at  the  beginning,  thofe  right  lines fall  to¬ 
gether  with  the  lines  eleuated  on  high  make  e  quail  angles ;  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


Becaufe  the  figures  of  the  former  demonfcration  are  fomewhat  hard  to  cdnceaue  as  they  are  there' 
drawen  in  a  plaine,by  reafon  of  the  lines  that  are  imagined  to  be  eleuated  on  high,  I  haue  here  fet  o- 
ther  figures,  wherein  you  mull  e- 
redte  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 
fuperficieces  the  two  triangles 
BHK,  and  EM  N  ,  and  then  eld  - 
uate  the  triangles  D  F  M,&A  C  H, 
in  fuch  fort  that  the  angles  M  and 
H  of  thefe  triangles,  may  concurre 
with  the  angles  M  and  H  of  the  o- 
ther  erected  triangles  .  And  then 
imagining  only  a  line  to  be  drawen 
from  the  point  G  of  the  line  A  G  to 
the  point  L  in  the  ground  fuperfi- 
cies,  compare  “ft  with' the  former 
conftru&ion  &  demonftration,  and 
it  will  make  it  very  eafye  to  con- 
ceaue. 


f  Corollary.  ■  . . 

/  -  this  it  is  manifefi,  that  if  there  be  two  re  chiline  fuperfciall  angles  & 
quail,  and  Vpon  thofe  angles  be  eleuated  on  high  equal!  right  lines  contay* 
ntng  together  *Veith  the  right  lines  put  at  the  beginning  equall  angles: per* 
pmdmlar  lines  drawen  from  thofe  eleuated  lines  to  the  ground plaine fu« 
perfcieces  therein  are  the  angles  put  at  the  beginning,  are  equall  the  one 
tO  tlk  Other.  For  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  perpendicular  lines  H  K,  &M  N,  which  ate  dra- 
i^en  from  the.eades  of  the  eqpallfle^ted  lines  A  H,  and  DM,  to  the  ground  fuperficieces,  are 


i  *  ■  -  v  *  (  >. 

f  The  3i.  Theoreme,  The  3d.  Tropofition . 

ff  there  he  three  right  lines  proportional l:  a  farallelipipedon  defcrihed  of 
thofe  three  right  lines  fts  equall  to  the  fPar.allelipipedon  defcr  'tbed  of  the 
middle  line  Jo  that  it  confifte  of  equall fides  ,  andalfo  he  equiamle  to  the 
forefay  d  T  arallelipipe  don.  °  . 


Vppofethat  thefe  three  lines  A, B,C,  be  proportiomll,  as  A  is  to  Bfo  let  B  be  to  C 
T hen  I fay,  that  the  Par  allelipipedon  made  of  the  lines  A,B,C,  is  equall  to  the  Pa - 
r allelipipedon  made  of the  line  B,fo  that  the folide  made  of  the  line  B  con  fill  ofe- 


bafe  HK  is  equallto  the  bafe  M  N therfore  ( by  the  8. of the  fir B)  the  angle  HAKis  equall 
to  the  angle  M  D  N .  If  therefore  there  be  two fuperf ciall angles  )equall,  and  fro  the  pointes 
of  thofe  angles  be  eleuated  on  high  right  lines, comprehending  together  with  thofe  right  lines 
which  were  put  at  the  begirming,equall  angles,  ech  to  his  corejpondent  angle,  and  if  in  ech  of 
the  erected  lines  be  taken  a  point  at  all  aduentures,and from  thofe pointes  be  drawen perpen¬ 
dicular  lines  to  the  plaine  fuperfcieces  in  which  are  the  angles  geuen  at  the  beginning,  and 
from  the  pointes  which  are  by  the  perpendicular  lines  made  in  the  two  plaine fuperfcieces  be 
ioyned  right  lines  to  thofe  angles  which  Were  put  at  the  beginning,  thofe  right  lines fiall  to¬ 
gether  with  the  lines  eleuated  on  high  make  equall angles :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 


\Vv.~  "  '  Vt 


.  .  .  ...  .  ...  V 

Becaufe  the  figures  of  the  former  demo  nitration  are  fomewhat  hard  to  cOnceaue  as  they  are  there' 
draweft  in  a  plaine, by  reafon  of  the  lines  that  are  imagined  to  be  eleuated  on  high,  I  haue  here  fet  ei¬ 
ther  figures,  wherein  you  mull  e- 
rede  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 
fuperficieces  the  two  triangles 

BHK,  and  EM  N ,  and  then  ele-  p  _  .A 

uate  the  triangles  D  F  M,&A  C  H, 
in  fuch  fort  that  the  angle'  M 
H  of  thefe  triangles,., 
with  the  angles  M  and  R 
ther  eroded  triangles  .  And  tu. 
imagining  only  a  line  to  be  drawen 
from  the  point  G  of  the  line  A  G  to 
the  point  L  in  the  ground  fuperfi- 
cies,  compare  IT  with  the  former 
conftrudion  &  demonftration,  and 
it  will  make  it  very  ealye  to  con- 


ceaue. 


f  Corollary* 

-v  .  ;  v  -  ’ U  —  *,  v 

^  _  -  -Mg  : .  A.  a,  ,  .  . 

-  <By  this  it  is  manfefly  that  if  there  he  two  retfiline  fuperficidl  angles  e* 
quail }  and  Vpon  thofe  angles  be  eleuated  on  high  equall  right  lines  contay* 
ning  together  loith  the  right  lines  put  at  the  beginning  equall  angles:  per* 
pmdmlar  lines  drawen  from  thofe  eleuated  lines  to  the  ground plaine fa 
perfimees  therein  are  the  angles  put  at  the  hegmningy  are  equall  the  one 
to  the  Other.  For  it  is  manifeit,  .that  the  perpendicular  lines  H  K,  &M  N,  which  are  dra- 
wenfrom  theendes  ofthcecjuallelepated lines  A  H?  andD  M,  to  the  ground  fuperficieces,  are 


f  The  3 1.  Theorem.  The  36.  (Propofitm> 

If  there  he  three  right  lines  proportional!:  a  Tarallelipipedon  defer ibed  of 
thofe  three  right  lines y  is  equall  to  the  farallelifipedon  deferibed  of  the 
middle  lineyfo  that  it  confifie  of equall ftdes3  andalfo  be  equiangle  to  the 
forejayd  Tarallelipipedon,  •  . 


53  Vppofethat  thefe  three  lines  A,B,C,  be proportionall,  as  A  is  to  B,fo  let  B  be  to  C. 
ff^fbenlfay,  that  the  Par allelipipedon  made  of  the  lines  A, B,C,  is  equall  tothe  Pa* 
"~r allelipipedon  made  of  the  line  B,fo  that  thefolide  made  of  the  line  B  confiB  ofe 


0. 


oi*i  si. 

bafe  HK  is  eqmllto  the  bafeM  N :  therfore  ( by  the  S.of the  first)  the  angle  HA  K  is  equall 
to  the  angle  MBN .  If  therefore  there  he  two fuperfcidlmgks  "equally  and  fro  the  pointed 
of  thofe  angles  be  eleuated  on  high  right  lines, comprehending  together  with  thofe  right  line  's 
which  were  put  at  the  beginning,  e  quail  angles,  ech  to  hiscorejpondent  angle,  and  if  in  ech  of 
the  erecled  lines  be  taken  a  point  at  all  aduentures,and from  thofe pointes  be  drawen  perpen- 
dicular  lines  to  the  plainefuperfcieces  in  which  are  the  angles  geuen  at  the  beginning,  and 
from  the  pointes  which  are  by  the  perpendicular  lines  made  in  the  two  plainefuperfcieces  be 
ioyned  right  lines  to  thofe  angles  which  Were  put  at  the  beginning,  thofe  right  lines  fall  to¬ 
gether  with  the  lines  eleuated  on  high  make  e quail  angles which  was  required  to  beproued. 

..  ».  - -  lf  :  «*.  -  tfcVyfc*  1 1 '  -A 

.  *  .  _  ......  '*  -I*  t.'  '  '■  '  • 

Becaufe  the  figures  of  the  former  demo  nitration  are  fomewhat  hard  to  cbnceaue  as  they  are  there' 
drawefi  in  a  plaine,by  reafon  of  the  lines  that  are  imagined  to  be  eleuated  on  high,  I  haue  here  fet  ©» 
ther  figures,  wherein  you  mull  e- 
rede  perpendicularly  to  the  ground 
fuperficieces  the  two  triangles 

BHK,  and  E  MN  ,  and  then  ele-  p  .  M  ^ 

uate  the  triangles  D  F  M,& A  C  H, 
in  fuch  fort  that  the  angle'  M 
H  of  thefe  triangles,., 
with  the  angles  M  and  H  <-. 
ther  ereded  triangles  .  And  tu. 
imagining  only  a  line  to  be  drawen 
from  the  point  G  of  the  line  A  G  to 
the  point  L  in  the  ground  fuperfi- 
cies,  compare  'it' with  the  former 
conftrudxon  &  demonftration,  and 
it  will  make  it  very  eafye  to  con- 
ceaue. 


\ 


r,  lx 


f  Corollary, 

**  •*«,  ■  _  !  '■  a.  x  4 ,  r.  .x  v  ■  *  r\  «  v  „  . 

<By  this  it  is  manfeft,  that  if  there  be  two  reef  dine  fuperficiall  angles  e* 
quail j  and  Vpon  thofe  angles  be  eleuated  on  high  equall  right  lines  contay* 
ning  together  Tvitb  the  right  lines  put  at  the  beginning  equall  angles: per* 
pmdkular  lines  drawen  from  thofe  eleuated  lines  to  the  ground plaine fu* 
ferfickces  therein  arephe  angles put  at the  beginning ,  are  equall  the  one 

tO  the  Other .  For  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  perpendicular  lines  H  K,  &M  N,  which  are  dra- 

'Wenfromche  endes  of  the  equall  pleuated  lines  A  H,  and  DM,  to  the  ground  fuperficieces,  are 
equall- 

-  *  •  V.\  -  ..  •_  J  ... 

ffThe  31-  Theoreme,  The  sti.Tropofitkn. 


here  he  three  right  lines proportionqU:  a  Tarallelipipedon  deferibed  of 
thofe  three  right  lines fis  equall  to  the  Tar.allelipipedon  deferibed  of  the 
middle  line,  jo  that  it  confifte  of  equall Jides,  and  alfo  he  equiangle  to  the 
forefqyd  Tar  allelipipedon. 


Fppofe  that  thefe  three  lines  A,  B,C,  be  proportiondl,  as  A  is  to  B,  fo  let  B  be  to  C. 
Then  I  fay,  that  the  Par allelipipedon  made  of  the  lines  A,B,C,  is  equall  to  the  Pa* 
r allelipipedon  made  of the  line  B,fo  that  the folide  made  of  the  line  B  con  fill  ofe - 


Cmjlmffkn* 


Vemonftra- 

sion* 


qualifies,  and  be  alfo  equiangleto  the f olidemade  of  the  lines  A,B,C .  Defcribe  ( by  the  2  3 , 
tf  the  eleuenth)  a  folide  angle  E  contained  vnder  three  fuperficiall  angles,  that  is,  D  E  G, 
GEF,  and  FED:  and  ( by  the  3  .of  the  firf)  put  vnto  the  line  B  euery  one  of  thefe  lines 


D  E,G  E,<&  E  F,  equall: 
and  make  perfeffe  the  fo¬ 
lide  E  K  .  And  vnto  the 
line  A  let  the  line  L  M  be 
equall.  And  (by  the  26. of 
the  eleueth )  vnto  the  right 
line  L  M,  and  at  the  point 
in  it  L,  deferibe  vnto  the 
folide  angle  E  an  equall  fo¬ 
lide  angle,  cot  diked  vnder 
thefe plaine ftperfciall  an¬ 
gles  2 XJL  X,  XL  M,  and 
N  LM,  and  vnto  the  line 
B  put  the  line  L  X  equall , 
&  the  line  L  2Cjo  the  line 
C.Now  for  that  as  the  line 
A  is  to  the  line  B,fo  is  the 
line  B  to  the  line  C:but  the 
line  A  is  equall  to  the  line 
L  M,and  the  line  B  to  eue¬ 
ry  one  of  thefe  lines  LX, 
EF ,EG,  and  E D,  and 
the  line  C  to  the  line  LN. 
Wherefore  as  L  CM  is  to 
E  F,fo  is  D  E  to  L  So 

then  thefides  about  the  e- 
qual  angles  D- 

E  Eyre  Keciprokall:  Wher- 
;  m  ofdefixt) 


3 


JL 


K 


~~  ~  ^ 

. 

X 

aralMofframe  CMN 


>34  &V-  \  1 


*  Itiseuidet 
that  thofe  per¬ 
pendiculars 
are  all  one 
with  the  ft  ad¬ 
ding  lines  of 
the  /oiidesjf 
their  folide  an 
gf.es  be  made 
of  fuperfi- 
ciall  right  an¬ 
gles  onely. 


is  equall  to  theparallelogramme  D  F.  Andforafmtich  as  two  plaine ftperfciall  angles, name¬ 
ly,  D  E  F  and  N  LM  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  and  vpon  them  are  erected  vpward  e- 
qna.ll  right  lines,  L  X  and  E  G,  comprehending  with  the  right  lines  put  at  the  beginning  e- 
quallangles  the  one  to  the  other  .  Wherefore  *  perpendicular  lines  drawen from  thepointes 
X  and  G  to  the  plaine fuperfcieces  wherin  are  the  angles  IX  LM,  and  D  EF,  are  (by  the  Co¬ 
rollary  of the former  Proportion)  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  and  thofe  perpendiculars  are 
the  altitudes  of  the  Parallelipipedons  L  H  and  E  1C,  by  the  ^definition  of thefxt.  Wher  fore 
thefolid.es  L.H  an,d  E  K,  are  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude .  But  Parallelipipedons 
conffthg  vpon  equall  bafesyhd  being  Vnder  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude, are  (by  the  3  r. 
of the  eleuenth)  equdll  the  one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  the  folide  LH  is  equall  to  the  folide 
E  K .  But.  the  folide  L  H  is  defenbed  oft  he  lines  A, B,C,  and  the  folide  EK  is  deferibed  of 
the  line  B  .  Wherefore  the  P  arallelipipedon  deferibed  of  the  lines  A,B,C,  is  equallto  the  Pa - 
rallelipipedon  made  of  the  line  B,  which  confiHeth  of  equall fdes,and  is  alfo  equiangte  to  the 
forefaid  P  arallelipipedon.  lftherfore  there  be  three  right  lines  proportionally  P  arallelipipe- 
do  deferibed  of  thofe  three  right  lines  is  equall  to  the  Parallelipipedo  deferibed  of the  middle 
line,  fo  that  it  confist  of  equall fides,  and  alfo  be  equiangle  to  the forefaid  P  arallelipipedon; 
which  was  required  to  be proued. 


The 


ofSuclides  Elementes .  FoLpz, 

The  conllrudion  and  demonllration  of  this  Propolition,  and  of  the  next  Proportion  followings 
may  ealily  be  conceaued  and  vnderllanded  by  the  figures  defcribed  in  the  plaine  belonging  to  them. 
But  ye  may  for  the  more  full  fight  of  them  ,delcribe  fuch  bodies  of  palled  paper,hauing  their  fides  pro¬ 
portional^  as  is  required  in  the  Propolitions. 

f  New  inventions^  coincident )  added  by  MaHer  John  (Dee. 

#  Lx/  Corollary,  i . 

Hereby  it  is  euident,  that  if  three  right  lines  be  proportionall.-the  Cube  produced  of  the  middle 
line ,  is  e quail  to  the  rectangle  Tarallelipipedon  made  ofthofe  three  lines. 

For  a  Cube  is  a  Parallelipipedon  of  equall  fides  :  and  alfo  redangled  :  as  we  fuppofe  the  Parallelipi¬ 
pedon,  made  of  the  three  lines  to  be  likewife  redangled  . 

Lx/  Problems,  x . 

Cube  being geuen,  to  finde  three  right  lines  proportionally  in  any  proportion  geuen  betwene 
two  right  lines :  of  which  three  lines ,  the  rcttangle  Parallelipipedon  produced,  [hall  be  equall  to  the 
Cubegeuen. 


H 


Suppofe  AC  to  be  the 
C'ube  geuen  :  whofe  roote, 
fuppofe  to  be  A  B  .  Let  the 
proportion  geuen ,  be  that 

which  is  betwene  the  two  ^  / 

right  lines  D  and  E  .  I  fay 
now,  three  right  lines  are 
to  be  found,proportionall, 
in  the  proportion  of  D  to  E, 
of  which,  the  redangle  Pa- 
xallelipipedon  produced, 
lhallbe  equall. to  AC  .  By 
the  12  .Of  the  fixt  let  a  line  be  rf  ^ 
found ,  Which  to  AB  haue  Jjt 
that  proportion  that  D  hath 
to  E.  Let  that  line  be  F:  and 
bythefame  iz.  ofthefixth, 
let  an  other  line  be  found, 
to  which,  A  B  ,  hath  that 
proportion  that  D  hath  to 
E  :  and  let  that  line  found 
be  H .  Let  a  redanglc  Paral- 
Jelipipedon  mathematically 
be  produced  of  the  three 
right  lines  F,AB,  andH, 
which  fuppofe  to  be  K :  I  lay 
no  w,  that  F,  A  B ,  and  H,are 
three  right  lines  found  pro- 
portionall  in  the  proporti¬ 
on  of  D  to  E,  of  which,  the 
rcdangle  Parallelipipedon 
X ,  produced ,  is  equall  to 
AC  the  Cubegeuen  .  Firll 
it  is  euident  that  F,  A  B,and  1  ■ 

H,  are  proportionall  in  the  proportion  ofD  to  E .  For,  by  conllrudion,  as  D  is  to  E,  fo  is  F  to  A  B :  and 
by  conllrudion  likewife,  as  D  is  to  E,  fo  is  A  B  to  H .  Wherefore  F  is  to  A  B,  and  A  B  is  to  H,  as  D  is 
to  E  .  So  then  it  is  manifclt,  F,  A  B,  and  H,  to  be  proportionall  in  the  proportion  of  D  to  E,and  A  B  to 
be  the  middle  line  .  By  my  former  Corollary, therefore,  the  redangle  parallelipipedon  made  of  F,  A  B, 
and  H,  is  equall  to  the  Cnbe  made  of  A  B  .  But  A  C,  is  (by  fuppofition)the  Cube  made  of  A  B  :  and  of 
the  three  lines  F,  A  B,  andH,  the  redangle  parallelipipedon  produced,  is  K,  by  conllrudion  :  Wher- 
fgrfij  K,  is  equall  to  A  C  :  A  Cube  being  geuen,  therefore,  three  right  lines  are  found,proportionall  ia 

BBb.j.  any 


Doubling -of  the 
Cube.&c. 

*  Demonfl rati¬ 
on  of poftbiUite 
in  the  Vroblerp . 


jin  other  argu¬ 
ment  to  comfort 
the fudious . 


"Demnflrdti- 
0*1  of  the  firft 
pan. 


The  eleuenth  2>  ooke 

any  proportion  gene  betwene  two  right  lines,of which  three  right  lines  the  re£angle  parallelipipedon 
produced, Is  equal  1  to  the  Cube  geuen  .  Which  ought  to  be  done. 

v  ■■.ij  .  '  * .  ' .T ,  U  a.  «  1  v:!  v;.~ 

*  ^  Probleme.  2, 


<iSf  reef-angle  Parallelipipedon  being  geuen,  tofinde  three  right  lines  proportionaii :  of  the  Vt>hicb; 
the  rectangle  Parallelipipedon  produced,  is  equall  to  the  reflangle  Parallelipipedon  geuen. 


Lillen  to  this  new  deuife,  you  couragious  Mathematidens  :  confider,  how  nere  this  crepeth  to 
the  famous  Probleme  of doubling  the  Cube .  What  hope  may  (in  maner)any  young  beginner  coceiue, 
by  one  'meanes  or  other,at  one  time  or  other,  to  execute  this  Probleme  ?  *  Seing  to  a  Cube  may  in¬ 
finitely  infinite  Parallelipipedon s  be  found  equall :  all  which  Parallelipipedons  fhall  be  produced  of 
three  right  lines  proportionaii,  by  the  former  Probleme  :  but  to  any  rectangle  Parallelipipedon  geuen, 
fome  one  Cube  is. equall  •  as  is  eafie  to  demonftrate  :  We  can  not  doubt,  but  ynto  our  redfangle  Paral¬ 
lelipipedon  geuen,  manyotherre&anglePafallelipipedons  are  alfo  equall,  hauing  their  three  lines  of 
produftion, proportionaii.  In  the  former  Probleme, infinitely  infinite  Parallelipipedons  may  be  found 
of  three  proportionaii  lines  produced,  equall  to  the  Cube  geuen  :  it  is  to  wete,  the.three  lines  to  be  of 
all  proportions,  that  a  man  can  deuife  betwene  two  right  lines :  and  here  any  one  will  ferue  :  where 
alfo  is  infinite  varietie  :  though  all  of  one  quantitie  :  as  before  in  the  Cube  .  I  leaue  as  now,  with  thy* 
markeherefet  vpto  fhooteat.  Hititwho  can. 


f  The  32.  Theoreme.  The  37 .  Tropvfition. 


If  there  be  foiver  right  lines  proportionaii:  the  Parallelipipedons  deferi* 
bed  of thofe  lines  feing  like  and  in  like  fort  deferibed }jh  all  be  proportion 
nail,  jdnd  if the  Parallelipipedons  deferibed  of them  fang  like  and  in  like 
fort  deferibed 3be  proportionaii:  thofe  right  lines  alfo fhall  be  proportionaii. 


Fppofe  that  thefe fewer  right  lines  AB,CD,  EF,  and  G  H,  be  proportionaii , 
as  A  B  is  toC D,fo let  E  F betoG H,  and vpon  the  lines  AB,C D,  EE,  and 
G  H,  defenbe  thefe  Parallelipipedons  K  A,LC,  M  E,  and  N  G,  being  like  and 
in  like  fort  deferibed  .Then  JJay ,  that  asthefolide  K  A  is  to  the folide  LC,fo 


is  the  folide  M  E  to  the  folide 
jV  G.  Forforafmuch  as  the  Pa¬ 
rallelipipedon  K  A  is  like  to  the 
Parallelipipedon  L  C:  therfore 
(by  the  33  .of  the  eleuenth  )  the 
folide  K  A  is  to  the  folide  L  C 
in  treble  proportion  of  that 
which  the  fide  A  Bis  to  the fide 
CD:  and  by  the  fame  reafion 
the  Parallelipipedon  ME  is  to 
the  P arrallelipipedon  T(G  in 
treble  proportion  of  that  which 
the  fide  E  F  is  to  the  fide  G  H. 
Wherfore(by  the  1 1. of  the fift ) 
as  the  Parallelipipedon  K  A  is 
to  the  Parallelipipedon  L  C,fo 
is  the  Parallelipipedon  ME  to 
the  Parallelipipedon  N  G. 

But  now  fuppofie ,  that  as 
the  Parallelipipedon  K  A  is  to 


K 


\J 

\ 

-  , 

\ 

ohs^ 

K 

\ 

\ 

3 


K 


F 


tht 


0 


the  Parallelipipedon  L  C,fo  is  the  Parallelipipedon  M  E  to  the  Parallelipipedon  T(G.  T hen 
1 fay,  that  as  the  right  line  A  Bis  to  the  right  line  CD,  fio  is  the  right  line  EE  to  the  right 
line  G  E .  F or  againe  forafmuch  as  the  folide  K  A  is  to  the  folide  L  C  in  treble  proportion  of 
that  which  the fide  A  is  is  to  the fide  CD,  and  the folide  OA  E.  alfo  is  to  the  folide  N  G  in 
treble  proportion  cfthat  which  the  line  E  F  is  to  the  line  G  H,  and  as  the folide  K  A  is  to  the 
folide  L  C,fio  is  the  folide  M  E  to  the  folide  N  G .  Wherefore  alfo  as  the  line  AB  is  to  the  line 
CD,  fo  is  the  line  E  F  to  the  line  G  H .  if  therefore  there  be fower  right  lines  proportionall : 
the  Parallelipipedons  defcribed  ofthofe  lines,  being  like  dr  in  like fort  defcribed,jhall  he  pro-* 
port  ion  all.  And  if  the  Parallelipipedons  defcribed  of  them, and  being  like  and  in  like  fort  de¬ 
fcribed,  be proportionall  :thofe  right  lines  alfo  jhall  be  proportionall.  which  was  required  to 
beproued. 

The  33-  Theorems.  The 38.  Tropofition. 

_  '  ‘  j’Vy.  ;  wV;  \  .  '  ,'\?Vv-.  ”,  ;  1  i'-'ws 

If  a  flame  fuperficies  be  ereSted  perpendicularly  to  a  plaine  fuperficies ^ 
and from  a  point  taken  in  one  of the  plaine fuperfcieces  be  drawen  to  the 
other  plaine fuperficies  ,a  perpendicular  line :  that  perpendicular  ImeJhaU 
fail  ypon  the  common feciion  ofthofe  plaine fuper ficteces. 

Vppofe  that  the  plaine fuperfcies  C  D  be  erecled pcrpedicularly  to  the  plaine fuperfi¬ 
cies  A  B,  and  let  their  common fetiion  be  the  line  D  A  -  and  in  the  fuperficies  CD 
take  a  point  at-  all  aduentures,.andlet  the fame  be  E .  Then  I fay,  that' a  perpendicu¬ 
lar  line  drawen  from  the  point  E  to  the 
plaine  fuperfcies  A  B,  jhall  fall  vp  on  the 
right  line  DA.  For  if  not, then  let  it  fall 

without  the  line  D  Ax,  as  the  line  EE  - 

*  ..  •) 

doth,  and  let  it  fall  vpon  the  plaine  fu¬ 
perfcies  A  B  in  the  point  F .  \_And  {by 
the  12.  of  the  firfi  )  from  the  point  F 
draw  vnto  the  line  D  A,  being  in  the 
fuperficies  0/  B  a  perpendicular  line  F-  33 
G,  which  line  alfo  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  CD:  by  the 
third dijf initio:  by  reafion  we  prefuppofe 
C  D  and  A  B  to  be  perpendicularly  erec¬ 
ted  ech  to  other.  Draw  a  right  line  from 
the  point  E  to  the  point  G  .  And  foraf¬ 
much  as  the  line  F  G  is  erecled  perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  C  D ,  and 

the  line  E  G  toucheth  it  being  in  the fuperficies  C  D.  Wherefore  the  angle  F  GEis  (by  the  2- 
definition  of  the  eleuenth )  a  right  angle.  But  the  line  E  F  is  alfo  erecled perpedicularly  to  the 
fuperficies  A  B  :  wherefore  the  angle  E  F  G  is  a  right  angle,  fiow  therefore  two  angles  of  the 
triangle  EF  G,  are  e  quail  to  two  right  angles :  which  (by  the  17.  of  the  firfi)  is  rmpofiible- 
Wherfore  a  perpendicular  line  drawen  fro  the  point  E  to  the fuperficies  A  Bfalleth  not  with¬ 
out  the  line  D  A.  Wherefore  itfdlleth  vpon  the  line  D  A :  which  was  required  to  be proued 1 

Vote.;. 

Cam  fane  maketh  this  as  a  Corollary, following  vpon  the  1 3 :  and  very  well,  with  fmall 
ayde  of  other  Propolitions,heproueth  it;whofedemonftratio  there,  Fluffas  hath  in  this 
place,  and  none  other:though  he  fayth  that  Campane  of fuch  a  Propofiti6,as  of  Eudtdesb 
maketh  no  mention . 

BBb.ij,  Xsa 


Bmcnftrfa 
turn  of  the 
fecond  part, 
which  is  the 
conuerje  of 
thefirjl  part. 


Demnftra- 
Sion  leading  to 
an  tmpo/itbt- 
title. 


The  eleuenth  TZooke 


In  thisfigure  yemaymorc  fully  fee  the  former  Proposi¬ 
tion  and  deffionilration  if  ye  eredte  perpendicularly  vnto 
the  ground  plaine  fuperficies  A  B  the  fuperficies  C  D,  and 
imagine  a  line  to  be  extended  from  the  point  E  to  thepoint 
dcde  whereof  ye  may  extend  if  ye  will  a  thred. 


D 

- 

C 

e 

G  A 

! 

C  A 

T-  . 

B 

f  The  34°  Theorems  The  39°  Tropofition . 


CanjhuUim, 


C,  .**>', 

Vemonftra- 
fian « 


£f  the  oppojite  Jides  of  a  T  arallelipipe-don  he  deuided- into  two  equall 
partes y  and,  by  their  common  feffiions  be  extended  plaine fuperfcieces:  the 
commp 'feffiion  of  thoje  plaine  fuperfcieces }  and  the  diameter  of the  Tar  ah 
leUpipedon  Jhalldemde  the  one  the  other  into  two  e  quail  partes . 

: 

Vppofe  that  A  F  be  a  Farnlklipipedon,  and  let  the  oppofite ftdes  thereof  C  F  and 
A  H  be  deuided  into  two  e quail  partes  in  thepointes  K,L,M,N,  and  hkewife  let 
theoppvfte Jides  A  D  and  G  F  be  deuided  into  two  equallpartes  in  the  pointer 
X,P  ,0,R,and  by  thofe fections  extend  thefe  two  plaine fuperfcieces  K  N  &XR, 
and  let  the  common  feciion  of thoje  plaine fuperfcieces  be  the  line  VS,  and  let  the  diagonal 
line  of  the folide  B  be  the  line 

I)  G.T  hen  I  fay, that  the  lines  V  S 
and  D  G  dodeuide  the  one  the  o- 
ther  into  two  e quail partes, that  is, 
that  the  line  VF  is  e quail  to  the 
line  F  S,  and  the  line  EF  to  the 
line  F  G .  Drawe  thefe  right  lines 
D  V,V  E,  B  S,  and  S  G.  Now  for- 
afnuch  as  the  line  DXis  a  parallel 
to  the  line  0  E,therfore(  by  the  29. 
of  the  fr si)  the  angles  E  XV  and 
VO  E  being  alternate  angles, are 
equall  the  one  to  the  other .  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  E  X  is  equall 
to  the  line  0  E,  and  the  line  XV  to 
the  line  V  O,  and  they  comprehend 
equall  angles :  Wherefore  the  bafe 
D  V  is  equall  to  the  bafe  VE  (  by 
the  4. of the frf )  •  and  the  triangle 
E  X  V  is  equall  to  the  triangle 
V  O  E  ,  and  the  ref  oftke  angles  to 
the  ref  of  the  angles .  Wherefore  the  angle  XVE  is  equall  to  the  angle  OVE .  Wherefore 
I)  V  E  is  one  right  line ,  and  by  the  fame  reafon  B  S  G  is  alfo  one  right  line,  and  the  line  B  S 
is  equall  to  the  line  S  G .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  C  A  is  equall  to  the  line  D  B,and  is  vn¬ 
to  it  a  parallel,  but  the  line  C  A  is  equall  to  the  line  G  E,  and  is  vnto  it  alfo  a  parallel :  wher- 
fore  ( by  the frf  common  fentence)  the  line  E  Bis  equall  to  the  line  G  E,&  is  alfo  a  parallel 
vnto  it :  but  the  right  lines  E  E  and  B  G  do  ioyne  thefe  parallel  lines  together  :  Wherefore 
■(  by  the  3  3.  of the frf )the  line  EE  is  a  parallel  vnto  the  line  B  G.And  in  either  of thefe  lines 

are 


ofSuclides  Elementes.  35^ , 

art  taken  pointes  at  all  aduentures,  namely,  D,F,G:S,  and  a  right  line  is  drawen  from  the 
point  D  to  the  point  G ,  and  another from  the  point  V  to  the  point  S .  Wherefore  ( by  the  7. of 
the  eleuenth )  the  lines  D  G  and  V  S  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fameplaine  fuperficies .  And  for - 
afmuch  as  the  line  D  E  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  B  G,  therefore  ( by  the  2  4..  of the  frfl )  the  an¬ 
gle  EUT  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  G  T,for  they  are  alternate  angles,  and  hkewife  the  angle 
D  T  Vis  equall  to  the  angle  GTS.  Now  then  there  are  two  triangles,  that  is,  D  T  V  and 
GTS,  hauing  two  angles  of  the  one  equall  to  two  angles  of the  other,  and  one fide  of  the  one 
,  equall  to  one  fide  of  the  other,  namely,  the fide  which  fubtendeth  the  equall  angles, that  is, the 
fide  D  V  to  the fide  G  S,for  they  are  the  halfes  of the  lines  D  E  and  B  G:  Wherefore  the  fdes 
remay  ning  are  equall  to  the fides  remayning.Wherfore  the  line  D  T  is  equall  to  the  line  T  G, 
and  the  line  FT  to  the  line  T  S .  if  therefore  the  oppofite fides  of a  P  arallelipipedon  be  de- 
uided  into  two  equall partes,  and  by  their  feciions  be  extended plaine  fuperficieces,  the  com¬ 
mon fettion  ofthofe plaine  fuperficieces, and  the  diameter  of  the  P arallelipipedon,  do  deuide 
the  one  the  other  into  two  equall partes :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfir ated. 

A  Corollary  added  by  Flufias. 

Euery  playne  fitperficies  extended  by  the  center  of  a  parallelipipedon,  diuideth  that  folide  into 
two  equally  art  es  -.and fo  doth  not  any  other  playne  fuperficies  not  extended  by  the  center . 

For  euery  playne  extended  by  the  center,cutteth  the  diameter  of  the  parallelipipedon  in  the  cen- 
terinto  two  equall  partes.  For  it  is  proued,  that  playne  fuperficieces  which  cutte  thefolide  into  two 
equall  partes, do  cut  the  dimetient  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  center.  Wherefore  all  the  lines  drawen 
by  the  cen  ter  in  that  playne  fuperficies  fhall  make  angles  with  the  dimetient.  And  forafmuch  as  the  di¬ 
ameter  fallcth  vpon  the  parallel  right  lines  of  the  folide,  which  deferibe  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  fayde 
folide,  or  vpon  the  parallel  playne  fuperficieces  of  the  folide,  which  make  angels  attheendes  of  the 
diameter:  the  triangles  contayned  vnder  the  diameter,  and  the  right  line  extendedin  that  playne  by 
the  center,  and  the  right  line, which  being  drawen  in  the  oppofite  fuperficieces  of  the  folide,ioyneth, 
together  the  endes  of  the  forefayde  right  Lines,  namely,  the  ende  of  the  diameter,  and  the  ende  of  the 
line  drawen  by  the  center  in  the  fuperficies  extended  by  the  center,  fhall  alwayes  be  equall,  and  equi- 
angle,  by  the  2  6.  of  the  firft.  For  the  oppofite  right  lines  drawen  by  the  oppofite  playne  fuperficieces  of 
the  folide  do  make  equall  angles  with  the  diameter,  forafmuch  as  they  are  parallel  lines,  by  the  1 6.  of 
this  booke.  But  the  angles  at  the  ceter  are  equall,  by  the  ijr.  ofthe  firft,  for  they  are  head  angles*.  &  one 
fide  is  equall  to  one  fide,  namely,  halfe  the  dimetient.  Wherefore  the  triangles  contayned  vnder  e- 
uery  right  line  drawen  by  the  center  of  the  parallelipipedon  in  the  fuperficies,  which  is  extended  alfo 
by  the  fayd  center,  and  the  diameter  thereof,  whofe  endes  are  the  angles  of  the  folide, are  equall, equi- 
later,&  equianglefby  the  16.  of the  firft). Wherfore  it  followeth  that  the  playne  fuperficies  which  cue- 
teth  the  parallelipipedon,  doth  make  the  partes  ofthebafes  on  the  oppofite  fide,equall,and  equiangle, 
and  therefore  like,  and'equall  both  in  multitude, and  in  magnitude:  wherefore  the  two  folide  fections 
of  that  folide,lha!  be  equall  and  like,by  the  g.  diffinition  of  this  booke  .  And  now  that  no  other  playne 
fuperficies, befides  that  which  is  extended  by  the  center ,deuide.th  the  parallelipipedon  into  two  equall 
partes,  it  is  manifeft:  if  vnto  the  playne  fuperficies  which  is  not  extended  by  the  center,  we  extend  by 
the  center  a  parallel  playne  fuperficies  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  iy.  of  this  booke  j.  For  forafmuch  as 
that  fuperficies  which  is  extended  by  the  center,doth  deuide  the  parallelipipedo  into  two  equall  parts  *. 
iris  manifeft,  that  the  other  playne  fuperficies  ("which  is  a  parallel  to  the  fuperficies  which  deuideth 
thefolideinto  two  equall  partes)  is  in  oneofthe  equall  partes  of  the  folide  :  wherefore  fein<*  that  the 
whole  is  euer  greater  then  his  partes,  it  miift  nedes  be  that  one  of  thefe  fe&ions  is  lefie  then°the  halfe 
of  the  folide,  and  therefore  the  other  is  greater. 

For  the  better  vnderftanding  of  this  former  propofition,&  alfo  of  this  Corollary  added  by  Ttufias,  it 
fhalbe  very  nedefull  for  you  to  deferibe  of  palled  paper  or  fuch  like  matter  a  parallelipipedo  or  a  Cube, 
and  to  deuide  all  the  parallelogrames  therofinto  two  equall  parts,  by  drawing  by  the  ceters  of  the  fayd 
parallelogram mes  (which  centers  are  the  poynts  made  by  the  cutting  of  diagonall  lines  drawen  fro  the 
oppofite  angles  of  the  fayd  parallelogrames)  lines  parallels  to  the  fides  of  the  parallelogrames :  as  in  the 
former  figure  deferibed  in  a  plaine  ye  may  fee,are  the  fixe  parallelogrames  D  E,E  H,H  A,  A  D,  DH,and 
C  G,  whom  thefe  parallel  lines  drawen  by  the  ceters  of  the  fayd  parallelogrames,  namely,  XO,OR, 
P  R ,  and  P  X,  do  deuide  into  two  equall  parts.-  by  which  fower  lines  ye  mull  imagine  a  playne  fuperfi¬ 
cies  to  be  extended,  alio  thefe  parallel  lynes  K  L,  L  N,  N  M,  and  M  K,  by  which  fower  lines  likewifeye 
mull  imagine  a  playne  fuperficies  to  be  extended  ye :  may  ifyc  will  put  within  your  body  made  thus  of 
palled  paper,  two  fuperficieces  made  alfo  of  the  fayd  paper, hauing  to  their  limites  lines  equalhothe 
Forefayde  parallel  lines :  which  fuperficieces  mull  alfo  be  deuided  into  two  equall  partes  by  parallel 

BCb.iij,,  linys 


A 


In  this  figure  yetnaymore  fully  fee  the  former  Propofi- 
tion  and  dernoniiration  if  ye  eredte  perpendicularly  vnto 
the  ground  plaine  fuperficies  A  B  the  fuperficies  C  D,  and 
imagine  a  line  to  be  extended  from  the  point  E  to  thepoint 
Fsin  ilede  whereof  ye  may  extend  if  ye  will  a  thred. 


f  T he  3  4-  Theorem &  The  39.  Tropofition. 


Canftruc&on, 

■<&  -iv-T 

i  .  -vu»: 

-  ..•tXnv 

Vemon&ra - 
tion< 


If  the  Qpfmjite  fides  of  a  T arallelipipedon  he  deuided  into  two  equail 
partes y  and.  by  their  common  fe&iotis  he  extended  plaine  fuperficieces:  the 
comma  fe  ffiion  of  thofe  plaine  fuperficieces P  and  the  diameter  of  the  TaraU 
klipipedon  fhalldeuide  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  partes. 

-  1 

V ppofe  that  A  F  he  a  P  araHelipipedon,  and  let. the  oppofite fides  thereof  C  F  and 
A  H  he  deuided  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point es  K,L,M,N,  and  likewife  let 
the  oppofite fides  A  D  and  G  F  he  deuided  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  pointes 
X,P  ,G,R,and  by  thefe  fictions  extend  thefe  two  plaine  fuperficieces  K  N  &XR, 
and  let  the  common  fiction  of thofe  plaine  fuperficieces  he  the  line  V  S,  and  let  the  diagonall 
line  of  the folide  fiA  B  he  the  line 
D  G.F  hen  I  fay, that  the  lines  VS 
and  D  G  dodeuide  the  one  the  0- 
ther  into  trvo  equall partes,  that  is, 
that  the  line  VF  is  equall  to  the 
line  T  S,  and  the  line  DF  to  the 
line  F  G .  Drawe  thefe  right  lines 
D  V,V  E,  B  S,  and  S  G.  Now  for - 
afmuch  as  the  line  DXis  a  parallel 
to  the  line  0  E,therfore( by  the  2p. 
of  t he  fir B)  the  angles  D  XV  and 
VO  E  being  alternate  angles, are 
equall  the  one  to  the  other .  And 
for  afmuch  as  the  line  F>  X  is  equall 
to  the  line  0  E,  and  the  line  XV  to 
the  line  V  O,  and  they  comprehend 
equall  angles  :  Wherefore  the  ha  fie 
P  V  is  equall  to  the  bafe  VE  (  by 
the  4.  of the  fir fi)  •  and  the  triangle 
P  XV  is  equall  to  the  triangle 
Y  O  E,  and  the  refi  ofthje  angles  to 
the  refi  of  the  angles .  Wherefore  the  angle  X  V  D  is  equall  to  the  angle  0  VE  .  Wherefore 
p  VE  is  one  right  line ,  and  by  the  fame  reafon  B  S  G  is  alfo  one  right  line,  and  the  line  B  S 
is  equall  to  the  line  S  G .  And for  afmuch  as  the  line  C  A  is  equall  to  the  line  D  B,and  is  vn¬ 
to  it  a  parallel,  hut  the  line  C  A  is  equall  to  the  line  G  E,  and  is  vnto  it  alfo  a  parallel :  wher- 
fore  ( by  the  firjl  common  fintence)  the  line  D  B  is  equall  to  the  line  GE,&  is  alfo  a  parallel 
vnto  it :  hut  the  right  lines  P  E  and  B  G  do  ioyne  thefe  parallel  lines  together  :  Wherefore 
(by  the  3  3  .ofthefirfi  )the  line  PE  is  a  parallel  vnto  the  line  B  G.And  in  either  of  thefe  lines 

are 


lines  drawen  by  their  centers,  and  muft  cut  the  one  the  other  by.thefe  parallel  lines.  And  for  the  dia¬ 
meter  of  this  body,  ex  ted  a  thred  from  one  angle  in  the  bafe  of  thefolide  to  his, oppofite  angle,  which 
Ihall  pafle  by  the  center  of  the  parallelipipedon ,  as  doth  the  line  D  G  in  the  figure  before  defcribed  in 
the  playne.  And  draw  in  the  bafe  and  the  oppofite  fuperficies  vnto  it.  Diagonal!  lines, from  the  angles 
from  which  is  extended  the  diameter  of  the  folide:  as  in  the  former  defcription  are  the  lines  B  G  and 
D  E.  And  when  you  haue  thus  defcribed  this  body,  compare  it  with  the  former  demonftration,  and  it 
■will  make  it  very  playne  vnto  you,  fo  your  letters  agree  with  the  letters  of  the  figure  defcribed  in  the 
fcooke.  And  this  defcription  willplaynely  fet  forth  vnto  you  the  corollary  following  that  propofition. 
Forwhere  as  to  the  vnderftanding  of  the  demonftration  of  the  propofition  the  fuperficieces  put 
within  the  body  were  extended  byparallel-lynes  drawen  by  the  ceters  of  the  bafes  of  the  parallelipipe- 
don:  to  the  vnderftanding  of  the  fayd  Corollary,  ye  may  extende  a  fuperficies  by  any  other  lines  dra¬ 
wers  in  the  fiyd  bafes, fo  that  yet  it. pafle  through  the  middeft  of  the  thred,  which  is  fuppofed  to  be  the 
center  of  the  parallelipipedon.  . 

f  T be  ss.T krnme .  The  40.  Tropoftiom 

If  there  he  two  Trifmes  bonder  equal!  altitudes  3  &  the  one  haue  to  his  bafe 
a  par allelogr amme  ?  and  t  he  other  a  triangle }  and  if  the  p  ara  lie  l gramme 
be  double  to  the  triangle :  thofe  Trijmes  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other , 


Conflruciion • 

Vemttjlra* 

■tm. 


Fpp°fe  that  thefe  two  Prifmes  A  B  C  D  E  F,  GH  K  M  0  N,  be  under  equal! 
altitudes,  and  let  the  one  haue  to  his  bafe  the  par  allelogr  amme  A  C,  and  the  o- 
then  the  triangle  G  B  K,  and  let  the  par allelogr amme  A  C  be  double  to  the  tri - 

_  mgle  GHK.  Then  1 fay, that  the  Prifme  ABC  DBF  is  equall  to  the  Prifme 

GHKMON .  CMakc  perfeffe'  '  '  ' 

the  P  arallelipipedons  A  Xfy  GO . 
c And  forafmuch  as  the  par  allelo - 
gramme  AC  is  double  to  the  tri¬ 
angle  GH K ,  but  the  parallelo- 
gramme  G  H  tsalfo  (by,  the  41. 
ofthefrB)  double  tothefriangk  ^ 

G  HK,  wherefore  the  par allelo- , 
gramme  AC  is  equall  to  the  pa-? !i_„. 
r allelogr amrne  G  H .  But  Parallelipipedons  con  fifing  upon  equall  bafes  andvnder  one  and 
the  felfe  fame  altitude,  are  equall  the  one  to  the other  (by  the  3 1  .oftheekuenth)  .  Wherefore 
thefolide  AX  is  equall  to  the folide  GO .  But  the  halfe  of  the folide  AX  is  the  Prifme  A  B  - 
C  D  E  F,  and  the  halfe  of  the  folide  G  Oisthe  Prifme  GHKMON.  Wh erf  ore  the  Prifme 
ABC  D  EF  is  equall  to  the  Prifme  GHKMON.  If  therefore  there  be  two  Prifmes  'un¬ 
der  equall  altitudes ,  and  the  one  haue  to  his  bafe  apar allelogr  amme,  f  the  other  a  triangle, 
mdif the  par allelogramme  be  double  to  thetriangle :  thofe  Prifmes  are  equall  the  one  to  the 
Other . 1 '  '  '  "  ' 


0 

•  7 

1 - ' _  .  •  H 

\  i  JL 

\u 

c:  ? i ", : ; r.  . 

1  = ;  1 1 

<5 


K 


This  Propofition  and  the  demonftration  thereof  are  not  hard  to  conceaue  by  the  former  figures: 
but  ye  may  for  your  fuller  vnderftanding  of  the  take  two  equall  Parallelipipedons  equilater  andequi- 
angle  theone  to  the  other  defcribed  of  palled  paper  or  fuch  like  matter,  and  in  the  bafe  of  the  one  Pa- 
rallqiipipedon  draw  a  diagonall  line,  and  draw  an  other  diagonall  line  in  the  vpper  fuperficies  oppofite 
vntq,  the  faid  diagonall  line  drawen  in  the  bafe .  And  in  one  of  the  parallelogrammes  which  are  fet  vp« 
©n  the  bafe  ofthe  other  Parallelipipedon  draw  a  diagonall  line,  and  drawe  an  other  diagonall  line  in 
the  parallelogram  me  oppofite  to  the  fame .  For  fo  ifye  extend  piaine  fuperficieces  by  thofe  diagonall 
lines  there  will  be  made  two  Prifmes  in  ech  body .  Ye  ra  uft  take  heede  that  ye  put  for  the  bafes  of  eche 
ofthefe  Parallelipipedons  equall  parallelogrames  .  And  then  note  the  with  letters  according  to  the  let¬ 
ters  of  the  figures  before  defcribed  in  the  piaine.  And  copare  the  with  the  dem  onftratioh,and  they  will 
make  both  it  and  the  Propofition  very  clerc  vnto  you  .  They  will  alfo  geue  great  light  to  the  Corollary 
•following  added  by  flujpu.  \ 

By 


A  Gorollaiy  added.byir/^4’. 

By  this  and  the  former  propofitions  it  is  manifefk, that  Prifmes  andfoBdes *  coniayned  vnder  t\eo 
poligon  on  figures  equall Jike, and  parallels,  and  the  reft  pdralldogrammes:may  be  compared  the  one  to 
the  oth  er  after  the felfe fame  manor  that  parallelipipedons  are. 

For  forafmuch  as  (by  this  proportion  and  by  the  fecond  Corollary  of  the  zf.  qfthisbooke)  it  is 
manifeftj  that  euery  parallelipipedon  may  be  refolued  in,tat\yo  jijte,  and  equal  Prifmes,of  one  and  the 
fame  altitude,  whofe  bafe  fhalbe  oh e,  jpd  the  felfe  fame  with  the  bafe  of  the  parallelipipedon  orthe 
halfe  thereof,  which  Prifmes  alfo  ihalhe  contained  vnder  the  kite  lame  lides  with  the  parallelipipedo, 
the  fayde  fides  heyng  alfo  lides  of  like  proportion :  I  fay  that  Prifmes  may  be  compared  together  after 
the  like  man  er  that  their  Parallelipipedons  are.For  if  we  would  deuide  a  Prifme  like  vnto  his  foli  e  by 
the  25  .of  this  booke,ye  fhall  lindc  in  the  Corollaryes  of  the  25.  propofitibj  that  that  which  is  fet  forth 
touching  a  parallelipipedon,  foUoweth  not  onely  in  a  Prifme,butalfo  in  any  fided  columne  whofe  op- 
pofite  bafes  are  equall,  and  like,  and  his  lides  parallel  ogrampaes, 

If  it  be  required  by  the,27.propolitiomvpon  a  right  line.geuen  to  defcribe  a  prifme  like  and  in  like 
forte  lituate  to  a  Prifme  geuen:  defcribe  firil  the  whole  parallelipipedon  whereof  the  prifme  geuenis 
the  halfe  (which  thing  ye  fee  by  this  40.  propolition  may  be  done) .  And  vnto  that  parallelipipedo  de¬ 
fcribe  vpon  the  right  line  geuen  by  the  fayd  17.  propolition  an  other  parallelipipedon  like  :  and  the 
halfe  thereof  fhalbe  the  prifme  which  ye  feeke  for,  namely,  fhalbe  a  prifme  deferibed  vpon  the  right 
line  geuen, and  like  vnto  thepriftne  geuen. 

In  deede  Prifmes  can  not  be  cut  according  to  the  28. propolition.  For  that  in  their  oppolite  lides 
can  be  drawen  no  diagonall  lines:  howbeit  by  that  28.  propolition  thofe  Prifmes  are  manifellly  con¬ 
firmed  to  be  equall  and  like,  which  are  the  halues  of  one  and  the  felfe  fame  parallelipipedon. 

And  as  touching  the  2 9.  propolition,  and  the  three  following  it,  which  proueth  that  parallelipi¬ 
pedons  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude,  and  vpon  equall  bafes,  or  the  felfe  fame  bafes,are  equal.' 
or  if  they  be  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude, they  are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, as  their 
bafes  are:  to  apply  tnefecompadfons  vnto  Prifmes,  it  is  to  be  required,that  the  bafes  of  the  Prifmes 
compared  together,  be  either  all  parallelogrammes,  or  all  triangles  .  For  fo  one  and  the  felfe  altitude 
remayning,  the  comparifon  of  thinge.s  equall  is  euer  one  and  the  felfe  fame,  and  the  halfes  of  the  bafes 
areeuer  the  one  to  the  other  in  the  fame  proportion,  that  their  wholes  are.  Wherfore  Prifmes  which 
are  the  halues  of  the  parallelipipedons,  and  which  haue  the  fameproportion  the  one  to  the  other  that 
the  whole  parallelipipedons  haue,  which  are  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude :  mull  needes  caufe 
that  their  bafes  being  the  halues  of  the  bafes  of  the  paralleliptpedos  are  in  the  fame  proportio  the  one 
to  the  other,  that  their  whole  parallelipipedons  are.  If  therefore  the  whole  parallelipipedons  be  in  the 
proportion  of  the  whole  bafes,  their  halues  alfo  (  which  are  Prifmes)  fhalbe  in  the  (proportion  either 
of  the  wholes  if  their  bafes  be  parallelogrammes,or  of  the  halues  if  they  be  triangles,  whichjis  euer  all 
one  by  the  15.  ofthefiueth. 

And  forafmuch  as  by  the  3  3 .  propolition,  like  parallelipipedons  which  are  the  doubles  of  their 
Prifmes  are  in  treble  proportion  the  one  to  the'other  that  their  lides  of  like  proportion  are,  it  is  mani- 
fell,  that  Prifmes  being  their  halues  ( which  haue  the  one  to  the  other  the  lame  proportion  that  their 
wholes  haue,by  the  15  of  the  fiueth)  and  hauing  the  felfe  lame  lides  that  their  parallelipipedons  haue, 
are  the  one  to  the  other  in  treble  proportion  of  that  which  the  lides  oflike  proportion  are. 

And  for  that  Prifmes  aie  the  one  to  the  other  in  the  fame  proportion  that  their  parallelipipedons 
aie,  and  the  bafes  of  the  Prifmes(being  all  either  triangles  or  parallelogram  es)are  the  one  to  the  other 
in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  bafes  oftheparallelipipedons  are,  whofe  altitudes  alfo  are  alwayese- 
quail,  we  may  by  the  34.  propofition  conclude, that  the  bafes  of  the  prifmes  and  the  bafes  of  the  paral- 
lehpipedons  their  doubles  ("being  ech  the  one  to  the  other  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  proportion  )  are 
to  the  altitud  es,in  the  fame  proportion  that  the  bafes  of  the  double  folidcs,  namely,  of  the  parallelipi¬ 
pedons  are.  For  if  the  bafes  of  the  equall  parallelipipedos  be  reciprokall  with  their  altitudes,then  their 
halues  which  are  Prifmes  fhall  haue  their  bafes  reciprokall  with  their  altitudes. 

By  the  36.  propofition  we  may  conclude,  that  if  there  be  three  right  lines  proportionall,  the  an¬ 
gle  ofaPrifme  made  of  thefe  three  linesfbeing  common  with  the  angle  of  his  parallelipipedon  which 
is  double)doth  make  a  prifme,which  is  equall  to  the  Prifme  deferibed  of  the  middle  line, and  contay- 
mng  the  like  angle,  confilting  alfo  of  equall  lides.  For  as  in  the  parallelipipedon ,  fo  alfo  in  the  Prifme 
this  one  thing  is  required,  namely,that  the  three  dimenfions  ofthe  proportionall  lines  do  make  an  an¬ 
gle  like  vnto  the  angle  contayned  of  the  middle  line  taken  three  tymes.  Now  then  if  the  folide  angle 
ofthe  Pnfme  be  made  of  thofe  three  right  lines,  there  fhall  of  them  be  made  an  angle  like  to  the  an^le 
of  the  paral  ehpipedon  which  is  double  vnto  it.  Wherefore  it  followeth  ofneceHitie,that  the  Prices 
whicn  are  alwayes  the  halues  ofthe  Parallelipipedons,  are  equiangle  the  one  to  the  other,  as  alfo  are 
their  doubles,  although  they  be  not  equilater  .•  and  therefore  thofe  halues  of  equall  folides  are  equall 
the  one  to  the  other:  namely,  that  which  is  deferibed  of  the  middle  proportionall  lineis  equall  to  that 
which  is  deferibed  ofthe  three  proportionall  lines.  ^ 

By  the  37.  propofition  alfo  we  may  conclude  the  fame  touching  Prifmes  which  was  concluded 

BBb.iiij.  touching 


*  mkhof 

fame  are  cal¬ 
led  fided  Co 1- 
lumneu 


I 


Sided  CV* 
fameu 


7 he  eleuenth  *Boo%e 

couching  Parallelipipedons,  For  forafinuch  as  Prifmes,delcribed  like  &  in  like  fort  of  the  lines  geuen, 
are  the  halues  of  the  Parallelipipedons  which  are  like  and  in  like  fort  defcribed,it  followeth  that  theie 
Prifmes  haue  theone  to  the  other  the  fame  proportion  that  the  folides  which  are  their  doubles  haue. 
And  therfore  if  the  lines  which  defcribe  them  be  porportionall,they  lhalbe  proportionall,  and  fo  con- 
uerfedly  according  to  the  rule  of  the  fayd  37.  proportion. 

Butforafmuch  as  the3^  propofition  fuppofeth  the  oppofite  fuperficiall  fidesofthe  folide  to  be 
parallelogrammes,  and  the  fame  folide  to  haue  one  diameter,  which  thinges  a  Prifme  can  not  haue, 
therefore  this  propofition  can  by  no  meanes  be  applyed  to  Prifmes, 

But  as  touching  folides  whofe  bafes  are  two  like,  equall,and  parallel  poligonon  figures, and  their 
fides  are  parallelogrammes,  forafmuch  as  by  the  fecond  Corollary  of  the  i$.  ofthis  booke  it  hath  bene 
declared,thatfuch  folides  are  compofedjof  Prifmes,  it  may  eafely  be  proued  that  their  nature 
is  fuch,  as  is  the  nature  of  the  Prifmes,  whereof  they  are  compofed.  Wherefore  a  paralle- 
Jipipedon  being  by  the  27.  propofition  ofthis  bookd  defcribed,  there  may  alfo  be  de- 
fcribedthe  halfe  thereof,  which  is  a  Prifme  :  and  by  the  defcription  of  Prifmes, 
there  may  be  compofed  a  folide  like  vnto  a  folide  geuen  compofed  of  Prifmes. 

So  that  it  is  manifeft,  that  that  which  the  29. 30. 31.32.33.  34.  and 

37 .  propofitions  fet  forth  to  uching  parallelipipedons  ,  may  well 
be  applyed  alfo  to  thefe  kyndes  of  folides.. 


_  .v  '  .  :  .  v ;; :  .. 1  ....  •  . "  J  -  i 

The  end  of  the  eleuenth  booke 

of  Euclides  Elementes, 


FoL  353. 


elides  Elementes. 


BOOKE,  EVCLIDE 


N  THIS  TVVELVETH 

fetteth  forth  the  paflions  and  proprieties  of  Pyramids, 
Prifmcs,Cones,Cylinders5andSpheres.Andcompareth 
Pyramids,firftto  Pyramids,  then  toPrifmes :  fo  like  wife 
doth  he  Cones,  and  Cylinders.  And  laftly  he  compared! 
Spheres  the  one  to  the  other.But  before  he  goeth  to  the 
treatie  of  thofe  bodies,  he  proueth  that,  like  Poligonon 
figures  inferibedin  circles,and  alfo  the  circles  the  felues 
are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  the  fquares  of 
the  diameters  of  thofe  circles  are .  Becaufe  that  was  ne- 
ceffary  tobeproued,forthe  confirmation  of  certayne 
paffions  and  proprieties  of  thofe  bodies. 


f/  The  1. Theorems. 


The  1.  (proportion. 


Like  (P  oligonon  figures  deferibed  in  circles :  are  in  that  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other }  that  the  fquares  of  their  diameters  are. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  two  circles  lHBCE  E ,  and  FGHKL , 
and  in  them  let  there  be  deferibed  like  Poligonon  figures, name* 
ly>  cMB  CEE,  and  FGHKL,  and  let  the  diameters  of  the 
circles  be  B  M,  and  G  N .  Then  l fay,  that  as  the  fquare  of  the 
line  B  M  is  to  the fquare  of  the  line  GN,foisthe  Poligonon  fi¬ 
gure  ABC  EE  to  the  Poligonon  figure  FGHKL  .  Erawe 
thefe  right  lines  B  E,  AM,  G  L,  and  F  N .  Andforafmuch  as 
the  Poligonon  figure  ABC  EE  is  like  to  the  Poligonon  figure 
FGHKL ,  therefore  the  angle  BAE  is  equall  to  the  angle 


?i 


G  F  L,  and  as  the  line  B  A  is  to  the  line  A  E,fo  is  the  line  G  F  to  the  line  F  L  (by  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  like  Poligonon  figures  )  .  Now  therefore  there  are  two  triangles  BAE  and  G  F  L, 

\tii'  hmins 


Confructiotii 

Eemenjlu- 
tm , 


The  tmlueth  Tlooke 

baiting  one’ angle  of i the  one  e  quail  to  one  angle  of the  other ,  namely,  the  angle  B  AE  equall 
to  the  angle  GEL,  and  the fides  about  the  equall  angles  are proportionall.  Wherefore  {by  the 
firft  definition  ofthefixt )  the  triangle  A  BE  is  equiangle  to  the  triangle  F  G  L.  Wherefore 
the  angle  A  E  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  F  LG .  But  {by  the  21. of  the  third )  the  angle  A  EB 
is  squall  to  the  angle  AM  B,  for  they  conffe  njpon  one  and  thefelfe fame  circumference;  and 


F 


$y  the  fame  reafin  the  angle  F  L  G  is  equallto  the  angle  F  N  G.Wberfore  the  angle  AMB 
is  equall  to  the  angle  F  B  G .  ^And  the  right  angle  B  AM,  is  (  by  the  4. petition)  equall  t§ 
the  right  angle  GF  ?i_.  Wherefore  the  angle  remayning,is  equallto  the  angle  remaining - 
Wherefore  the  triangle  AMB  isxquiangle  to  the  triangle  FNG .  Wherefore  proportionally 
as  the  line B  Mis  totheline  G  Nffo  is  the  line  BA  to  the  line  GF  .But  thefquare  of the  line 
3  Mis  to  thefquare  of the  line  G  N  in  double  proportion  of  that  which  the  line  B  Mis  to  the 
line  G  (by  the  Corollary  of the  20  .of the fixt)  .  And  the  Foligononfgure  ABCD  Eiste 
the  Poligonon  figure  FGB IC  Lin  double  proportion  of that  which  the  line  BA  is  to  the  line 
G  F  ( by'the  2  0.0ft he fixt) .  Wherefore  (by  the  11. of  the fift )  as  thefquare  of the  line  B  lM 
Is  to  thefquare  of the  line  GN,fo  is  the  Poligonon  figure  ABODE,  to  the  Poligonon  fi¬ 
gure  FGWK  L .  Wherefore  like  Poligonon  figures  defcnbed  in  circles,  are  in  that  pro - 

~  uares  of  the  diameters  are :  which  was  required  to  be 


1  •  ■  •  \,  y  _ \  v 

f  lohn  (Dee  his fruitfull  infractions,  T) iith  certains  Corollaries y 

and  their  great  vfe. 

WHo  can  not  eafiiy  percexue,what  occafion  and  vy  At,  Archimedes  had,  by  theft  fird  &  ftcond  Pro¬ 
portions,  to  finde  the  nere  Area, or  Content  of  a  circle :  betwene  a  Poligonon  figure  within  the 
circle,  and  the  like  about  the  fame  cirde,defcri bed  ?  Whofe  precift  quantities  are  raofi  eafiiy  knowen : 
being  comprehended  of  right  lines  „  Where  alfo  (to  auoyde  all  occasions  oferrour)  it  is  good  in  num¬ 
bers,  not  tiauing  precift  fquare  rootes,to  vfe  the  Logidicall  precede,  according  to  the  rules,  with 
%/lf  1 2  s  19,  and  fo,  of  fuch  like  .  Who  can  not  readily  fall  into  Archimedes  reckoning  and  ac¬ 

count,  by  his  method  ?  To  finde  the  proportion  of  the  circumference  of  any  circle  to  his  diameter, 
to  be  almoil  triple,  and  one  feuenth  of  the  diameter :  but  to  be  more  then  triple  and  ten  one  &  feuen- 
tithes  t  that  is  to  be  leflethen  3— and  more  then  3— .  And  where  Archimedes  vfed  a  Poligonon 

7  7* 

figure  of  swS.ficfts :  he  that,  for  exercife  fake,or  for  earned  defire  of  a  more  nerenes,will  vfe  Polygonon 
figures  of  jS^fides  (or  more)  may  well  trauaile  therein,  till  either  wearines  caufe  him  day,  or  els  he 
fiade  his  labour  fruitles.  Indeede  Archimedes  concluded  proportion,  of  the  circumference  to  the  dia¬ 
meter. 


ofSuclides  Elementes*  FoLtyj* 

meter*  hath  hitherto  ferued  the  vulgare  and  Mechanicallworkemen  :  wherewith,  who  fo  is  not  con¬ 
tented,  let  his  owne  Methodicall  trauaile  fatiffie  his  defire  :  or  let  him  procure  other  therto  .  For,nar- 
rower  termes  (of  greater  and  lefle)  found,  and  appointed  to  the  circumference,  will  alfo  winne  to  the 
Area  of  the  circle  a  nearer  quantise  :  feing,  it  is  welldemoftrated  oi Archimedes,  that  a  triangle  redan- 
gle,of  whofe  two  fides  (Contayning  the  rightangle  )  one  is  equall  to  the  femidiameter  of  the  circle, 
and  the  other  to  the  circumference  ofthe  fame,  is  equall  to  the  Area  ofthatcircle .  Vpon  which  two 
Theoremes,  it  followeth,  that  the  fquare  made  of  the  diameter,  is  in  that  proportion  to  the  circle  (ve- 
ry  neare)  in  which,  14,  is  to  ir.  Wherefore  euery  circle  is  -dL  eleuen  fowertenthes  (well  neare)  of 

1.4 

the  fquare  about  him  defcribed .  The  one  fide,then,  of  that  fquare,  deuide  into  14. equall  partes :  and  fquarinp 
from  that  point  which  endeth  the  eleuenth  part,  drawe  to  the  oppofitefide,  a  line,  parallel  to  the  other  ofthe  circle  * 
fides,  andfomakeperfedtetheparallelogramme.Then,  by  the  laft  Proportion  ofthefecond  booke,  * 
vnto  thatparalIelogramme(whofe  one  fide  hath  thofe  ri. equall  partes),  make  a  fquare  equall .  Then 
is  it  euident,  that  fquare  to  be  equall  to  the  circle,  about  which  the  firfl  fquare  is  defcribed.  Asye  may 
here  beholdein  thefe  figures  . 


Gentle  frend,  the  great  defire,  which  I  haue,that  both  with  pleafure  and  alfo  profite,  thou  mayeffc 
fpend  thy  time  in  thefe  excellent  fludies,  doth  caufe  me  here  to  furnifhe  thee  fomewhat  (extraordina¬ 
rily  )  about  the  circle  :  not  onely  by  pointing  vnto  thee, the  welfpring  oi  Archimedes, his  fo  much  won- 
dred  at,  and  tuftly  commended  trauaile  (in  the  former  3 .  Theoremes,  here  repeated),but  alfo  to  make 
thee  more  apt,  to  vnderftand  and  pradfife  this  and  other  bookes  following  ,  where,  vfe  ofthe  circle 
may  be  had  in  any  confideration  :  as  in  Cones,  Cylinders,and  Spheres, &e„ 


Lsf  Corollary.  1. 


FSy  Archimedes  fecond  Theoreme  (  as  /  haue  here  alleaged  them  )  it  is  manifefl ,  that  a  pa- 
raUelogrammc  contained, either  vnder  the femidiameter  and  halfe  the  circumference ,  or  vnder  the 
half ?  femidiameter  and  Vohole  circumference  of  any  circle,  is  equall  to  the  circle;  by  the  ^1,  of  the 
firfl :  andfirfi  ofthe fixt. 

;  L- v  7 1  7'.  ..  .  -j  •  .. .  .  '  .  .  *  '  "  :  t  ■ 

lX  Corollary.  2. 

Likewije  it  is  euident ,  that  theparallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  femidiameter ,and  halfe  of 
any  portion  of  the  circumference  of a  circle geuen,  is  equall  to  that  fed  or  ofthe  fame  circle,  to  Vo  hie h 
the  Vohole  portion  of the  circumference geuen,  doth  belong  .  Or  you  may  vfe  the  halfe femidiameter , 
and  the  Vohole  portion  ofthe  circumference  :  as fides  ofthe faidparallelogramme. 

The  farther  winning,  and  inferring,  I  committe  to  your  fkill,care,and  ftudye.  But  in  an  other  fore 
will  I  geue  you  newe  ayde,  and  inftru&ion  here. 


ff  ATheoreme. 


Dmonflrati- 
on  leading  to 
an  impofibi- 
litie. 

Two  cafes  in 
this  Oropo/i- 
tiou. 

Tbs  fir fl  cafe „ 


The  Welueth  cBooke 

K^iTheorcme. 

.  '  '  . 

Of  all  circles,  the  circumferences  totheir  vwnc  diameters,  haue one  and  the fame  proportion  tin 
What  one  circle foeutr,  they  are  ajjigned . 

That  is  (as  Archimedes  hath  demonllrated)  almoft,  as  zt .  to  7  :  or  nearer,  if nearer  be  fouud :  vn- 
till  the  very  precife  proportion  be  demonllrated  .  Which,  what  foeuer  it  be,  in  all  circumferences  to 
their  proper  diameters,  will  be  demonilrated  one  and  the  lame. 

#  A  Corollary.  1. 

T 

Wherefore  if two  circles  be  propounded,  Which fuppofe  to  be  A  and  B ,  as  the  circumference  of  A 
is  to  the  circumference  ofH,fo  is  the 
diameter  of  A  to  the  diameter  ofB . 

For  by  the  former  Theoreme,as 
the  circumference  of  A,is  to  his  own 
•diameter,  fo  is  the  circumference  of 
•B,  to  his  own  diameter :  Wherfore, 
alternately,  as  the  circumference  of 
A,  is  to  the  circumference  ofB,fois 
the  diameter  of  A,  to  the  diameter 
of  B  :  Which  was  required  to  be  de¬ 
monllrated. 


of  Corollary.  2. 


It  is  now  then  euident,  that  We  can gene  twoxirclesWhofe  circumferences  one  to  the  other , 
haue  any  proportion geuen  in  two  right  lines. 


The  great  Meehanicall  vfe  (  befides  Mathematical!  confiderations)  which,  thefe  two  CoroQatyes 
may  haue  in  Wheeles  of  Milles,  Clpckes,Cranes,and  other  engines  for  water  workes,  and  for  warres, 
’aad  many  other  purpofes,  the  earnell  and  wittie  Mechanicien  will foone  boult  out,  8c  gladly  pra&ife. 

jffohn  T)ee. 


■f  The  2.  Theorems . 


The  2.  (propojitbn. 


Circles  are  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other ,  that  the fquares  of their 
diameters  are. 

.If  v.i  -  v-vsw..*  V". 

Vppofe  that  there  be  two  Circles  A  BCD,  and  EFGH ,  and  let  their  diame¬ 
ter  she  BDandFH .  T  hen  1  fay,  that  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  B  is  to  the 
fquare  pf  the  line  F  H,fo  is  the  circle  ABC  D  to  the  circle  EFGH .  For  if 
the  circle  ABC D  be  not  vnto  the  circle  EF  G  H,as  the fquare  of the  line  B  D 
is  to  the fquare  of the  line  F  H then  the fquare  of  the  line  B  D  Jhall  be  to  the  fquare  of  the 
line  F  H,  as  the  circle  AB  CD  is  to  a fuperfeies, either  lefe  then  the  circle  EF  G  H, or  grea¬ 
ter  .  Firfi  lei  the  fquare  of the  UncfB  D  be  to  the  fquare  of the  line  F  FI, as  the  circle  AB  CD 
is  to  a  fuperfeies  lejfe  then  the  circle  EFGH,  namely ,  to  the fuperfeies  S .  Defcribe  (by  the 
6.  of the  fourth  )  in  the  circle  EF  G  Ha fquare  EFGH.  No*  this  fquare  thus  deferred  is  pea- 
ur  then  the  half  oft  he  circle  zxGH.  Forif  by  the  pointes  E,  F,  G,H,wdrawc  rightlines 

touching 


Fo/.3i8, 


touching  the  circle  yt-he  fquare  E  F  GB,  is  the  halfe  of  the fquare  defcribed  about  the 
circle 7  but  the fquare  defcribed about  the  circle , is  greater  then  the" circle.  Whereforethe' 1 
fquare  E  F  G  FI,  which  is  inf  riled  in  the  circle,  is  greater  then  the  halfe  of  the  circle 
EF  Gti.  Deuide  the  circumferences  E  F,  F  G,G  H,  and  B  E,  into  two  equall partes  in 
the point es  K,L,  M,N .  And  dr  awe  thefe  right  lines  E  K,  K  F,  F  L,  LG,G  M,  CM  It, 
H  N,  and  2 \E .  Wherefore  euery  one  of thefe  triangles  EKF,F  LG, GMH,  and  BNM, 
is  greater  then  the  halfe 
of the fegmet  of  the  cir¬ 
cle  which  is  defcribed  a- 
bout  it .  For  if  by  the  , 
pointes  K,L,  CM,  N,be 
drawen  lines  touching 
the  circle,  and  then  be 
made  perfecle  the  paral- 
lelogrames  made  of  the 
right  lines  EF  ,F  G,G- 
H,&H  E,  euery  one  of 
the  triangles  E  I<  F,F  - 
LG,GMH,&HNEf£ 
is  the  halfe  of  the par al- 
lelograme  which  is  de¬ 
fcribed  about  it  ( by  the 
4 1. of the  fir  ft ) :  but  the 
fegmet  defcribed  about, 
it  is  lejfe  then  the  paral- 
lelogramme .  Wherefore  euery  one  of  thefe  triangles  EE  F,  F  LG,  G  M  B,  and  BNE,  is 
greater  then  the  halfe  of  the fegment  of  the  circle  which  is  defcribed  about  it .  Now  then 
deuiding  the  circumferences  remaining  into  two  equall  partes, and  drawing  right  tines  from 
the  pointes  where  thofe  diuifions  are  made, fo  continually  doing  this, we  fall  at  the  length 
(by  the  i. of  the  tenth)  leaue  certainefegmentes  of  the  circle, which jhall  be  lefe  then  the  ex* 
cefie,  wherby  the  circle  EF  GB  excedeth  the fuperficies  S .  For  it  hath  bene  proued  in  the 
frfl  Fropofition  of  the  tenth  booke,  that  two  vnequatl  magnitudes  being  geuen,  if from  the 
greater  betaken  away  more  then  the  halfe,  and  hkewife  againe  from  the  ref  due  more  then 
the  halfe,  and fo  continually,  there  fall  at  the  length  be  left  a  certaine  magnitude  which fall 
he  lefe  then  the  lefe  magnitude  geuen .  Let  there  be fuch  fegmentes  left ,  dr  let  the fegment  es 
of  the  circle  EF  GB,  namely,  which  are  made  by  the  lines  E  K,K  F,FL,LG,G  M,M  B, 
B  N,and  N  E,be  lefe  then  the  excejfe,  whereby  the  circle  EF  GB  excedeth  thefuperfcies  S. 
Wherefore  the  refidue,  namely,  the  Poligononfgure  EKE  LG  MB  N,  is  greater  then  the 
fuperficies  S  .  Infcribe  in  the  circle  ABC  D  a  Poligononfgure  like  to  the  Poligonon  figure 
EKFLGMBN ,  and  let  the fame  be  AXBOCPDR.  Wherefore  (  by  the  Propofition 
next  going  before  )  as  the fquare  of  the  line  B  D  is  to  the  fquare  of the  line  F  B,fo  is  the  Po¬ 
ligononfgure  AX  B  O  C  P  D  R  to  the  Poligononfgure  EKF  LG  CM  B  N .  But  as  the 
fquare  of  the  line  B  D  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  G,fo  is  the  circle  AB  CD  fuppofed  to  be 
to  thefuperfcies  S .  Wherefore  ( by  the  1 1. of  the f ft)  as  the  circle  A  B  CD  is  to  the fuperfi- 
cies  S,fo  is  the  Poligonon figure  AX  BO  C  P  D  R  to  the  Poligonon  figure  E  K  F  LG  CM* 
B  N .  Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  id.ofthefft )  as  the  circle  AB  CD  is  to  the  Poligonon 
figure  defcribed  in  it,fo  is  thefuperfcies  S  to  the  Poligononfgure  EKFLGMBN ■  But 
the  circle  AB  CD  is  greater  then  the  Poligononfgure  defcribed  in  it .  Wherefore  alfo  the 
fuperficies  S  is  greater  then  the  Poligononfgure  EKF  LG  B  CM  N :  but  it  is  alfo  lefe : 
which  is  impofiible .  Wherefore  as  the fquare  of the  line  B  D  is  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  B, 

CCc.i.  fo  is 


within  any 
circle  deferi- 
bed  is  bigger 
than  halfe  thi 
circle , 

That  the  Iff 

celes  trian¬ 
gles, without 
the  fquare, are 
greater  then 
halfe  the  feg¬ 
ment  s  wherift 
they  are* 


fo  is  n  o  t  the  circle  "A  B  CT>  to  any  fuf  erf  ties  lejfe  then  the  circles  EF  G  H. 

Second  cafu  in  like  fort alfo  -may  wf roue, that  as  the  fquare  of the  line  F  H  is  to  the fquare  of the  line 

Bp,fo  is  not  the  circle  Ff  G  H  to  any fuferfcies  lefe  then  the  circle  ABC  D.l fay, namely, 
that  as  the  fquare  of  the, 


■;  V  V*  t  .1 


mrc 


oftheline  F  Hffo  is  not 
the  circle  A B  CD  to  a- 
ny  f if  erf ties  greater  the 
then  the  circle  E  F  GH. 

'  For  if 'it  he  fofible,  let  it 

be  to  a greater, namely  ,to 
the  fuf  erf  ties  S .  Wher - 
fore  by  conuerfon,  as  the 
fquare  of  the  line  F  H 
is  to  the  fquare  of  the 
tine  B  D,fo  is  the  fil¬ 
ter  ficies  S  to  the  circle 
*  Thh  A  A  CD.*  But  as  the 

is  after  War  d  fupsrficj;es  s  is  to  the  cir- 

thedemoilra-  cle  A  B  C  D  ,fots  the  cir- 
tie*  fraud-  .  cle  EFGH  to  fomefu- 
f  erf  ties  lejfe  the  the  cir¬ 


cle  ABC  D  .  Wherefore  ( by  then,  of  the f ft )  as  the fquare  of the  line  F  Ft  is  to  the fquare 
of the  line  B  D,fo  is  the  circle  EFGH ,  tofome fuf  erf  ties  lefe  then  the  circle  <_//  BCD: 
which  is  in  thefrfi  cafefroued  to,  be  irnfofible.  Wherefore  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  D  is  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  F  Hfois  not  the  circle  A  BCD  to  any  fuf  erf  ties  greater  thenthe 
circle  EFGH.  And  it  is  alfo  f rotted  that  it  is  not ,  to  any  lefe .  Wherefore  as  the fquare 
of  the  line  B  D  is  to  the fquare  of the  line  F  Hfo  is  the  circle  A  B  CD  to  the  circle  EFGH. 
Wherefore  circles  are  in  that  frofortion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  the  fquares  of  their  diame¬ 
ters  are :  which  was  required  to  befroued. 


«[[An  Aflumpt. 

1  fay  now,  that  the  fuf  erf  ties  S  be¬ 
ing  greater  then  the  circle  EF  G  H,as 
the fuf  erf ties  S  is  to  the  circle  ABC- 
D,fo  is  the  circle  EF  GH  to  fomefu- 
f  erf  ties  lefe  then  the  circle  ABC  D. 

For,  as  the  fuf  erf ties S  is  to  the  circle 
ABC  D,  fo  let  the  circle  EF  G  H  be 
to  the  fuf  erf  ties  T .  2 'low  J fay,  that 
the  fuf  erf  ties  T  is  lefe  then  the  circle 
A  B  CD.  For  for  that  as  the fuf  erf  ties 
S  is  to  the  circle  A  B  C  D,fo  is  thetir- 
cle  EF  G  H  to  the fuf  erf ties  T there¬ 
fore  alternately  (by  the  id.  of  the f ft ) 
as  the fuf  erf  ties  S  is  to  the  circle  EF  - 
G  H,fo  is  the  circle  A  B  CD  to  the fu- 
f  erf  ties  T.  But  the fuf  erf  ties  S  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  circle  EFGH  (by  ptffoftion )  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  circle  A  B  CD 
then  the  fuf  erf  ties  T  (by  the  1 4.0/ the f ft)  .  Wherefore  as  the  fuf  erf  ties  S  is  to 


is  greater 
the  circle 

ABCD, 


ofSticlides  Elementes. 


FoLtf?. 


A  B  C  D  ,fo  is  the  circle  EF  G  Hto  fome fu/erjicies  lejfe  then  the  circle  A  B  C  JO  :  which 
was  required  to  be  demonstrated.  ,  r 

.  '  .  ■  •  •  ■  ’  .  •  - 

%  A  Corollary  added  by  Flufas. 

Circles  bane  the  one  to  the  other,  that  proportion  ,that  like  Foligonon figures  and  in  like fort  de* 
/crib ed  in  them  haue  ,  For,  it  was  by  the  firft  Propofition  proued,  that  the  Poligonon  figures  haue 
that  proportio  the  one  to  the  other,  that  the  fquares  of  the  diameters  haue,which  proportion  likewife, 
by  this  Propofition,the  circles  haue. 

•v  •-  ‘i  1  "*  ■  nf  :"■"?  t".  bn  not  > 

jy  Very  needefull  Troblemes  and  Corollary es  by  Matter  Ihon  !Dee 
inuented :  whofe  wonderfull  vfealfo,  he /artel/  declaret h . 

A  Frobleme .  /. 


T  wo  circles  being  gene:  to/inde  two  right  lines,  Which  haue  the fame  proportion  jOn£  to  the  other, 
that  thegeuen  circles  haue,  one  to  the  other, 

Suppofe  A  and  B,  to  be  the  diameters  of  two  circles  geuen:  I  fay  that  two  right  lines  are  to  be 
foude,hauing  that  proportio,  that  the  circle  of  A  hath  tathe  circle  ofB,Letto  A  SeBfby  the  n  of  the 
fixth)  a  third  proportionall  line  be  found, which  fuppofe  to  be  G.  I  fay  now  that  A  hath  to  C,that  pro¬ 
portion  which  the  circle  of  A  hath  to  the  cir¬ 
cle  ofB.  For  forafmuch  as  A,B,.and  C,  are  (by  4.  r~ — - — - < - — — — — , 

c6nftfu£tion)  three  proportionall  lines ,  the 

fquareof  A  is  to  the  fquare  ofB,as  A  is  to  C,  £  - y-* - - 

(by  the  Corollary  of  the  10.  of  the  fixth) r  but 

as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  is  to  the  fquare  of  C 

the  line  B/o  is  the  circle  whofe  diameter  is  the 

line  A,to  the  circle  whofe  diameter  is  the  line 

B,  by  this  fecond  ofthe  eleueth.Wherfore  the  circles  of  the  lines  A  andB,  are  in  the  proportion  of  the 
right  lines  A  and  C .  Therefore  two  circles  being  geuen,  we  haue  found  two  right  lines  hauing  the 
fame  proportion  bctwene  the,  that  the  circles  geuen,  haue  one  to  the  other:  which  ought  to  be  done* 

AProbleme,: 

T wo  circles  being  geuen ,  and  a 
right  line:  to  fnde  an  other  right  line, 
to  which  the  line  geue (hall  haue  that 
proportion.  Which  the  one  circle  hath 
to  the  other , 

Suppofe  two  circles  geue:  which  let 
be  A  &  B ,  &  a  right  line  geue,  which 
let  be  C.- 1  lay  that  an  other  right  line 
is  to  be  founde,  to  which  the  lineC 
fhall  haue  that  proportion  that  the 
circle  A,  hath  to  the  circle  B  .  As  the 
diameter  of  the  circle  A,  is  to  the  dia¬ 
meter  of  the  circle  B,  fo  let  the  line 
C  be  to  a£ourthline,  (by  the  iz.of 
the  fixth  J  let  that  fourth  line  be  D.  Aiid,by  the  ii.  of  the 
fixth,let  a  thirde  line  proportionall  be  found,  to  the  lines 
C  &  D,  which  let  be  E r  I  fay  no  w,  that  the  line  C  hath  to 
the  line  E,  that  proportion  which  the  circle  A,  hath  to  the 
circle  B.  For  (by  confirmation)  the  lines  C,D,andE,are 
proportionall :  therefore  the  fquare  of  C,  is  to  the  fquare 
of  D,  as  C  is  to  E,by  the  Corollary  of  the  ao.  of  the  fixth . 

But  by  conftruction ,  as  the  diameter  of  the  circle  A, 
is  to  the  diameter  of  the  circle  B,  fo  is  C,  to  D :  wherefore 
as  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  ofthe  circle  A,  is  to  the 
fquare  of  the  diameter  of  the  circle  B,  fo  is  the  fquare  of 
the  line  C  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E>,  by  the  zz.  of  the  C  D  E 
fixth.  But  as  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  of  A,  the  circle,  is 
to  the  fquare  ofthe  diameter  ofthe  circle  B,fois  the  cir¬ 
cle  A,  to  the  circle  B,by  the  fecond  of  the  twelfth :  wherefore  by  i  r .  ofthe  fiueth,  as  the  circle  A,  is  to 

CCc.ij.  the 


ConJlruflioMt 

Emmfira™ 

mn t 


Cchtfrkfiitn 


Vemon/lra- 
tion . 


) 


Diffreetsce 
■hetwenethe 
firtf  problem 
and  the  fe¬ 
cond. 


Conftwftion * 


Demon  Ura- 
lion. 


Cotijlrutlioiu 


DemonUra- 

mtt. 


TheVtoelueth  *Boo%e 

tfee  circle  B,  fo  is  the'fquare  of  the  line  C,to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D.But  it  is  proued/hat  as  the  fquare 
<»fthe  lineC,  is  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  D,fo  is  the  line  C  to  the  line  E.  Wherefore  by  then. ofthe 
Hueth,  as  the  circle  A,  is  to  the  circle  B,  fo  is  the  line  C  to  the  line  E.  Two  circles  being  geuen  there¬ 
fore,  and  a  right  line,  we  haue  found  a  right  line,  to  which  the  right  line  geuen,  hath  that  proportion, 
which  the  one  circle  hath  to  the  other.  Which  ought  to  be  done. 

Wm  ■'  •.  ■  "-dv  ■  ,"&\t  ■  vr  '  •  .> 

‘Rote. 

%  •  '■  •  r  ..  •':?  i  ..  :  ■  u.'i;  "irbi.  .  .  •  .  i:  •  r  •  •  • 

The  difference  betwene  this  Probleme,  and  that  next  before,  is  this:  there,although  we  had  two 
circles  geuen,  and  two  lines  were  found  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  in  which  the  geuen 
circles  were, :  and  here  likewife  are  two  circles  geue,  and  two  lines  alfo  are  had  in  the  fame  proportio, 
that  the  geue  circles  are :  yet  there  we  tooke  at  pleafure  the  firft  of  the  two  lines,  wherunto  we  framed 
the  fecond  proportionally,  to  the  circles  geuen  .But  here  the  firft  of  the  two  lines,  isaffigned,poyntcd, 

and  determined  to  vs  :  and  not  our  choyfe  to  be  had  therein,  as  was  in  the  former  Probleme. 

\ 

t  ’  * 

•>.  u 

A  Probleme.  3. 

tA  circle  being  geuen,  to  finde  an  other  circle,  to  which  the geuen  circle  is  in  any  proportion  geue 
in  two  right  lines,  ■ 1 1  -\ 

»  ■'  ‘  A  loslrnbc-fo 

Suppofe  the  circle  a  b  c  geuen,  and  therefore  his  femidiameter  is  geuen:  whereby  his  diameter 
alfo  is  geuen:  which  diameter  let  be  a  c.Lec  the  proportion  geuen,  be  that  which  is  betwene  E,F,two 
right  lines.  I  fay,  a  circle  is  to  be  found,  vnto  which  ab  c  hath  that  proportion  that  e  hath  to  f. 
As  e  is  to  r,  fo  let  a  c  the  diameter,  be  to  an  o- 
ther  right  pine,  by  the  12.  of  the  fixth  .  Which  line  >sn. 

fuppofe t o  be  h .  Betwene  ac  and  h,  finde  a  middle  Y  N. 

proportionallline,  by  the  13.  of  the  fixth:  which  let  be  /  \ 

1  n.  By  the  10.  of  the  firft,  deuide  l  n,  into  two  equall  —1 

partes:  and  let  that  be  done  in  the  point  o.  Nowvponi - - - 4 

o  l,  (o  being  made  the  center)  delcribe  a  circle: which  V  I  >  “*1* 

let  be  l  m  n  .  I  fay  that  a  b  c ,  is  to  t  m  W,  as  e  is  to  F.For  \  J 

feing  that  a  c,ln,  and  h, arc  three  right  lines'in  con-  / 

tinuall  proportion  (by  conftrudion)  therefore  (by  the 
Corollary  of  the  20.  of  the  fixth)  as  a  c  is  to  h,  fo  is  the 
fquareofA  c  tothefquareof  1  n.  But  a  c  is  to  h,  as  e 
is  to  f,  by  conftrudion.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  a  c  is 
to  the  fquare  of  t  n,  as  e  is  f  :  but  as  the  fquare  of  the 
diameter  a  c,  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  1  n,  fo  is 
the  circle  ab  c  to  the  circle  1  m  n  ,  by  this  2.  of  the 
twelueth,  wherefore  by  the  11.  of  the  fiueth,  the  circle 
aec  is  to  the  circle  l  m  N,as  e  is  to  f.  A  circle  being 
geuen  (therefore)  an  other  circle  is  founde,  to  which 

the  geuen  circle  is  in  any  proportion  geuen  betwene  two  right  lines;  which  ought  to  be  done. 

%  (  j  •  ;  ^  f. 

kA  Probleme.  4. 

Two  circles  being  geuen,  to  finde  one  circle  equall  to  them  both. 

Suppofe  the  two  circles  geue, haue  their  diameters  a  b  &  c  d  .1  fay  thata  circle  rauft  be  found 
equall  to  the  two  circles  whofe  diameters  are  a  b  and  cl  d  :  vnto  the 
line  a  u,at  the  point  a,  ered  a  perpendicular  line  a  e  :  from  which 
(fufficiently  produced)  cut  a  line  equal!  to  c  i>,  which  let  be  a  f.  By 
the  firft  peticion  draw  from  f  to  b  a  right  line :  fo  is  f  a  b  made  a  tri¬ 
angle  redangle.  I  fay  now  thata  circle  whofe  diameter  is  f  b  , is  equal 
Xo  the  two  circles  whofe  diameters  are  a  b  and  c  d  .  For  by  the47,  of 
the  firft,  the  fquare  of  f  b  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  a  b  &  a  f  .Which  p 
a  f  is  (by  conftrudion)  equall  cocd  -  wherefore  the  fquare  of  f  b  is 
equall  to  the  fquares  of  a  b  and  c  d  .  But  circles  are  one  to  an  other, 
as  the  fquares  of  their  diameters  are  one  to  the  other,  by  this  fecond 
of  the  twelueth. Therefore  the  circle  whofe  diameter  is  f  b  is  equall 
to  the  circles  whofe  diameters  are  a  b  and  c  d.  Therefore  two  circles 
being  geuen  we  haue  found  a  circle  equall  to  them  both.  Which  was 
required  to  be  done. 

A  Corollary 


ofSuclides  Elementes .  Fol.tfo. 

K^i  Corollary .  /. 

Hereby  it  is  made  euident,that  in  all  triangles  rett angle,  the  circles  ,femicircles ,  quadrants  ,  or 
any  other  portions  of  circles  defended  vpon  the  Jitb  tender,  t  line  ,is  equall  to  the  two  ch  clesfemicircles, 
quadrants  ,or  any  two  other  like  portions  of  circles, defiribed  on  the  two  lines  comprehending  the  right 
angle  flike  to  like  being  compared.  '• 

For  like  partes  haue  rhat  proportion  betwene  them  felucs,thattheir  whole  magnitudes  haue ,  of 
which  they  are  like  partes,by  the  ij. ofthe  fifth  .  But  ofthe  whole  circles,  in  the  former  probleme  it  is 
euidenttand  therefore  in  the  fornamed  like  portions  ofcir.cksjit.is  a  true  confequent. 

(  _  w  £1 1 1 » •  1. -  S  y  •.  j  ^  J  _■  il  J  ^  ^ 

,  -  •  |  '  .  . 

Corollary.  2. 

,  £  .  •  ‘  .•  J;-  -ct 

*By  the  former  probleme, it  tsalfo  manifefi ,  vnto  circles  three }foweT ,  fine 3or  to  hew  many  Jo  euer 
one  Vvtllgeue^one  circle  may  be  geuen  equall. 

For  if firft ,  to  any  two ,  by  the  former  probleme ,  you  finde  oneequall,and  then  vnto  your  found 
circle  and  the  third  of  the  geuen  circles, as  two  geuen  circles, finde  one  other  circle  equall,  and  then  to 
that  fecond  found  circle,  and  to  thefourth  of  the  firft  geuen  circles ,  as  two  circles ,  one  new  circle  be 
found  equal!, and  fo  proceede  till  you  haue  once  cuppled  orderly,  euery  one  of  your  propo uded  circles 
(except  the  firft  and  fecond  already  doone)with  the  new  circle  thus  found :  for  fo  the  laft  found  circle  is 
equall  to  all  the  firft  geuen  circles.If  ye  doubt,or  fufficiently  vnderftand  me  not:  heipe  your  felfe  by  the 
difeourfe  and  demonftration  ofthe  laft  propofition  in  the  fecond  booke,and  alfo  of  the  3 1 ,  in  the  fixth 
booke. 

A  Probleme  5. 


Two  vnecjticiU  circles  beinggeuen, to finde  a  circle  equall  to  the  exceffe  of the  greater  to  the  leffie. 

Suppofe  the  two  vnequal  circles  geue,  to  be  AB  C  &  DE  F,&let  AB  C  be  the  greater  :whofe  dia¬ 
meter  fuppefe  to  be  A  C :  &  the  diameter  of  D  E  F  fuppofe  to  be  D  F.I  fay  a  circle  muft  be  found  equal 
to  that  exceflfe  in  magnitude,by  which  A  B  C  is  greater  the  D  E  F.By  the  firft  of  the  fourth, in  the  circle 
ABC.  Apply  a  right  line  equall  to  D  F: 
whofe  one  end  let  be  at  C,and  the  other 
let  be  at  B.  Fro  B  to  A  draw  a  right  line. 

By  the  30.  of  the  third it  may  appeare, 
that  A  B  C  is  a  right  angle:  and  thereby 
AB  C,the  triangle  is  redangled :  wher- 
fore  by  the  firft  of  the  two  corollaries, 
here  before,the  circle  A  B  C  is  equall  to 
the  circle  D  E  F,  (For  B  C  by  conftrudfi- 
on  is  equall  to  D  F  )  and  more  ouer  to 
the  circle  whofe  diameter  is  A  B  .That 
circle  therefore  whofe  diameter  is  A  B, 
is  the  circle  conteyning  the  magnitude,by  which  A  B  C  is  greater  then  D  E  F.Wherefbre  wo  vnequal 
circles  being  geuen,we  haue  found  a  circle  equall  to  the  exceffe  of  th  e  greater  to  the  leffe :  which  ought 
to  be  doone.  ® 


A  Probleme.  6. 


Corjlmtm. 


Demott/lr*- 

tmu 


*A  Circle  being  geuen  to  finde  twe  Circles  equall 
to  the  fame :  Vo  hich found  Circles  ,Jha/l  haue  the  one  to 
the  other, any  proportion  geuen  in  two  right  lines. 

Suppofe  A  B  C, ,  a  circle  geuen :  and  the  proportion 
geuen,let  it  be  that,which  is  betwene  the  two*  right  lines 
D  and  E.I  fay ,  that  two  circles  are  to  be  found  equall  to 
ABC  -.and  with  al,one  to  the  ocher,  in  the  proportio  of 
D  to  E .  Let  the  diameter  of  A  B  C  be  A  C.  As  D  is  to  E, 
fo  let  A  C  be  deuided,by  the  lo.of  the  fixth,in  thepoynt 
F.  At  F,to  the  line  A  C  let  a  perpedicular  be  drawne  F  B, 
and  let  it  mete  the  circufereceat  the  poyntB.  From  the 
poyntB  to  the  points  A  and  C,le t  righ  t  lines  be  drawne : 

B  A  and  B  C  .  I  fay  that  the  circles  whofe  diametes  are 
the  lines  B  A  and  B  C  are  equall  to  the  circle  A  B  C :  and 
that  thofe  circles  hauing  to  their  diameters  the  lines  BA  .  ^ 

and  B  C  are  one  t©  the  other  in  the  proportion  of  the  f'~  *  * - 

line  D  to  the  line  E  .  For ,  firft  that  they  are  equal,it  is  e- 


CCc.iij. 


CorfotiUhri* 


widen? 


T be  Welueth  cBoo%e 


s  y 


l\'ote  this  ,, 

well',  fork  ,, 

■is  of  great  „ 

&fe.  „ 


53 

>3 

31 

>3 

>3 

33 

33 

33 


An  other  way 
vf  demon  ft  at  :o 

of  the frsd  pro¬ 
blems  of  this 
addition. 


N  vte  this  pro- 
per tie  of  a  tri¬ 
angle  rectangle. 


Confrucltan, 


iSemenf ra¬ 


ison. 


V 


sklent :  By  reafon  that  A  B  C  is  a  triangle  redangle :  wher 
fore  by  the  47. of  the  firll  the  fquares  of  B  A  and  B  C  are 
equall  to  the  fquare  of  A  C  :  And  fo  by  this  fecond  it  is 
manifell,the  two  circles  to  be  equall  to  the  circle  A  B  C. 

Seco ndiy  as  D  is. to  E,  fo  is  A  F  to  F  C  by  conftrudion . 

And  as  the  line  AT  is  to  the  line  T  C  ,fo  is  the  fpttare  of  the  lint 
S  A  to  the  fquare  of  the  Ime  B  C  .  [  Which  thing.  We  will 
briefely.  prone  thus  .  .The  parallelogramme  contayned  . 
v  n der  A  C  an  d  A  F,is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  B  A :  by  the  A 
Lemma  after  the  31  .of  the  tenth  booker  and  by  the  fame 
Lemma  or  Alfompt,the  parallelogramme  contayned  vn- 
der  A  C  and  F  C,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  C. 

Wherfore  as  the  firll  parallelogramme  hath  it  felfe  to  the 
fecond :  fo  hath  the  fquare  of  B  A  (  equall  to  the  firll  pa- 
rallelogramme)it  felfe, to  the  fquare  ofB  C,equall  to  the 
fecond  parallelogramme .  But  both  the  parallelogramcs 
haue  oneheigth,  namely,the  line  A  C  :  and  bafes  sthe 
lines  A  F and  F  C  :  wherefore  as  A  F  is  to  F  C  s  fo  is  the 

parallelogramme  contayned  vnderA  C ,  A  F ,  to  theparallelogramme  contayned  vnder A  C  ,  F C,by 
the  firll  ofthe  fixth.  And  therefore  as  A  Fis  toFC,fo  is  the  fquare  of  B  A  to  the  fquare  of  BC  .  ]  And 
as  the  Iquare  of  B  A  is  to  the  fquare  of  B  C:fo  is  the  circle  whofe  diameter  is  B  A,to  the  circle  whofe 
diameter  is  B  C,by  this  fecond  of  the  twelfth.  Wherefore  the  circle  whofe  diameter  is  B  A,is  to  the 
circle  whofe  diameter  is  B  C  ,asDistoE  .  And  before  we  prouedthem  equall  to  the  circle  ABC. 
Wherefore  a  circle  being  geuen ,  we  haue  found  two  circles  equall  to  the  fame  :  which  haue  the  one 
to  the  other  any  proportion  geuen  in  two  right  lines.  Which  ought  to  be  done. 

“Note. 

Here  may  you  perceiuean  other  way  how  to  execute  my  firll  probleme,  for  if  you  make  a  right  an¬ 
gle  conteyned  of  the  diameters  geue,  as  in  this  figure  fuppole  them  B  A  and  B  C:  and  thenfubtend  the 
right  angle  with  the  line  A  C:and  from  the  right  angle,  let  fall  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  bafe  AC: 
that  perpendicular  at  the  point  of  his  fall,deuideth  A  C  into  A  F  and  FC,of  the  proportion  required. 

^ A  Corollary. 

It  follow  eth  oftbinges  manifeftly  proued  in  the  demonfiratien  of  this  problems,  that  in  a  trian¬ 
gle  re£langle,iffrcm  the  right  angle  to  the  bafe ,  a  perpendicular  be  let  fall :  the fame  perpendicular 
cutmh  the  bafe  into  two  partes,  in  that  proportion ,  one  to  the  other,  that  the, fquares  of  the  right 
lines,  conteyning  the  right  angle, are  in, one  to  the  other:  thofeon  the  one fide  the  perpendicular ,  being 
compared  to  thofe  on  the  ot  berjs  oth  fquare  and  fegment .  * 

if-  A  Probleme  7 . 

Betwene  two  circles  geuen, to finde  a  circle  middell  proportionally 

Let  the  two  circles  geuen,be 
A  C  D  and  B  E  Ft  1  lay,thata  cir¬ 
cle  is  to  be  foudjwhich  betwene 
A  C  D  and  B  E  F  is  middell  pro¬ 
portionall  .  Let  the  diameter  of 
A  C  D,  be  A  D,and  of  B  E  F ,  let 
B  F  be  the  diameter: betwene  A-'B 
D  and  B  F  ,  finde  a  line  middell 
proportionall ,  by  the  13. of  the 
fixth:  which  let  be  H  K:I lay  that 
a  circle, whofe  diameter  is  HK  is 
middell  proportionall  betwene 
A  CD  and  B  EF.To  AD,HK, 
and  B  F,(three  right  lines  in  con 
tinuall  proportion  ,  by  conilruc- 
tion)  let  a  fourth  line  be  found: 
to  which  B  F  lhal  haue  that  pro¬ 
portion  ,  that  A  D  hath  to  H  K: 
by  the  iz.of  the  fixth,  &  let  that 
line  be  L  .  It  ismanifeft  that  the 
fower  lines  A  D  ,  H  /(_,  B  T,  and  L, 
are  in  continual! proportion,  £  For 
by  collrndlion,  as  A  D  is-to  H  K, 
fo  is  B  F  to  L.  And  by  conilrudii- 

m 


o/Suclides  Elementes . 

on,as  A  D  is  to  H  K,  fo  is  H  K  to  B  F ;  wherefore  H  K  is  to  B  F,as'£  F  is  to  1 :  by  the  i  r.of  the  fifth, wher- 
fbre  the  4  .lines  are  in  continuall  proportion.]  Wherefore  as  the  firft  is  to  the  third,  that  is  AD  toB  F, 
fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  firft  to  the  fquare  of  the  fecond:  tliafis,the  fquare  of  A  D,to  the  fquare  of  H  K  :  by 
the  corollary  of  the  ao.of  the  fixth.  And  by.the  fame  corollary ,  as  HK  is  to  L ,  fo  is  thefqiiareofH  K  to 
the  fquare  ofBF.Butby  alternate  proportion,  the  line  AD  is  toB  F,as  H  Kis  to  L:  wherefore  the  fquare 
of  A  D  is  to  the  fquare  of  H  K, as  the  fquare  ofH  Kis  to  the  fquare  of  B  F.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  H  Ki 
is  middell  proportionail,betwene  the  fquare  of  A  D  and  the  fquare  of  B  F.Butas  the  fquares  are  one  to 
the  other, fo  are  the  circles(whofe  diameters  produce  the  fame  fquareslone  to  the  other,by  this  fecod 
of  the  twelfth :  wherfo  re  the  circle  whofe  diameter  is  the  line  H  K,is  middel  proportional, betwene  the 
circles  whofe  diameters  are  the  lines  A  D  and  B  F  .  Wherefore  betwene  two  circles  geuen we  haue' 
found  a  circle  middell  proportionall :  which  was  requifite  to  be  doone. 

cA  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is.  manifest,  three  lines  or  more  Joeing  in  continuall  proportion ,  that  the  circles  halting 
thofe  lines  to  their  diameters*  arealfo  in  continuall  proportion. 

As  of  three,  our  demonftration  hath  already  proued  :  fo  of  fewer,  will  the  proufe  go  forward  •  if 
you  adde  a  fifth  line  in  continuall  proportion  to  the  fower  geuen  :  as  we  did  to  the  three,  addethe 
fourth  namely,  the  line  L.  And  fo,  if  you  haue  6}  by  putting  to  one  more,  the  demonftration  will 
be  eafic  and  plaine  .  And  fo  of  as  many  as  you  will . 

&  A  Probletne.  8. 

To  a  circle  heinggeuen,  to  finde  three  circles  e quail :  Which- three  circles Jhall  he  in  continuall 
proportion ,  in  any  proportion  geuen  betwene  two  right  lines. 

Suppofe  the  circle  geuen  to  be  ABC :  and  the  proportion  geuen  to  be  that  which  is  betwene 
the  lines  X  and  T  .  I  fay,  that  three  circles  are  to  be  geuen,which  three,together,  fhall  be  equall  to  the 
circle  ABC:  and  withall  in  continuall  proportion, in  the  fame  proportion  which  is  betwene  the  right 
lines  Xand  T .  Let  the  diameter  of  A  B  C,  be 
which  let  be  ACDE  .  From  the  point/? 
drawe  a  line,  fufliciently  long  (  any  way, 

*  without  the  fquare  )  :  which  let  be  DO. 

At  the  point  D,  and  from  the  line  D  o,  cut 
aline  equall  to  X:  which  let  be  D  M  .At 
the  point  at,  and  from  the  line  M  o,  cut  a 
line  equal!  to  T :  which  let  be  m  n.  At  the 
point  N,  to  the  two  lines  d  m  and  mn , 
fet  a  third  line  proportionall,  by  the  12..  of 
the  fixt :  which  let  be  N  o  .  From  E  (  one 
of  the  angles  of  the  fquare  ACDE,  next 
to  D  )  draw  a  right  line  to  o ;  making  per- 
fedte  the  triangle  DEO  .  Now  from  (the 
pointes  AfandN,  drawe  lines,  to  the  fide 
D  E,  parallel  to  the  fide  E  o  ;  by  the  31.  of 
the  firft :  which  let  be  M F  and  N  G.Wher- 
fore,  by  the  2.  of  the  fixt,  the  fide  D  _E,is 
proportionally  cut  in  the  pointes  F  and  (7, 
as  D  o  is  cut  in  the  pointes  M  and  N  :  ther- 
fore,  as  D  M  is  to  M  N,  fo  is  D  F  ’to  F  G : 
and  as  MX  is  to  N  O,  fo  is  F  G  to  G  E. 

Wherefore,  feing  j  D  MpM  N,  and  N  o,  are, 
by  conftrudion,continually  proportioned, 
in  the  proportion  of  X  to  T  ;  Solikewife, 
are  DF,F  G, and  G  E,  in  con  tinuall  propor¬ 
tion,  in  the  proportion  of  X  to  T,  by  the 
j  1, of  the  fift .  From  the  pointes  Fand  G,  to 
the  oppofite  fide  A  C,  let  right  lines  be 
drawen  parallel  to  the  other  fides  :  which 
lines,fuppofe  to  be  F  r, and  G  if :  making  thereby,  three  parallelogrammes  D 1,  F  I(_,  and  G  c,  equall  to 
the  whole  fquare  AC  D  E.  Which  three  parallelogram  m  es,by  the  firft  of  the  fixt,  are  one  to  an  other, 
as  their  bafes,  D  F,F  G,  and  GE,  are  .  But/?  F,  FG,  and  <7 E,  were  proued  to  be  in  continuall  propor¬ 
tion,  in  disproportion  of  Xto  r Wherefore,  the  three  parallelogrammes  D  i,\F  it,  and  G  C,  by  the 
1 1. of  the  firth  j  are  alfoin  continuall  proportion^  and  in  the  fame3  which  JFis  in3  to  T .  Let  three  fquares 
be  made.equall  to  the  three  parallelogrammes  D/,FIC  and  C7C;  by  the  laft  of  the  fecond  :  Let  the 
lides  of  thofe  fquares  be^  orderly 5  s}  T3  and  F  •  Forafmuch  as5  it  was  laft  concluded  that  the  three  paral- 

CCc.iiij .  ielogram  mes. 


Fol*i6i» 


*  Though  ifitjg 
without  the 
fquare ,j  et  jot* 
mujl  thinhe* 
that  it  maj  be 
alfo  withm  the 
fquare:  that 

diuerfj ,  JVher- 
fore  this  Vro- 
bleme  may  haue 
diuerfe  cafes  fo, 
but  briefly  ,to  a~ 
9oyde  all, may 
thus  be  faid:cut 
any  fide  of  that 
fquare  into  3 . 
farts, in  the  fro 
fortiori  of X  to 

r. 

Note  the  maner 
of  the  drift  in 
this  demonfira - 
tionandcon- 
fi ruFlifin,mixt- 
ly:  and  with  no 
determination 
to  the  con  ff rue - 
t so  las  cornmoly 
ts  in  froblemesi 
which  is  here  of 
mefo  §  fed, for 
an  example  to 
young fludetet 
of  Variety  m 
art. 


T 


%.:W 


\  •  i 


Detnonflra* 
tion . 

\aMv\v.  ,.  '■ 

*AVA'  \"  ■ 


T he  twelueth  ®  00^ 

lei  bgrammes,  £>  4  f  and  C7C  (which  are  equall  to  the  fquare  ACDE  )  are  alfo  in  continuall  pro¬ 
portion,  in  the  proportion  ofXto  T,  therefore  their  equalls,  namely,  the  three  fquares  of  S,  T,  &  v, 
are  alfo  equall  to  the  whole  fquare  AC  DE,  and  in  continuall  proportion,  in  the  proportion  of X to  T. 
Wherefore  the  three  circles,whofe  diameters  are  s,  T,  and  F,  are  equall  to  the  circle,  whofe  diameter 
js  AC,  the  fide  of  the  fquare  A  C  D  E,  and  alfo  in  continuall  proportion,^  the  proportion  ofxto  T:  by 
jthisfecondof  the  twelfth  .  But,  byconfiru61ion,^C  is  the  diameter  of  the  circle  ABC  .  Wherefore 
We  haue  found  three  circles,  equall  to  ABC:  namely,  the  circle,  whofe  diameter  is  s ?  and  the  circle, 
whofe  diameter  is  T ;  and  the  circle,  whofe  diameter  is  V~.  which  three  cirdes,alfo,  are  in  continuall 
proportion,  in  the  proportion  of  j:  to  T .  Wherefore  to  a  circle  being  geucn,we  haue  found  three  cir¬ 
cles  equall  in  any  proportion,geuen,bctwene  two  right  lines  :  which  was  requisite  to  be  done. 


o<f  Corollary, 


Hereby,  it  is  euident,  that  a  circle  geuen,  We  may  finde  circles  4,  6, 10,  20,  loo,  1 000, 

or  hove  many  footer  Jhall  be  appointed,  being  in  continuall  proportion,  in  any  proportion, geuen  betwene 

two  right  lines :  which  circles,  all  together,  fall  be  equall  to  the  circle  geuen. 

•  L  “ 


.  .  .  '  t  ‘ 

For,  etiermpredeuiding  the  one  fide  ofthe  chiefe  fquare  (which  is  made  ofthe  diameter  of  the 
circle  geuen)  into  fo  many  partes, as  circles  are  to  be  made:  fo  that  betwene  thofe  partes  be  continued 
the  proportion  geuen  betwenp  two  right  lines  •  and  from  the  pointes  of  thofe  diuifions,  drawe  paral¬ 
lels,  perpendiculars  to  the  other  fide  ofthe  faidchiefe  fquare  :  making  fo  many  parallelogrammes  of 
the  chiefe  fquare,  as  are  circles  to  be  made  :  and  to  thofe  parallelogrammes  (  orderly  )  making  equal! 
fquares-.  it  is  mariifeil:  that  the  iides  of  thofe  fquares,  arc  the  diameters  of  the  circles  required  to  be 
made .  .  w  '  rf 


#  AProbleme.  p. 


Three  circles  being  geuen,  to  finde  three  equall  to  them:  which  three  found  circles JhaU  be  in  con ~ 
timtall  proportion,  in  any  proportion  geuen  betwene  two  right  lines. 


Suppofe  the  three  circles 
geuen  to  be  A,B, and  c,  and 
let  the  proportion  geuen,  be 
that  which  is  betwene  the 
right  lines  X$c  r.  I  fay,  three 
other  circles  are  to  be  found, 
equall  to  A,B,  and  C,  &  with 
all,  in  continuall  proportion, 
tx\  the  proportion  of  X  to  T. 
By  the  i.  Corollary  of  my  4. 
Probleme,make  one  circle  e- 
quallto  the  three  circles  A,B, 
and  C.  Which  one  circle  fup- 
pofeto  be  D  -.  And  by  the  pro- 
bleme  next  before ,  let  three 
circles  be  found,  equall  to  D, 
and  with  all,  in  cotinuall  pro¬ 
portion,  in  the  fame  propor¬ 
tion  which  is  betwene  X  and 
r.  Which  three  circles,  fup- 
pofe  to  be  e,F,  and  G.  I  fay, 
that  E,F,G,  are  equall  to  A,B , 
C :  and  with  all,  in  continuall 
proportion, in  theproportio 
of  Xto  r.  For,by  coftru&ion, 
the  circle  D  is  equall  to  the 
circles  andby con- 

ftru£Hon  likewife,  the  circles 
Es  F,  and  G,  are  equall  to  the 
fame  circle  D  :  Wherfore  the 
three  circles  E,  F,  &  G,  are  e- 
quall  to  the  three  circles  A,B, 
&  C.-and  by  conftrudlion  E,F, 

and 


x  y 


o/Suclides  Elementes* 


and  G,  are  in  continual!  proportions  in  the  proportion  of  the  line  X  to  the  iine  T.  Wherefore  e,  T,  and 
<7,are  equal!  to  A,  B,  and  C  :  and  in  continuall  proportion,  in  the  proportion  of  X  to  T\  Three  circles, 
therefore, being  geuen,  wehaue  found  three  circles,equall  to  them,and  alio  in  continual!  proportion, 
in  any  proportion  geuen,  betwene  two  right  lines .  Which  was  requifire  to  be  done. 


«||  A  Corollary,  i. 


It  ishereby  very  manifest,  that  vnto  4.5 .6.10.20.  100.  or  how  many  circles  faeuer,  fall  hi 
geuen ,We  may  fivde  3 .4.5.8. 10 .  or  how  many  foeuer,  jhali  be  appointed :  Which, all  together, Jhali  be 
e<j  stall  to  the  circles  geuen,  how  many  foeuer  they  are  :  and  With  all, our  found  circles, to  be  in  continue 
all  proportion, in  any  proportion  ajjigned  betwene  two  right  lines  geuen. 

For,  euermore,  by  the  Corollary  ofthe4.Probleme,  reduce  all  your  circles  to  one  :  and  by  the  Co* 
rollary  ofmyS.Probleme,  make  as  many  circles  as  you  are  appointed,  equallto  the  circles  geuen,  and 
continuallinproportion,ih  the  fame,wherein,the  two  right  lines  geuen, are  *.  Andfohaue  you  perfor¬ 
med,  the  thing  required. 

Notts. 

What  incredible  fruitein  the  Science  ofproportions  may  hereby  grow,  no  mans  tounge  can  fuffi- 
ciently  exprefle  •  And  fory  I  am, that  vtterly  leyfurc  is  taken  from  me,  fomewhat  to  fpecifie  in  particu¬ 
lar  hereof. 

^  The  key  of  one  of  the  chief e  treafure  houjes,  belonging  to  the  State 

zTi'I  athematicalL 


T*  Hat,which  in  thefe  9 .Problemes,is  laid  ofcircles,  is  much  more  iayd  of  fquares,by  whofe  meanes, 
circles,are  thus  handled  .  And  therefore  feing  to  all  Polygonon  right  lined  figures,equall  fquares 
may  be  made, by  thelail  of  the  fecond:and  contrariwife,to  any  fquare,a  right  lined  figure  may  be  made 
equall,  and  withall,  like  to  any  right  lined  figure  geuen ,  by  the  if  .of  the  fixt .  And  fourthly,  feing  vpon 
the  faid  plaine  figures,as  vpo  bafes,may  Prifmes, Paralkiipipedons,Pyramids,fided  Columnes, Cones, 
and  Cylindersjbe  reared  :  which  being  *  all cf one  height,  fhall  haue  that  proportion, one  to  the  o- 
ther,  that  their  bafes  haue,  one  to  the  other .  And  fiftly ,  feing  Spheres,  Cones, and  Cylinders  are  one 
to  other  in  certaine  knowen  proportions:  and  fo  may  be  made,  one  to  the  other  in  any  proportion  af- 
figned .  Andfixtly,feing  vnder  euery  one  of  the  kindes  of  figures,  both  plaine,and  folide,  infinite  cafes 
may  chaunce,  by  theayde  of  thefe  Probleroes,to  be  foluted  and  executed  :  How  infinite  ( then  )  vpon 
infinite,  is  the  number  of  pradlifes,  either  Math emati call,  or  Meehan  icall,  to  be  performed ,  ofcompa- 
rifons  betwene  diuers  kindes,of  plaines  to  plaines,  and  folides  to  folides? 

Farthermore,to  fpeake  of  playne  fuperficiall  figures,in  refpedt  of  the  contet,or  Area  of  the  circle, 
fundry  mixt  line  figures,  Anular  and  Lunular  figures  :  and  aifo  of  circles  to  be  geuen  equall  to  the  iayd 
vnufed  figurestand  in  all  proportions  els  :  and  euermore  thinking  of  folides,  (like  high)  let  vpon  a- 
ny  of  thofe  vnufed  figures, (O  Lord)in  cofideration  ofal  the  premiiTes,how  infinite,  how  ftraunge  and 
incredible  Speculations  and  pradlifes,  may  (by  theayde'and  diredtion  of  thefe  few  problcmes),  fall  redx* 
ly  into  the  imaginations  and  handes  of  them,  that  will  bring  their  minde  and  intent  wholy  and  fixedly 
to  fuch  mathematicall  difeourfes?  In  thefe  Elementes ,  I  entend  but  to  geue  to  young  beginners  fome 
lighr,aide,and  courage  to  exercife  their  owne  witts,and  talent,  in  this  moll  pleafant  and  profitable  fei- 
ence.All  thinges  may  not,neither  yet  can ,  in  euery  place  be  iayd  .  Ogportunitie,  a»dSuffcie»cj,heJl  are 
to  be  allowed. 


f  The  3.  Theorems.  The  s.Eropofetion. 

Euery  Tyramis  hewing  a  triangle  to  his  bafe:  may  be  deuided  into  two  Ty* 
ramids  equall  and  like  the  one  to  the  other ,  and  alfo  like  to  the  "Whole,  ha • 
ning  alfo  triangles  to  their  bafes,  and  into  two  equall  prifmes:  and  thofe 
two prifmes  are greater  then  the  halfe  of the  "Whole  Eyr amis. 


Fppofethat  there  be  a  Pyramis,  whofe  bafelet  be  the  triangle  ABC ,  and  his 
toppe  the  point  D  .  T hen  I fay,  that  the  Tyramis  ABC  D  maybedeuided  into 
two  Pyramids  equall  and  like  the  one  to  the  other ,  and  alfo  like  to  the  whole, ha- 
uing  alfo  triangles  to  their  bafes,  and  into  two  equall  prifmes ,  and  thofe  two 

prifmes 


1* 

X* 

3.‘ 

4 

*  Note  and 
5.  remember 
one  heith  in 
6 ♦  thejefo ■» 
lids. 


7 . 


8. 


The  ttyelueth  Hooke 


e 

Cvnftmttum  Pr*fmes  angreater  then  the  halfe  of  the  whole  Pyramis .  Deuide  (by  the  10.  ofthefrf )  the 
lines  AB,BC,C  A,AD,BD,eftCD,intotwoequallpartesinthefiointesE,E,G,H,K,and 
L .  And  dram  theft  right  lines  E  H,E  G,G  H,H  K,  K  L,  LH,E  K,K  F,  and  F  G.  Now 
Demonttfati-  for af much  as  the  line  <^AE  is  equall  to  the  line 
of  she  fir (l  E  B ,  and  the  line  A  H  to  the  line  HD;  then  fore 
partinamely^  (by  the  2. of  the fixt )  the  line  EH  is  a  parallel  to 

white  P  ra  ^  ^  ®  S  ‘  ^  fam  nafm>  ^ye  &nt 

midsisdmi-  ^  H  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  A  B  :  Wherefore 

ded  into  tm  H  E  K  B  is  a  parallelogram-ms  .  Wherefore  the 

Pyramis  e-  line  H  K  is  equall  to  the  line  E  B  .  But  the  line 

quail  and  like  E  B  is  equall  to  the  line  A  E :  Wherefore  the  line 

the  one  to  the  j£js  equall  to  the  line  H IC .  And  the  line  A  H 

re  tke’whole  **  ecluad t0  the  line  H  D  .  Now  therfore  there  are 
&  hauir.g  tri  tm  ^nes  ^  ^  An^  H  H,  equall  to  two  lines  K  H 
angles  to  their  a#d  HD,  the  one  to  the  other ,  and  the  angle 
hafts*  E  AH  is  (by  the  2  p  .ofthefrjl )  equall  to  the  an¬ 

gle  K  H  D;  Wherefore  (by  the  4.  of  the  frit )  the 
baft  EH  is  equall  to  the  baft  K  D  .  Wherefore  the  triangle  A  E  H,is  equall  and  like  to  the 
triangle  HKD .  And  by  the fame  reaf on  alfo  the  triangle  AH  G ,  is  equall  and  like  to  the 
triangle  H  LD  .  And  forafmuch  as  two  right  lines  E  H  eft  HG  touching  the  one  the  other, 
are parallels  to  two  right  Imcs  K  D  and  D  L  touching  alft  the  one  the  other ,  and  not  being 
in  one  and  the ftlfe fame  plaine fuperfcies  with  the  two frfl :  thofe  lines  (by  the  to. of the  ele¬ 
uenth)  c ontaine  equall  angles .  Wherefore  the  angle  EHG  is  equall  to  the  angle  K  D  L.  And 
forafmuch  as  two  right  lines  E  Hand  H  G,are  equallto  two  right  lines  K  D  eft  D  L,the  one 
to  the  other,  and  the  angle  EHG  is  (  by  the  to. of the  eleuenth  )  equall  to  the  angle  K  D  L, 
therefore  (by  the  4.  of  the  frfl )  the  baft  EG  is  equall  to  the  baft  L  K .  Wherefore  the  trian¬ 
gle  EHG  is  equall  and  like  to  the  triangle  K  D  L .  And  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  triangle 
AEG  is  equall  and  like  to  the  triangle  H  K  L .  Wherefore  the  Pyramis, whoft  baft  is  the  tri¬ 
angle  AEG,  and  toppe  the  point  H,  is  equall  and  like  to  the  Pyramis, whofte  baft  is  the  trian¬ 
gle  H  K  L,and  toppe  the  point  D . 

And forafmuch  as  to  one  of  the fldes  of  the  triangle  0/  D  B,  namely, to  the fide  A  B,is 

drawen  a  parallel  line  H  K,  therefore  the  whole  triangle  AfiD  B  isequiangle  to  the  triangle 

DHK ,  and  their fidesUre  proportionall  (  by  the  Corollary  of  the  2. of  the  fixt )  .  Wherefore 

the  triangle  A  D  Bis  like  to  the  triangle  DHK.  And  by  the fame  reafon  alfo  the  triangle 

DBCis  like  to  the  triangle  D  K  L,  and  the  triangle  AD  Cto  the  triangle  DHL.  i^And 

forafmuch  as  two  right  lines  BA  and  AC  touching  the  one  the  other, are  parallels  to  two 

right  lines  K  H  and  H  L,  touching  alfo  the  one  the  other,  but  not  being  in  one  and  the  ftlfe 

fame  fuperficies  with  the  twofrfi  lines,  therefore  (by  the  10. of  the  eleuenth )  they  c ontaine  e- 

quall  angles .  Wherefore  the  angle  B  AC  is  equall  to  the  angle  KHL .  And  as  the  line  B  A 

is  to  the  line  A  C,fo  is  the  line  K  H  to  the  line  H  L .  Wherefore  the  triangle  ABC  is  like  to 

the  triangle  K  H  L.Wherfore  the  whole  Pyramis  whoft  baft  is  the  triangle  ABC  eft  top  the 

point  D  ,  is  like  to  the  pyramis  whofte  baft  is  the  triangle  H  K  L,  and  toppe  the point D  .  But 

the  pry  amis  whoft  baft  is  the  triangle  H  K  L  and  toppe  the  point  Dfisproued  to  be  like  to  the 

pyramis  whofte  baft  is  the  triangle  AEG  and  toppe  the  poynt  H .  Wherefore  alfo  the  pyramis 

whoft  baft  is  the  triangle  A  B  C,and  toppe  the  poynt  D  ,is  like  to  the  pyramis  whofte  bafe  is  the 

The  tonclufi-  triangle  AEG  and  toppe  the  poynt  H  (by  the  21. of the fixth )  .  Wherefore  either  of  theft  py- 

cn  of  the  fir  ft  ramids  A  EG  H  and  H  K  LD  is  like  to  the  whole  pyramis  A  B  CD. 
part.* 

Demonflratio  [And  forafmuch  as  the  lines  B  E,  K  H,are  parallel  lines  and  equall,  as  it  hath  bene  proued ,  there¬ 

by  the  f  econd  fore  the  right  lines  B  K  and  E  H,  which  ioyne  them  together,  are  equall  and  parallels,  by  the-  33  .of  the 
bart  namely  ^  •  Againe  forafmuch  as  the  lines  B  E  and  F  G  are  parallel  lines  and  equall,  therefore  the  lines  E  G 
'  '  and 


of8ucMesElementes.  FoL $6%. 

and  E  F,  which  ioyne  them  together,  are  alfo  equall  and  parallels :  and  by  the  fame  reafon  forafnnich 
as  the  lines  F  Gand  K  Hare  equall  parallels,  the  lines  F  K  and  GjH,which  ioyne  them  together,afe  alfo 
equall  parallels.  W  herefore  BEH  K,  B  E  G  F,  and  K  H  G  F,  areparaMogramm  es .  And  forafmuch  as 
their  oppofitefides  are  equall,  by  the  34. of  thefirft  therefore  the  triangles  E  H  G,  8cB  K  F,are  equi- 
angle,by  the  8.  of  the  firft :  and  therefore,  by  the  q.of  the  fame;  they  are  equall  :  and  itiorebuefjbythe 
if  .of  the  eleuenth,  their  fuperficiecesare  parallels..  Wherefore  the  folide  BKFEHGis  a  Prifrbe,'  by 
the  1 1. definition  of  the  eleuenth  .  Likewife  forafmuch  as  thefides  of  the  triangle  H  K  L  are  equall  and 
parallels  to  the  fidesofthe  triangle  GFC,  as  it  hath  before  bene  proued  *.  It  is  manifdl,  that  C  FKL, 
F  K  H  G,  and  C  L  H  G,  are  parallelogram  mes,  by  the  33 .  of  the  firft .  Wherefore  the  whole  folide  K  L- 
HFCG  ,  is  a  Prifme,by  the  11.  definition  of  the  eleuenth,  and  is  contayned  vnder  the  fayd  paralleio- 
grammes  CFKL,FKHG,  and  C  L  H  G,  and  the  two  triangles  H  K  L  and  GFC,  which  are  oppofite 
and  parallels.] 

And forafinuch  as  the  line  B  F  is  equall  to  the  line  F  C,  therefore  (by  the  41.  of  the 
firtt  )  the  farallelogramme  E  B  F  G  is  double  to  the  triangle  GFC.  And  forafmuch  as  if 
there  be  two  Prifmes  of  equall  altitudes,  and  the  one  haue  to  his  bafe  a  farallelogramme, and 
the  other  a  triangle,  and  if  the  farallelogramme  be  double  to  the  triangle,  thofe  Prifmes  are 
{by  the  40. of  the  eleuenth  )  equall  the  one  to  the  other  :  therefore  the  Prifine  contained  vn¬ 
der  the  two  triangles  B  I(  F  and  FUG,  and  vnder  the  three  parallelogrammes  E  B  F  G, 
FBK  IP,  and  K  H  F  G,  is  equall  to  the  Prifme  contained  vnder  the  two  triangles  G  F  C, 
and  HK  L,  and  vnder  the  three  parallelogrammes  K  F  C  L,  L  C  G II,  and  II K  F  G. 

And  it  is  manif 'efi,  that  both  thefe  Prifmes,  of which  the  bafe  of  one  is  the  farallelo¬ 
gramme  EB  F  G,  and  the  offofite  vnto  it  the  line  K  H,  and  the  bafe  of  the  other  is  the  tri¬ 
angle  GFC,  and  the  offofite fde  vnto  it  the  triangle  I<  LH,  are  greater  then  both  thefe 
Pyramids,  whofe  bafes  are  the  triangles  AGE,  and  U  if  L,  and  toffes  thefomtes  U  &  D . 
For  if we  draw  ethefie  right  lines  E  F  and  E  K,  the  Prifme whofe  bafe  is  the  farallelogramme 
EBF G,  and  the  offofite  vnto  it  the  right  line  H  if,  is  greater  then  the  Pyramis  whofe  bafe 
is  the  triangle  E  B  F,&  toffe  the foint  if.  But  the  Pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  E  B  F, 
and  toffe  the  foint  if,  is  equall  to  the  Pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  AEG  and  toffe  the 
foint  H,  for  they  are  c  ontained  vnder  equall  and  like  plainefuperficieces.  Wherefore  alfo  the 
Prifme  whofe  bafe  is  the  farallelogramme  EB  F  G  and  the  offofite  vnto  it  the  right  line 
H  K, is  greater  then  the  Pyramis,  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  A  E  G,and  toffe  the  foint  II.  But 
the  frifime  whofe  bafe  is  the  fdrallctogramme  EBF  G,and  the  offofite  vnto  it  the  right  line 
H  K,  is  equall  to  the  frifime, whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  G  F  C,and  the  offofite fide  vnto  it  the 
triangle  HK  L:  And  the  Pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  A  E  G,and  toffe  the  foint  H, 
is  equallto  the  Pyramis, whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  H  K  L, and  toffe  the foint  D.  Wherefore 
theforefiaid  two  frifimes  are  greater  then  theforefiaid  two  Pyramids,  whofe  bafes  are  the  tri¬ 
angles  AEG ,  H  K  L ,  and  toffes  the  fointes  H  and  D  .  Wherefore  the  whole  Pyramis 
whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  ABC,  and  toffe  the  foint  I),  is  deuided  into  two  Pyramids  equall 
and  like  the  one  to  the  other,  and  like  alfo  vnto  the  whole  Pyramis,  hauing  alfo  tnanyles  to 
their  bafes,  and  into  two  equall  frifimes,  and  the  two  frifimes  are  greater  "then  halfe  "of  the 
whole  Pyramis :  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated.. 

If  ye  will  with  diligence  reade  thefe  fower  bookes  following  of  Euclide,  which  concerne  body  es 
and  clearely  fee  the  demonftrations  in  them  conteyned,  it  fhall  be  requifitefor  you  when  you  come  to 
any  propofition,which  concerneth  a  body  or  bodies,whether  they  be  regular  or  not,firft  to  deferibe  of 
palled  paper(according  as  I  taughtyou  in  the  end  of  the  definitions  of  the  eleuenth  booke)fuch  a  body 
. or  .dyes, as  are  there  required, and  hauing  your  body ,  or  bodyes  thus  deferibed ,  when  you  haue  no¬ 
ted  it  with  letters  according  to  the  figure  fet  forth  vpo  a  plaine  in  the  propofitio,follow  the  conflrufti- 
on  required  in  thepropofition.As  for  example,in  this  third  propofitio  it  is  fayd  that,  Euery  oyrawis  !,*- 

tr,™fiet0  h,s  be  deuided  into  two  pyramids.  &c  .Here  firft  deferibe  a  pyramis  ofpafted  paper 

haning  his  bafe  triangled(it  fkilleth  not  whether  it  be  equilater,or  equiangled,or  not,only  in  this  pro¬ 
pofition  is  required  that  the  bafe  be  a  triangle .  Then  for  that  the  propofition  fuppofeth  the  bafe  of  the 
pyramis  to  be  tne  triangle  a  b  c,note  the  bafe  ofyour  pyramis  which  you  haue  deferibed  with  thelet- 
ters  a  b  c,and  the  tqppe  ofyour  pyramis  with  the  letter  d  :  For  fo  is  required  in  the  propofition  .  And 
thus  haue  you  your  body  ordered  ready  to  the  conftrudion.Now  in  the  conftru&ion  it  is  required  that 
ye  deuide  the  lines,  a  b  ,e  c,c  A.&c,namely,the  fixe  lines  which  are  thefids  of  the  fower  tf  jangles  con- 

tayning 


that  it  is  deui¬ 
ded  moreouer 
into  two  equal 
Prifmes. 


Conclufion  of 
the  ft cond  . 
part, 

Vemonfl  ratio 
of  the  lafi  prat 
that  the  ifio 
Prifmes  are 
greater  then 
the  halfe  of 
the  ivhole  Py¬ 
ramis. 


Conclufion  of 
the  lafi  part* 

Conclufion  of 
the  whale 
propofition . 


7 he  Weluetb  ^Boo^e 

taypingthe  piramis,  into  two  equall  partes  in  thepoynteti,  t,  g,  &c  .  Thatis,ye  mult  deuide  the  line 
a  b  or  your  pyramis  into  two  equall  partes,and  note  the  poynt  of  the  deuifion' with  the  letter  e  ,  and  fo 
the  line  2  c  being  demded  into  two  equall  paites,notc  the  poynt  of  the  deuifion  with  the  letter  f.  And 
w  the  reft,and  this  order  follow  ye  as  touching  the  reft  of  the  conftrudlion  there  put,and  when  ye  haue 
mined  the  conuru£tion,compareyour  body  thus  defcribed  with  the  demonftration:  and  it  will  make 
,  YW&W*  and  cafy  to  be  vnderfiaded  .  Whereas  without  fuch  a  body  deicribed  of  matter^it  is  hard 


for  young  beginriers(vnlefie  they  haue  a  very  deepe  imagination)fully  to  conceaue  the  demonftration 
by  the  figueas  it  is  defcribed  in  a  plaine.Here  for  the  better  declaration  of  that  which  I  haue  fay d, haue 
X  let  a  figure, whofe  forme  ifye  defcribe  vpon  palled  paper  noted  with  the  like  letters,and  cut  the  lines 
b  a,d  a  ,p  c,and  folde  it  accordingly ,  it  will  make  a  Pyramis  defcribed  according  to  the  confirmation 
requiredin  thepropofition  .  And  tliis  order  follow  ye  as  touching  all  other  propofitions  which  con- 
cernebodyes.  •  '■  '*■ 

^  ,  .  .  j  1  -  '•  .  r-  *-*•**'-  .  <  A  5- C.  A.  A  »  '  *  ^ 

5F  An  other  demonftration  after  Campane  of  the  j.propofition. 

v.  ‘  ‘*v  •  ,  i  V..I  l".1. •  Vv.  '  \  \  V  !•••'•  ’• 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  Pyramis  ABC  £>  hauing  to  his  bafe  the  triangle  BCD,  and  let  his  roppe 
be  the  folideangle-cfrom  which  let  there  be  drawne  three  fubtended  lines  A  B,  AC,  and  AD  to  the 
three  angles  of  the  bafe,  and  deuide  all  the  fides  of  the  bafe  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  three  poyntes 
E,F,G :  deuide  alfo  the  three  fubteded  lines  A  B,AC,  and  AD  in  two  equall  partes  in  the  three  points 
#X>£-Anddrawinthe  bafethefe  two  lines  EF and  EC: 

So  ihall  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis  be  deuided  into  three  fu- 
perficieces :  Whereof  two  are  the  two  triangles  B  E  F,  and 
E  G  D, which  are  like  both  the  one  to  the  other,and  alfo  to 
the  whole  bafe,by  the  2  part  of  the  fecod  of  the  fixth,&  by 
the  definitio  oflike  fuperficieces,&  they  are  equal  the  one 
to  the  other,by  the  8 .of  the  firft :  the  third  fuperficies  is  a 
quadrangled  paralleIogramme,namely,  EF  GC  :  which  is 
double  to  the  triangle  E  G  Z>,bythe4o.  and  41 .  of  the  firil. 

Now  then  agayne  from  the  poynt  H  draw  vnto  the  points 
E  and  F  thefe  two  fubtendent  lines  H  E  and  h  F:  draw  alfo 
a  fubtended  line  from  the  poynt /C  to  the  poynt  G  .  And 
draw  thefe  lines  H  and  L  H.  Wherefore  the  whole 
pyramis  A  B  CD  is  deuided  into  two  pyramids,  which  are 
H  B  E  F, and  A  H IQL ,  and  into  two  prifmes  of  which  the 
one  is  eh  FG  l{C  s  and  is  fet  vpon  the  quadrangled  bafe 
C  F  G  E:  the  other  is  EG  D  H  K^L,and  hath  to  his  bale  the 
triangle  E  G  D. Now  as  touching  the  two  pyramids  HB  EF 
and  ah  KJ-, that  they  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  and  alfo  that  they  are  like  both  the  one  to  the  0- 
ther  and  alfo  to  the  whole,itis  manife.it  by  the  definition  of  equall  and  like  bodyes,and  by  the  xo.ofthe 
eleuenth.and  by  2  .part  of  the  fecond  of  the  fixth .  And  that  the  two  Prifines  are  equall  it  is  manifelt  by 
the  laitof  the  eleuenth.  And  now  that  both  the  prifmes  taken  together  are  greater  then  thehalfeof  the 
whole  pyramis, hereby  it  is  manifeft  ,  for  that  either  of  them  may  be  deuided  in  to  two  pyramids,  of 
which  cheone  is  a  triangular  pyramis  equall  to  one  of  the  two  pyramids  into  which  together  with  the 
two  prifmes  is  deuided  the  whole  pyramis, and  the  other  is  a  quadrangled  pyramis  double  to  the  other 
pyramis.  Wherefore  it  is  playne  that  Xhe  two  prifmes  taken  together  are  three  quarters  of  the  whole 

pyramis 


ofcucMes  Elementes.  PoL^6^9 

pyramis  denided.But  if  yc  are  defirous  to  know  the  proportio  betwen  them,feade  the  s.cfthis  book£< 
But  now  here  to  this  purpofe  it  ihall  be  fufficient  to  know,  that  the  two  prifmes  taken  together  do  ex- 
ceede  in  quantity  the  two  partial  pyramids  taken  together, in  to  which  together  with  the  two  prifmeS 
the  whole  pyramis  was  deuided. 

ff  T he  4.  Theorems.  ,  The  4-  Tropojttiort. 

If  there  be  two  ^Pyramids  Tender  equall  altitudes }  hauing  triangles  to  their 
bafeSy  and  either  ofthofe  Pyramids  be  deuided  into  two  Pyramids  equal l 
the  one  to  the  other }and  like  Vnto  the  H>hole}  and  into  two  equall  Prijmesy 
and  againe  if  in  either  of the  Pyramids  made  of  the  two  firft  Pyramids  be 
fill  obferued  the fame  order  a?id  maner :  then  as  the  bafe  of  the  one  Pyra* 
mis  is  to  the  bafe  of  the  other  Pyramis }fo  are  all  the  Prifmes  yohich  are  in 
the  one  Pyramis  to  all  the  Prijmes  yohich  are  in  the  other y  being  equall  in 
multitude  loith  them. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  two  Pyramids  vnder  equall  altitudes,  hauing  triangles  1 0 
their  bafes ,  namely ,  A  S  C,  and  DEF,  ana  hauing  to  their  toppes  the  pointeS 
G  and  H.  And  let  either  ofthefe  pyramids  be  diuidedinto  two  pyramids  equall 
the  one  to  the  other, and  like  vnto  the  whole ,and into  two  equall prifmes  ( accor - 
ding  to  the  methode  of  the former  Propoftion  )  .  And  againe ,  let  either  ofthofe  pyramids fo 
made  of the  two  first  pyramids,  be  imagined  tc  be  after  the  fame  order  deuided,and fo  do  con¬ 
tinually  .  Then  1 fay, that  as  the  bafe  ABC  is  to  the  bafeD  E  F,fo  are  all  the  prifmes  which 
are  in  the  pyramis  ABC  G,to  all 
the  prifmes  which  are  in  the  py¬ 
ramis  D  EF H  being  equall  in 
multitude  with  them .  For  for- 
afmuch  as  the  line  B  X  is  equall 
to  the  line  X  C,  and  the  line  A  L 
to  the  line  LC :  (  For  as  We  faw 
in  the  conflruffion  pertayning 
to  the  former  Propoftion,  al  the 
fxefdes  of  the  whole  pyramids , 
areech  deuided  into  two  equall 
parts,  the  like  of  which  conf  ruc¬ 
tion  is  in  this  propoftion  alfo 
fuppofed) ;  therefore  the  line  X- 
L  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  A  B,& 
the  triangle.  A  B  C,  is  like  to  the 
triangle  LXC,  (by  the  Corolla¬ 
ry  of  the  fecond  of  the  fixth): 
and  by  the  fame  reafon  the  tri¬ 
angle  D  EF  is  like  to  the  triangle  R  W  F.And for  afmuch  as  the  line  BC  is  double  to  the  line 
C  X,and  the  line  F  E  to  the  line  F  W:  therefore  as  the  line  BC  is  to  the  line  C  X,fo  is  the  line 
EF  to  the  line  F  W.  And  'upon  the  lines  B  C  and  C  X  are  deferibed  rebliline figures  like  and 
in  like fortfet,  namely, the  triangles  ABC  and  LXC,  and  vpon  the  lines  E  F  and  F  Ware 
alfo  deferibed  retfiline figures, like  and  in  like fort fet, namely, the  triangles  DEF  &BWF 
But  if there  be fower  right  lines  proportio  nail,  the  retfiline  figures  deferibed  of  them  being 
like  md  in  like  fort  fet,  Jhall  alfo  be  proportionall  (  by  the  2 2. of the fixt )  .  Wherefore  as  the 

DDd.L  triangle 


P  U 


7 he  Welueth  Bool^e 

triangle  ABC  is  to  the  triangle  LXC,  fo  is  the  triangle  DEF  to  the  triangle  RWF. 
Wherefore  alternately  (  by  the  1 6. of  the f ft )  as  the  triangle  A  BCis  to  the  triangle  DEF, 
uRU  fo  is  the  triangle  LX  C  to  the  triangle  R  W  F  *  But  as  the  triangle  LX  C  is  to  the  triangle s 
R  W  F,fo  is  the  prifme  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  LX  C,  and  the  oppofte fde  vnto  it  the  tri¬ 
angle  O  M  N,  to  the  prifme  whofe  bafeis  the  triangle  RWF,  and  the  oppofte  fide  'unto  it 
the  triangle  S  TV  (by  the  Cor  ollary  of the  40  .of  the  eleuenth ) .  For  thefe  prifmes  are  'under 
■one  &  the f elf e fame  altitude, namely,  'under  the  half e  of  the  altitude  of the  whole  Pyramids , 
whic h  Pyramids  arefuppofed  to  be  'under  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude :  this  is  alfo proued 
rathe  A jf tempt following  ) .  Wherefore  (by  the  11.  of  the f ft )  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to 
the  triangle  D  E  F ,  fo  is  the  , 
prifme  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle 
L  X  C,  and  the  oppofte fde  in¬ 
to  it  the  triangle  O  -M  N,  to  the 
prifme  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  trian¬ 
gle  RWF,  and  the  oppofte  jide 
unto  it  the  triangle  S  T  V.  And 
forafmuch  ,  as  there  are  two 
mfmes  in  the pyramis  A  B  CG 


equal  the  one  to  the  ether, &  two 
prifmes  alfo  in  the  pyramis  D  E- 
F  He  quail the  one  to  the  other: 
therefore  4s  the  prifme , 
bafeis  the  pardlelograme 
L  X,  and  the  oppofte  fide 
it  the  line  M  O ,  is  to  the  prifme, 
whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  L  X  C, 
and  the  oppofte  fide  unto  it  the 
triangle  O  CM  N  ,  fo  is  the 
prifme,  whofe  bafe  is  the  parallelogramme  PERW,  and  the  oppofte  vnto  it  the  line  ST,  to 
the  prifme,  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  R  W  F,and  the  oppofte fide  vnto  it  the  triangle  ST  V. 
Wh  erf  ore  by  copofition(by  the  sS.of the f ft)  as  the  pri fixes  K  B  XL  MO,&  L  X  CM  N  O, 
are  to  the  prifme  LXCMNO,foare  the  prifmes  PEW  RS  T,  and  RWF  ST  V,  to  the 
prifme  RW  F  ST  V .  Wherefore  alternately  ( by  the  1 6.  of the fft )  as  the  two  prifmes  K  B- 
X  LMO,  and  LX  CM  NO, are  to  the  two  prifmes  P  EWRST,  and  RW  F  ST  V,fois 
theprifme  LX  C  M  N  O  totheprifme  RW  F  ST  V .  but  as  the  prifme  LX  C  M NO  is  to 
the  prifme  RWF  ST V,fo  hone  we  proued  that  the  bafe  LX  C  is  to  the  bafe  R  W F,and  the 
bafe  ABC  to  the  bafe  DEF.  Wherefore  (by  the  16 .  of  the  fft )  as  the  triangle  ABC  is  to 
the  triangle  D  E  F,fo  are  both  the  prifmes  which  are  in  the  pyramis  BCG,  to  both  the 

prifmes  which  are  in  the pyramis  D  E  F  H .  And  in  like  fort  ifwedmde  the  other  pyramids 
after  the  felfe fame  manor,  namely ,  the  pyramis  O  M  N  G,  and  the  pyramis  ST  VH :  as 
the  bafe  O  tJM  %Js  to  the  bafe  S  T  V,fo  fhall  both  the  prifmes  that  are  in  the  pyramis 
O  cM  T(G,  be  to  both  the  prifmes  which  are  in  the  pyramis  ST  VH .  But  as  the  bafe 
€  CM  Tfjsto  the  bafe  S  T  V,fo  is  the  bafe  BC  to  the  bafe  DEF .  Wherefore  (by  the 
ji. of  the  fft )  as  the  bafe  <lABC  is  to  the  bafe  D  E  F,fo  are  the  two  prifmes  that  are  in 
the  pyramis  ABCG,  to  the  two  prifmes  that  are  in  the  pyramis  DEF  H,  and  the  two 
prifmes  that  are  in  the  pyramis  O  M  T{Jj,  to  the  two  prifmes  that  are  in  the  pyramis  ST - 
rifines  to  the fewer  prifmes .  K_And fo  alfo fhall  it followe  in  the  prifmes 
<e  two  pyramids  K  L  O,  and  DP  RS,  and  of  all  the  other pyramids 

email  in  multitude. 

f  An 


VH,  and  the 


A  nd  that  as  the  triangle  L  X  C  is  to  the  triangle  R  W  F,fo  is  the prifme.  whofe  bafe  is 
the  triangle  LXC  and  the  oppofte  fide  O  M  N, to  the  prifme  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  RWF 
and  the  oppofte fide  the  triangle  S  T  V,may  thus  be  pro  tied.  For  in  the  felfe  fame  confirm- 
tion,  imagine perpendicular  lines  to  be  drawne from  the  poyntes  G  and  H  to  the  two  play  ne 
fuperficieces  wherein  are  the  triangles  ABC  and  D  EF.  Flow  thofe  perpendicular  lines  jhail 
be  equal l  the  one  to  the  other, for  that  the  two  pyramids  are fuppofed  to  be  of  equall  altitude. 
\_And  for af much  as  two  right  lines ,  namely ,  G  C,and  the  perpendicular  line  drawne  from 
thepoynt  G,are  deuided  by  two  parallel  play  ne fuperficieces, namely  ,A  B  Cando  M  N,  there¬ 
fore  (by  the  iy.of  the  eleventh)  the  partes  of  the  lines  deuided  are  proportionall .  But  the  line 
GCisby  the  play  ne fuperficies  0  M  N  deuided  into  two  equall partes  in. thepoynt  N.  Where¬ 
fore  alfo  the  perpendicular  line  drawne  from  thepoynt  G  to  the  play  ne fuperficies  wherein  is 
thetnangle  A  B  C, is  deuided  into  two  equall  partes  by  the  fuperficies  0  M  N:&  by  the  fame 
reafon  alfo  the  perpendicular  line  which  is  drawne from  the  poynt  FI  to  the  playne fuperficies 
D  EF  is  deuided  into  two  equall  partes,  by  the  playne  fuperficies  ST  V  .And  the  perpendicu¬ 
lars  drawne  from  the  poyntesG  and  H  to  the  playne f vperficieces  ABC  and  DBF  are  equal. 
Wherefore  alfo  the  perpendicular  lines  which  are  drawne  from  the  triangles  O  At  N  and  S 
T  V  to  the  playne fuperfcieces  ABC  and  D  EF  are  equal  the  one  to  the  other. Wherf ore  alfo 
the  prifmes  whofe  bafies  are  the  triangles  LXC  and  RWF  and  the  oppofte  fides  the  tri¬ 
angles  O  MN  and  ST  V, are  of  equall  altitude .  Wherefore  alfo  the  parallelipipedons  which 
are  defcribed  of the  for  fay  d  prifmes  and  being  equall  in  altitude  with  them, are  the  one  to  the 
other,  as  the  baf :  of  the  one  is  to  the  bafe  of the  other.  Wherefore  alfo  as  the  halfe  of the  babes 
of thofe  parallelipipedons, namely ,  as  the  bafe  LXCis  to  the  bafe  R  WF  ,fo  are  the f or  fay  d 
prifmes  the  one  to  the  other  .3.  jftherfore  there  be  two  pyramis  vnder  equal laltitudes, having 
triangles  to  their  bafes  and  either  of  thofe  pyramids  be  deuided  into  two  pyramids  equall  the 
one  to  the  other  and  like  vnto  the  whole, and  into  two  equall prifmes ,  and  agayne  if in  either 
of  the  pyramids  made  of  the  two  fir (l pyramids  be  fill  obferued  the  fame  order  and  maner; 
then  as  the  bafe  of  the  one pyramis  is  to  the  bafe  of  the  other  piramis,fo  all  the  prifmes  which 
are  in  the  one  pyramis  to  all  the  prifmes  which  are  in  the  other  being  equall  in  multitude: 
which  was  required  to  be  proved. 


An  AjtmpU 


Conclu/ton  of 
the  Whole* 


ft  The  S.  T heoreme.  The  s.  Tropofition. 

(pyramids  confifting  finder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude,  hatting  tri* 
angles  to  their  bafes  :  are  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  that 
their  bafes  are.  •- 

Tppcfe  that  thefe  two  Pyramids, whofe  bafes  are  the  triangles  ABC&D  EF, 

'andtoppes  thepointcs  G  and  H,  be  vnder  equall  altitudes .  T hen  1 fay ,  that  as 
]the  bafe  B  C  is  to  the  bafe  D  E  F,fo  is  the  pyramis  ABCGtothe  pyramis 
\D  EF  H .  For  if  the  pyramis  A  BCG  be  not  to  the  pyramis  D  E  F  H,  as  the 
bafe  ABC  is  to  the  bafe  D  EF ,  then  as  the  bafe  ABC  is  to  the  bafe  D  E  F,fo  is  the  pyra-  Vemnjlrati- 
mis  ABCG  to  a  folide,  either  lejfe  then  the  pyramis  D  F  F  B,  or  greater  .  Firfl  let  it  be  on  leading  to 
to fome  lefie,  and  let  the fame  be  X .  And  (by  the  3.  of  the  twelfth )  let  thepy  ramis  D  E  F  B  an  iyupofSihf 
be  deuided  into  two  pyramids  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  and  like  vnto  the  whole,  and  into  hitie* 
two  equall  prifmes  .T{ow  the  two  prifmes  are  greater  then  the  halfe  of  the  whole  pyramis. 

JDDd.ij.  And 


The  txpeluethcBoo!^e 

Jndagdne  (by  the fame jlet  the 
pyramids  which  are  made  of  the 
Amfionfoem  like  fort  dtuided, 
and  do  this  continually ,  <vntill 
there  remaine  fame  pyramids 
made  of  the  pyramis  D  E  F  H, 
which  are  lefe  then  the  excejfe , 
whereby  the  pyramis  D  E  F  H 
axcedeth  the  foli de  X .  Letfuch 
pyramids  be  taken ,  and  for  ex¬ 
ample  fake, let  thofc  pyramids  be 
DP  R S,cr STVH .  Wherfore 
the  prifmes  remayning  which 
are  in  the  pyramis  DBF  H,  are 
greater  then  the  folide  X .  De- 
uide(  by  the  Prspoftion  next  go¬ 
ing  before  )thc  pyramis  ABC  G 
in  kke  fort,  dr  as  many  times  as 
the  pyramis  DBF  H'is  de  aided. 

Wherefore  (by  the  fame  )  as  the  bafe  BC  is  to  the  bafe 
DE  F,  fo  are  all  the  prifmes  which  are  m  the  pyramis  A  B- 
C  G,  to  ail  the  prifmes  which  are  in  the  pyramis  DEFH. 

But  as  the  bafe  A  B  Cist  o  the  bafe  D  F  F,fo  is  the  pyramis 
A  BCG  to  the  folide  X .  Wherefore  (  by  the  1 1 .  of  the f ft ) 
ns  the  pyramis  A  BCG,  is  to  the  folide  X,  fo  are  the  prifmes 
which  Are  in  the  pyramis  A  BCG,  to  the prifmes  which  are 
in  the  pyramis  D  F  F  H .  Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  1 6. 

§f the  fft )  as  the  pyramis  ABCG  is  to  the  prifmes  which 
an  in  it, f bis  the  folide  X,  to  the  prifmes  which  are  in  the 
pyramis  DEFH.  But  the  pyramis  ABCG  is  greater  then 
the  prifmes  which  an  in  it .  Wherefore  alfo  the  folide  X  is 
greater  then  the  prifmes  which  are  in  the pyramis  D  EF  H  (  by  the  t^.of the fft)  .  But  it  it 
fupptfed  to  be  leffe  ••  which  is  impofible .  Wherefore  as  the  bafe  A  BC  is  to  the  bafe  D  E  Fs 
fo  is  not  thepyramis  ABCG  to  any  folide  left  then  the  pyramis  D  EF  H. 

I  fay  moreouer,  that  as  the  bafe  ABC  is  to  the  bafe  D  E  F Jo  is  not  the  pyramis  A  BCGT 
„  to  any  folide  greater  then  the  pyramis  D  EF  H .  For  if  it  be  pofble,  let  it  be  vnto  fome 

greater, namely,  to  the  folide  X .  Wherefore  (  by  conuerfion,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  4.  of  the 
fft )  as  the  bafe  D  E  F  is  to  the  bafe  A  B  C,fo  is  the  folide  X  to  the  pyramis  ABCG  .  But 
as  the  folide  X  is  to  the  pyramis  A  B  C  G,fo  is  the  pyramis  DEFH  to fome  folide  lefe  then 
the  pyramis  ABCG,*  as  wehaue  before proued .  Wherefore  alfo  (  by  the  ii.  of  the  fft )  as 
r  **  fitted  the  hafe  DFFis  u  the  hafe  A  BC,fo  is  the pyramis  DEFH,  to  fome  folide  leffe  then  the 
fetrnd  FT,Tmts  ABCG  t  which  thing  we  haue  proued  to  be  impofible.  Wherfore  as  the  bafe  ABC 
’’prapofmn  of  ds  to  the  bafe  D  E  F,fois  not  the  pyramis  A  B  CG  to  any  folide  greater  then  the  pyramis 
ibkb^ke.  DEFH:  and  ii  is  alfo  proued  that  it  is  notin  that  proportion  to  any  leffe  then  the  pyramis 

DEF  H.  Wherefore  as  the  bafe  A  B  C  is  to  the  bafe  D  E  F,fo  is  the  pyramis  A  BCG  to  the 
pyramis  DEFH .  Where  fore  pyramids  conffiing  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude, 
andhamyg  triangles  to  their  bafes,  are  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  theif 
bales  are  *  which  was  required  to  be  demon f rated. 

fThe 


D  P  T> 


of- 8uc tides  Element es,  FoL%66* 

f  T he  6 .  T beoreme.  T he  6.  Tropojitiort. 

pyramids  confifiing  Tender  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude,  and  hauing 
Poligonon  figures  to  their  hafesiare  in  that proportion  the  one  to  the  other, 
that  their  hafes  are. 

Fppofe  that  there  he  two  Pyramids  patting  to  their  hafes  thefe  P  oligonon  figures 
A  B  C  E  B,  and  F  G  B  K  L,  and  let  their  toppes  be  thepointes  M  and  N,  which 
|  let  he  of one  and  the felfe fame  altitude .  T  hen  1 fay?  that  as  the  hafe  ABC E  D 
is  to  the  hafe  F  Gil  K  L,fo  is  the pyr amis  A  B  CEB  M3to  the  pyramis  EGB- 
K L  TSfBiuide  the  hafe 
A  B  CEB  into  thefe  tri¬ 
angles  A  B  C,  AC  B,dr 
C  D  E,  and  hkewife  the 
bafe  F  G  B  K  L  into 
thefe  triangles  F  G  H, 

E  BL,  and  HI<  L.  And 
imagine  that  upon  euery 
one  of  thofe  triangles  be 
feta  pyramis  of equall  al¬ 
titude  with  the  two  pyra¬ 
mids  put  at  the  begin¬ 
ning.  And  for  that  as  the 
triangle  ABC  is  to  the 
triangle  A  B  C,fo  is  the 
pyramis  A  B  CM  to  the 
pyramis  o'f B  CM  (by 
the  s-  of  this  boke )  .Wher- 
fore,  by  compofition  (by 
the  i  S.  of  the f ft )  as  the 

fewer fided figure  ABCB  is  to  the  triangle  ACB,fo  is  the  pyramis  At  CBM  to  thepy 
ramps  AC  DM.  But  as  the  triangle  AC  D  is  to  the  triangle  C  B  E>fo  is  the  pyramis 
AC  B  M  to  the  pyramis  CB  EM .  Wherefore  of  equalitie  (by  the  2  2. of the f ft)  as  the  bafe 
ABC  B  is  to  the  bafe  C  B  E,fo  is  the pyramis  ABCB  M  to  the  pyramis  C  B  EM.  Wher- 
fore  againe  by  compofition  (by  the  iS  of the  fift)  as  the  bafe  ABCB  E  is  to  the  bafe  CB  E„ 
fo  is  the  pyramis  ABC  E  B  M  to  the  pyramis  C  B  EM .  And  by  the fame  redfon  alfo  as  the 
bafe  F  G  H  K  L  is  to  the  bafe  H  K  L,fo  is  the  pyramis  F  G  H  K  L  to  the  pyramis 
B  K  LN .  And fir  a  [much  as  there  are  two  pyramids  C D  EM  and  B  K  LN,  hauing  tri¬ 
angles  to  their  bafes,  and  being  under  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude ,  therefore  (  by  the  5. of 
the  twelfth )  as  the  bafe  CBEis  to  the  bafe  H  K  L,fo  is  the  pyramis  C  B  EM  to  the  pyra¬ 
mis  B  I<  LN.  Now for  that  as  the  bafe  e AB  CEB  is  to  the  bafe  C  B  E,fo  is  the  pyramis 
ABC  EB  M  to  the  pyramis  CBEM.  But  as  the  bafe  C  B  Eis  to  the  bafe  H  K  L,  fo  is  the 
pyramis  CB  E  M  to  the pyramis  H  K  LN .  Wherefore  of equalitie  (  by  the  22.  of the  fift) 
as  the  bafe  A  B  C  E  B  is  to  the  bafe  B  K  L,fo  is  the  pyramis  B  C  E  B  M  to  the  pyramis 
B  K  LN .  But  alfo  as  the  bafeH  K  L  is  the  bafe  F  G  H  K  L,fo  is  the  Pyramis  B  K  L  N  to 
to  the  pyramis  FGHKLN .  Wherefore  againe  of equalitie  (  by  the  22.  of the  fift )  as  the 
bafe  ABC  EB  is  to  the  bafe  F  G  H  K  L,fo  is  the  pyramis  A  B  C  E  B  M  to  the  pyramis 
FGHKL  N. Wherefore  pyramids  confining  under  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude, and  ha¬ 
tting  Polygonon figures  to  their  bafes,  are  in  that proportion  the  one  to  the  other,  that  their 
hafes  are :  which  was  required  to  be proued. 


Conjlruftim 


VmonHrS'- 

tm* 


BBd.ijj . 


e 


Demonjlra - 
non. 


The  7  .Theorems. 


T  be  7  ■Fropofition, 


x\A 


Huery  prifme  hailing  a  triangle  to  his  bafi9  may  be  deuided  into  three py» 
ramids  equall  the  one  to  the  other fhauing  alfo  triangles  to  their  bafes . 

Fppofe  that  ABCDEFbea  prifme, baiting  to  his  bafe  the  triangle  A  B  C,and 
the  oppofite fide •vnto  it, the  triangle  D  E  F.Then  I fay  that  the  prifme  ABC  D 
:  E  F , may  be  deuided  into  tk  reepiramids  equall  the  one  to  the  other, and  hauing 
triangles  to  their  bafes.. Draw  thefe  right  lines  BD,  E  C3  and  C  D ,  And  for af 
much  as  A  B  E  D  is  aparallelogramme,  and  his  di¬ 
ameter  is  the  line  B  D,  therefore  the  triangle  A  B  D 
is  equall  to  the  triangle  ED  B  .  Wherefore  alfo  the 
pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  A  B  D,and  toppe 
the  poynt  C,is  equall  to  the  pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  the 
triangle  ED  B,  &  toppe  the  point  C,by  the  s.of this 
books. But  the pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  E  D 
B,and  toppe  the  poynt  C,is  one  and  the  fame  rvhich 
the pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  EBC,and  toppe 
the  poynt  D  ,for  they  arc  comprehended  of  the felfe 
fame  play  ne  fuperfcieces, namely,  off  triangles  BDE 
D  EC,  D  BC ,  and  E  B  C.  Wherefore  alfo  the  pyra¬ 
mis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  ABD  and  toppe  the 
poynt  C,is  equall  to  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  EBC  and  toppe  the  point  D .  A- 
gaine  forafmuch  as  B  C  F  Eis  a  parallelogramme,and  the  diameter  thereof  is  E  C,  therefore 
the  triangle  EC  F  is  equall  to  the  triangle  CB  E .  Wherefore  alfo  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is 
the  triangle  EBC  and  toppe  the  poynt  D,is  equall  to  the  pyramis,  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle 
EC  F  and  toppe  the  poynt  D,by  the  y. of  this  booke.  But  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  trian¬ 
gle B  E  C  and  toppe  the  poynt  D, is  proued  to  be  equall  to  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  trian¬ 
gle  A  B  D  ,and  toppe  the  p  oynt  C.  Wherfore  alfo  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  CEE 
and  toppe  the  poynt  D,is  equall  to  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  A  B  D  &  toppe  the 
poynt  C. Wherefore  the  prifme  ABD  E.Fis  deuided  into  three  equall  pyramids  hauing  tri¬ 
angles  to  their  bafes .  fAnd forafmuch  as  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  ABD  and 
topfie  the.  poynt  C,is  one  fgthe  felfe  fame  with  the  pyramis  rvhofe  bafe  is  the  trianfieC  A  B  & 
tappet  he  poynt  D  ( for  they  arecontayned  under  the felfe  fame playne  fuperfcieces  )  but  it 
hath, bene  proued  that  the 'pyramis  whofc  bafe  is  the  triangle  A  B  D  andtoppe  the  poynt  C,is 
the  third pyramis  oftbepnfmewhofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  ABC  aud  the  oppofite  fide  vnto  it 
the  triangle  D  £  F .  Wherefore  the  pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  ABC  and  toppe  the 
poynt  D  is  the  third pyramis  of  theprifme, whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  ABC,  and  oppofite fide 
the  triangle  D  E  F  .Wherefore  euery  prifme  hauing  a  triangle  to  his  bafe, may  be  deuided  in¬ 
to  three  pyramids  equall  the  me  to  the  other ,  hauing  alfo  triangles  to  their  bafes  :  which  was 
required  to  be  proued. 

fj  Corollary, 

Hereby  it  is  manifefl  that  euery  pyramis  is  the  third  part  of  a  prifme  ha* 

'  uing  one  and  the fame bafe  ioith  it  and  alfo  being  Imder  the  felfe  fame  aU 
titiule  ~$>itb  it. For  if the  bafe  of the  prifme  be  any  other  re  ffiiline  figure  the 
a  triangle fth at  alfo  may  be  deuided  into prifines  which  jbal  haue  triangles 
to  their  bafes. 

X  %  Here 


Here  Campane  and  F tufas  adde  certayne  Coroliarycs. 
Firjl  Corollary. 


Eiiery  Prifme  is  treble  to  the  Pir amis, which  hath  the  felfe  fame  triangle  to  his  bafe  that  the 
Trifme  hath,  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude.  As  it  is  manifeil  by  this  propofition ,  where  the  Prifme  is 
deluded  into  three  equall  Pyramids,  of  which,  two  are  vpo  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe,  and  vnder  one 
and  the  felfe  fame  altitude.  But  if  the  Prifme  haue  to  his  bafe  a  parallelogramme ,  and  if  the  Pyramis 
haue  to  his  bale  the  halfeofthe  fame  parallelogramme,and  their  altitudes  be  equall,  then  agaynethe 
Pyramis  fhalbe  the  third  part  of  the  Prifme .  For  it  was  manifeft,by  the  40.  of  the  eleueth,that  Prifmes, 
being  voder  equall  altitudes,  and.  the  one  hauiog  to  his  bafe  a  triangle, and  the  other  a  parallelogramme 
double  to  the  fame  triangle,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherof  followeth  the  former  condition. 


Second  Corollary  . 

If  there  be  many  Prifmes  vnder  one  and  the  ptme  altitude,  and  hailing  triangles  to  their  bafes, 
and  if  the  triangular  bafes  be fo  ioyned  together  vpon  one  and  the fame  p  lay  ne,  that  they  compofe  a  Po- 
ligonon  figure:  pyr amis fet  vpon  that  bafe  being  a  Voligonon figure,  and  vnder  the  fame  altitude, 
is  the  third  part  of  that folide,  which  is  compofed  of  all  the  Prifmes  added  together. 

For  forafmuch  as  euery  one  of  the  Prifmes  which  hath  to  his  bafe  a  triangle,  to  euery  one  of  the 
Pyramids  fet  vpon  the  fame  bafe  ( the  altitude  being  alwayes  one  and  the  lamej  is  treble,  it  is  manifcll 
by  the  iz.  of  the  fiueth,  that  all  the  Prifmes  are  to  allthe  Pyramids  treble  .  Wherefore  Parallelipipe- 
dons  are  treble  to  Pyramids  fet  vpon  the  felfe  fame  bafe  With  them}  and  vnder  the  fame  altitude,  for 
that  they  contayne  two  Prifmes. 

••  /’.v  r-ViM  \\\  Yd , 

1  ;  '  \  „  » 

If  two  Prifmes  being  vnder  one  and  the  felfe fame  altitude ,  haue  to  their  bafes  either,  both  tri¬ 
angles ,  or  both  parallelogrammes ,  the ' Prifmes  are  the  one  to  the  01  her, as  their  bafes  are. 

For  foralmuch  as  thofc Prifmes  are  equemultiqlices  vnto  the  Pyram  ids  vpon  the  felfe  lame  bafes, 
and  vnder  thelamealtitudef  which  Pyramids  are  in  propordbnas  their  bafes,  itis  tnanifeft  (by  the  iy. 
ofthe  lift),  that  the  Prifinesarein the  proportion  of  the  bafes.  For  by  the  fornier  Coroliary,the  Prifi- 
mes  are  treble  to  the  Pyramids  fet  vpon  the  triangular  bafes. 

...  .0  -  -  &  '  ■  &  *  ■  . 

Fourth Corollary. 


Third  Corollary. 


If 0  te. 
Sided  Co¬ 
lumn  es  (feme  - 
time  called 
prifmes)  are 
triple  to  pyra¬ 
mids,  hatting 
one  bafe  and 
equall  hc.th 
with  them. 
Note:  I'arat- 
leiiptpedons 
treble  to  pyra¬ 
mids  of  one 
bafe  and  heith 
Ivithtbm* 


'Prifmes  are  in  fcfqueakera  proportions  Pyramids  Which  haue  the  felfe  fame  quadr angled  bafe 
that  the  Prifmes  haue,  and  are  vnder  the  felfe fame  altitude , 

For,  that  Pyramis  contayneth  two  Pyramids  fet  vpon  a  triangular  bafe  of  the  fame  Prifme,  for  itis 
proued,  that  that  Prifme  is  treble  to  the  Pyramis  which  is  fet  vpon  thehalfe  ofhis  quadrangled  bafe, 
vnto  which  the  other  tyhich  is  fet  vpon  the  whole  bafe  is  double,by  the  fixth  ofthis  booke. 


Fiueth  Corollary.  \  .  > 

Wherefore  We  may  in  like fort  conclude,  that  folides  mencioned  in  the  fecond  CoroRary  ( which 
folids  Campane  callcth  fided  Columnes  )  being  vnder  one  and  the  felfe fame  altitude,  are  in  proportion 
the  one  to  the  other,  as  their  bafes,  Which  are  poligonon  figures , 

For  they  are  in  the  proportion  of  the  Pyramids  or  Prifmes,  fet  vpon  the  felfe  lame  bales,  and  vn¬ 
der  the  felfe  fame  altitude,  that  is,  they  are  in  the  proportio  of  the  bales  of  the  fayde  Pyramids  or  Prif¬ 
mes.  For  thofe  folids  may  be  deuided  into  Prifmes  hauirg  the  lelle  famealtitude,  when  as  their  oppo¬ 
site  bafes  may  be  deuided  into  triangles,  by  the  20  of  the  lixth  .Vpon  which  triangles  Prifmes  beyng  fet, 
are  in  proportion  as  their  bafes. 

. 

By  this  7.  Propofition  it  playnely  appeareth  that  Eutlide,*%  it  was  before  noted  in  the  diffimtions, 
vnder  the  diffinition  of  a  Prifme,eomprehended  alio  thole  kinds  of  folids;,  which  Campane  calleth  fided 
Golumnes.  For  in  that  he  fayth,  Euery  Prtfme  hautng  a  triangle  to  his  bafe, may  be  deuided.  fifed  he  neded 
not  (taking  a  Prifme  in  thatfenfe  which  Campane  and  moll  men  takeitj  to  haue  added  that  particle, 
hauing  to  his  bafe  a  triangle.  Fqr  by  their  fenfe,there  is  no  Prifme, but  it  may  haue  to  his  bale  a  triangle : 
and  fo  it  may  feeme  that  Euclide  ought  without  exceptiou  haue  fay d,  that, euery  prifme  whatfoeuer,may 

DDd.iiij.  be 


e 


Conflmtion. 

"Demonflra- 

MU, 


be  deuided  into  three  pyramids  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  hauing  alfo  triangles  to  their  bafes.  For  fo 
do  Campane  and  Flu  fas  put  the  propofition,  leauing  out  the  former  particle  hauing  to  bis  baft  a  triangle, 
which  yet  is  red  in  the  Greeke  copye,&  not  left  out  by  any  other  interpreters  l^nowne  abroade  except 
by  Camgane  and  Flufias.  Yea  and  the  Corollary  followingof  this  propofition  added  by  Theon  or  Eucltde, 
and  ameded  by  M.Dee  femeth  to  confirme  this  fence. 

Of  this,  is  it  made  man, tf eft,  that  entry  pyramis  is  the  third  part  of  the  prifme,  hauing  the fame 
baft  with  tt ,  and  equall  altitude  .  For,  and  if  the  bafe  of  the  prifme  bane  any  other  right  Iwedfigure 
ft  hen  a  triangle)  andalft the fiuperftcies  oppoftte  to  the  baft,  the  fame figure:  that  prifme  may  be  de¬ 
cided  into  pnftnes,  hauing  triangled  bafts :  and  thefuperficieces  to thoft  bafts  oppoftte, alft  triangle d  a 
ilihg  and  equally. 

For  there,  as  we  fee  are  put  thefe  wordes  ,  For  and  if  the  baft  tf  the  prifme  be  any  other  right  lined 
figure.  £jY.  whereof a  man  may  well  inferre  that  the'bafe  may  be  any  other  rtdiltne  figure  what- 
foeuer  ,&  not  only  a  triangle  or  a  parallelogram  me,  and  it  is  true  alfo  in  that  fence,  as  itis  plaine  to  fee 
by  the  fecond  corollary  added  out  of  Flujfas,  which  corollary,  as  alfo  the  firft  of  his  corollaries,  is  in 
a  maner  all  one  with  the  Corollary  added  by  Theon  or  Eucltde .  Farther  Theon  in  the  demonllration  of 
the  10  .  propofition  of  this  booke  l  as  we  fhall  afterward  fee  )  moftplaynely  calleth  notonely  fided  co- 
lumnes  prifmes,but  alfo  parallelipiprdons.And  although  the  40. propofition  of  the  eleuenth  booke  may 
feme  hereunto  to  bea  let.For  that  it  can  be  vnderftanded  of  thofe  prifmes  onely  which  haue  triangles 
to  their  bke, equall, oppofite.and  parallel  fides ,  or  but  offome  fided  columnes, and  not  ofall :  yet  may 
that  let  be  thus  remoued  away ,  to  lay  that  Eucltde  in  that  propofitio  vfed  genus  pro  fpecie,  that  is, the  ge~ 
nerall  word  for  fome  fpecialkindc  therof:  which  thing  alfo  is  not  rare,not  only  with  him, but  alfo  with 
other  learned  philofophers.Thus  much  I  thought  good  by  the  way  to  note  in  farther  defence  of Zuclidi 
definition  of  a  Prifme. 


•1  not 


The  8.Theoreme. 


The  8.  Propofition. 


[ Pyramids  being  like  &  hauing  triangles  to  their  bafes  3are  in  treble  pro  for 
tion  the  one  to  the  other 3  of  that  in  which  their fides  of  like  proportion  are . 

^  V'-t  ^  ’  '  -  il.'C  *  •  4  -  1  '•  •  ‘  *  i  .  .  '*•  J  ,  • sV.  -~t  1  *V  .  •  .  \  t  Y:  ,  .  J. 

Fppofe  that  thefe  pyramids  whofe  bafes  are  the  triangles  G  BC  and  Ft  E  F  and 
toppes ,  the  poyntes  A  and  D  be  like ,  and  in  like  fort  defcribed  3  and  let  A  B  and 
D  E  beftdes  of like  proportion .  T  hen  I  fay  that  the  pyramis  A  BCG  is  to  the 
rvjr— ~x  -v^i|  pyramis  D  E  F  H  in  treble proportio,of that  in  which  the fide  A  B  is  to  the  fide 
jD  E.  Make  perfect  the  par  allelipipedons, namely, the folides  B  C  K  L&  E  F  X  O  .And foraf 
much  as  the  py amis  A  BCG  is  like  to  the pyramis  JO  EE  Jiftherfore  the  angle  ABC  is  equall 
to  the  angle  D  E  F , eft  the 
ingle  G BC  to  the  angle 
H  E  F ,  and  moreouer  the 
angle  A  B  G  to  the  angle 
DEB ,  and  as  the  line  A 
B  is  to  the  line  D  E  ,fo  is  ^ 
the  line  BC  to  the  line  E 
F ,  and  the  line  BG  to  the 
line  E  H .  ^And  for  that 
as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the 
line  D  E ,  fo  is  the  line  B 
C  to  the  line  E  F ,  and  the 
fides  about  the  equall  an¬ 
gles  ,  are  proportional!, 
therefore  the  parallelo- 
gramme  B  M  is  like  to  the 
parallelograms  E  P  :  and 
by  the  fame  reafon  the  pa- 
rallelogramwe  B  Jdjs  like 


/ 

/ 

i* \ 

' 

w  / 

\\ 

/ 

B 

c 

mentis* 


Fo/,^6 


to  the parallelogramme  E  R,  and theparellelogramme  B  K '  islikevnto  the parallelogramme 
EX .  Wherefore  the  three  parallelogrammes  B  M,  K  B  and  B  N  are  like  to  the  three par al- 
lelogrammes  EP,E  Xpand E  R .  But  the  three  parallelogrammes  B  M,  K  B ,  and  B  Tpjire 
equall  and  like  to  the  three  oppofte parallelagrammes,  and  the  three  parallelogrammes  E  P, 

E  X ,  and_  E  R  are  equall  and  like  to  the  three  oppofte parallelogrammes .  Wherefore  the  pa- 
rallelipipedons  B  C  K  Land  E  F  X  O  are  comprehended  tender  playne fupe; faeces  like  and 
equall  in  multitude  .Wherefore  the  f Hide  BC  K  Lis  like  to  the folide  E  F  X  0.  But  like  par  at 
lelipipedons  are( by  the  3 3  .of  the  elcuenth )in  treble proportion  the  one  to  the  other  of  that  in 
which  fide  of  like  proportion  is  to fide  of  like  proportion .  Wherefore  the  folide  BC  K  L  is  to 
the folide  EF  XO  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the fide  of  like  proportion  A  B  is  to 
the fide  of  like  proportion  D  E.  But  as  the folide  B  C  K  Lis  to  the  folide  E  F  X  ofo  is  the  py- 
ramis  ABCGto  the  pyramis  D  EF  H  (  by  the  i$.  of theffth  )  for  that  the  pyramis  is  the 
fixthpart  of  this  folide :  for  the  prifme ,  being  the  halfe  of  theparallelipipedon  is  treble  to 
the  pyramis  .‘Wherefore  the  pyramis  AB  C  Gisto  the  pyramis  D  EF  H  in  treble  proportion 
of  that  ip  which  the fide  A  Bis  to  the fide  D  E. Which  was  required  to  be  proued . 

Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft  that  like  pyramids  hauing  to  their  hafes  poligonon 
figures  ^are  in  treble  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  ^ofi that  in  fihich fide  of 
like  proportion  fis  to fide  of like  proportion . 

For  if  they  be  deuided  into  pyramids  hauing  triangles  to  their  bafes  ( for  like  poligono 
figures  are  deuided  into  like  triangles, and  equal  in  multitude, and  the fides  are  of  like  propor¬ 
tion  )as  one  of  the  pyramids  of  the  one, hauing  a  triangle  to  his  bafe ,  is  to  one  of  the  pyramids 
of the  other, hauing  alfo  a  triangle  to  his  bafe  ,fo  alfo  are  all  the  pyramids  of the  one  pyramis 
hauing  triangles  to  their  bafes  to  allthe  pyramids  of  the  other  pyramis  hauing  alfo  triangles 
to  their  bafes. That  is yhe pyramis  hauing  to  his  bafe  a, poligono  figure,  to  the  pyramis  hauing 
alfo  to  his  bafe  a  poligono  figure, But  a  pyramis  hauing  a  triangle  to  his  bafe, is  to  a  pyramis  ha 
uing  alfo  a  triangle  to  his  bafe, dr  being  like  <vnto  it,  in  treble prop  ortho  of that  in  which fide 
of  like  profortipisto fide  of  like  proportio.Wber fore  a  pyramis  hauing  to  his  bafe  a  poligono 
figure,  is  to  a  pyramis  hauing  alfo  a  poligonon  figure  to  his  bafe,  the  fayd  pyramids  being  like 
the  one  to  the  other ,  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which fide  of  like  proportion  is  to  fide  of 

like ^77^0r//0/2.LikewifePrifrnesandfided  columnes,beingfet  vpon  the  bafes  of  thofe pyramids, and  An  addition 
vnder  the  fame  altitude  (forafmuch  as  they  are  equemultiplices  vnto  the  pyramids ,  namely, triples,  by  by  CampAfie 
the  corollary  of  the  7.of  this  booke)fhai  haue  the  former  porportion  that  the  pyramids  haue.by  the  if,  andfluffas 
of  the  hfth,and  therefore  they  lhall  be  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  fides  of  like  propor-  **  9 

tion  are. 

fThe  9.  Theoreme.  The  p.Tropofition. 

In  equall  pyramids  hauing  triangles  to  their  hafes  3  the  bafes  are  recipro* 
kali  to  their  altitudes. Hnd pyramids  hauing  triangles  to  their  hafes yvhofie 
hafes  are  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes  pare  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

Tppofic  that  BCG  A  and  EF  HE  he  equall pyramids, hauing  to  their  bafes  the 
triangles  BCG  and  EF  H,  and  the  tops  the  pointes  A  and  D  .  T hen  1 fay  that 
the  bafes  of  the  two  pyramids  BCG  A  and  EF  IID  are  reciprokall  to  their  al¬ 
titudes  .-that  is, as  the  bafe  BCG  is  to  the  bafe  E  F  H,fo  is  the  altitude  of the  py¬ 
ramis  EF  HE  to  the  altitude  of  the  pyramis  B  CG  A .  c. Make  perfect  theparallelipipsdons, 

namely , 

hot 


Tkmtnt&uti- 

enofthefirtt 

putt* 


TtmonUra- 
turn  of  the 

jecotidpart, 

which  ii  the 
conuerle  of 
the  firjt. 


7 he  Welueth 


/ 

Wx 

■ 

A 

/ 

■p 


N 


/I 

ir 

R. 


F 


e 

namely, B  GML  and  EH  TO  .Andforafmueh  as  the py  rams  BCG  A  is  equal!  to  the  pyra- 
mis  E  F  H  D,  &  the folide  B  G  ML,  is  f extuple  to  thepyra'mis  BCG  A.  (For  the paralleli- 
pipedon  is  duple  to  the  Prifme fetvpon  the  bafe  of  the  Pyramis,  fr  the  Prifme  is  triple  to  the 
pyramis) : and  likewifethe folide  EH  P  O  is  fextuple  to  the  pyramis  EF  H  D  .Wherefore  the 
folide  BG  ML  is  equal  to  tfe folide  EBP  O  .But  me  quail paralldipipedons  ,the  bafes  are(by 
the  3  4 .  of  the  eleueth  )reci- 
prokall  to  their  a  Ititudes. 

Wherfore  as  the  bafe  B  N 
is  to  the  bafe  E  Jffo  is  the 
altitude  of  they  folide  E  H 
P  O, to  the  altitude  of  the 
folide  SGML.  But  as  the 
bafe  BN  is  to  the  bafe  E- 
fjp ,fo is  the  triangle  GBC 
to  the  triangle HEF  (by 
the  i  $  .of the  fifth ,  for  the & 
triangles  G  B  C  &  H  E  F 
an  the  halues  of  the  par  ah 
kLogrammes  B  N  and  E- 
J2J .  Wherfore  (by  the  u. 
of  the  fifth  )as  the  triangle 
G  BCis  to  the  triangle  H- 
E  'F  ,  fo  is  ihe-altitude  of 
the  folide  EH  P  O  to  the 
altitude  of the  folide  BG- 

M  L.  But  the  altitude  of  the folide  E HP  O  is  one  and  the fame  with  the  altitude  of  the  pyra¬ 
mis  EF  H  I), and  the  altitude  of the  folide  B  G  M  Lis  one  and  the  fame  with  the  altitude  cf 
the  pyramis  BCG  A.  Wherefore  as  the  bafe  G  BCis  to  the  bafe  H  EF  ,fo  is  the  altitude  of 
the  pyramis  E  F  H  D  to  the  altitude  of the  pyramis  B  CG  A.  Wherefore  the  bafes  of the  two 
pyramids  BCG  A  and  E  F  H  D  are  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  bafes  of  thepyramids  BC  G  A  and  EF  H  T>,  be reciprokall  t$ 
their  altitudes  ,that  is,  as  the  bafeGBCis  to  the  bafe  H  E  F,fo  let  the  altitude  of the  pyramis 
E  F  H  D  bet-o  the  altitude  of  the  pyramis  BCG  A. Then  I fay  that  the  pyramis  BG  G  A  is  e- 
quall  to  the  pyramis  EF  H  D.  For(  the  felfe  fame  order  of  confiruciion  remaining) , for  that 
as  the  bafe  GBC  is  to  the  bafe  h  E  F ,  fo  is  the  altitude  of  the pyramis  E  V  H  D  to  the  alti¬ 
tude  of  the  pyramis  BCG  A  .But  as  the  bafe  GBC  is  to  the  bafe  H  E  F,fo  is  the  paralleto- 
gramme  G  C  to  the  parallelogramme  H  F  Wherefore(by  the  1 1  .of the  fifth)  as  the  parallelo- 
gramme  G  C  is  to  the  parallegoramme  H  F,fo  is  the  altitude  of  the  pyramis  E  F  H  T>  to  the 
altitude  of the  pyramis  BCG  A.  But  the  altitude  of  the  pyramis  EF  H  D  and  of  the folide 
EH  PO,  is.  one  and  the felfe fame,  and  the  altitude  of the  pyramis  BCG  A  and  of  the folide 
BG  M  L, is  alfo  one  and  the fame  Wherefore  as  the  bafe  GC  is  to  the  bafe  H  F  ,fo  is  the  alti¬ 
tude  of  the folide  EHP  O  to  the  altitude  of  the  folide  B  G  M  L.But  farallelipipedons,  whofe 
bafes  are  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes  are  (  by  the  3  4.  of  the  eleuenth  )  equall  t  he  one  to  the  0- 
ther  Wherefore  the par allelipipedon  PGM  L  is  e  quail  to  the parallelipipedonE  HP  O  .  But 
the  pyramis  BC  G  A  is  the  jixth  part  of  the folide  BG  M  L,and  I-ikewife  the  pyramis  E  FHD 
is  the  fixth  part  of  the  folide  E  HP  O  .  Wherefore  the  pyramis  BCG  A  is  equall  to  the  pyra - 
E  F  H  D  .  Wherefore  in  equall  pyramids  hauing  triangles  to  their  bafes ,  the  bafes  are  reci¬ 
prokall  to  their  altitudes.  And pyramids  hauing  triangles  to  their  bafes, whofe  bafes  are  reci¬ 
procal!  to  their  altitudes ,are  equall  the  one  to  the  other  :which  was  required  to  be  demonfir  a - 
ted \ 

A  Corollary 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 

A  Corrollary  added  by,  Campane  and  Flujfas. 


Hereby  it  is  tnqnifefi  that  equall  pyramids  hauingto  their  bafes  Poligonon  figures  ,  hauetheif 
bafes  reciprokall  with  their  altitudes  .<iAnd  Pyramids  fyhofe  bafes  beingpoligonon figures  are  recipro « 
hall  With  their  altitudes, are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

Suppofe  that  vpon  the  poligonon  figures  A 
andB  ,  be  fet  equall  pyramids  .  Then  I  fay  that 
their  bafes  A  and  Bare  reciprokall  with  their  al¬ 
titudes.  Defcribe  by  the  zy.  of  the  fixth,  triangles 
equali  to  the  bafes  A  and  B  .  Which  let  |>e  C  and 
D  .Vpon  which  let  there  be  fet  pyramids  equall 
in  altitude  with  the  pyramids  A  andB.Wherforc 
the  pyramids  C  and  D,being  fet  vpo  bafes  equall 
with  the  bales  of  the  pyramids  A  and  B ,  and  ha¬ 
iling  alfo  their  altitudes  equall  with  the  altitudes 
of  the  fayd  pyramids  A  and  B,  fhall  be  equall  by 
the  6. of  this  booke.  Wherefore  by  the  firll  pare 
of  this  propofirion,the  bafes  of  the  pyramids ,  C 
to  D  are  reciprokall  with  the  altitudes  of  D  to  C. 

But  in  what  proportion  are  the  bafes  C  to  D ,  in 
the  lame  are  the  bafes  A  to  B ,  forafmuch  as  they 

are  equall .  And  in  what  proportion  are  the  altitudes  ofD  to  C,  in  the  fame  are  the  altitudes  of  B  to  A, 
which  altitudes  are  like  wife  equall .  Wherefore  by  the  1 1 .  of  the  fifth  ,  in  what  proportion  the  bafes 
A  to  E  are,in  the  fame  reciprokally  are  the  altitudes  of  the  pyramids  B  to  A  .  In  like  fort  by  the  fecond 
part  of  this  propofition  may  be  proued  the  conuerfe  of  this  corollary.  The  fame  thing  followeth  alfo  in 
a  Prifme,andin  a  fided  columne,as  hath  before  at  large  bene  declared  in  the  corollary  of  the  40.  propo¬ 
fition  of  the  1 1  .booke .  For  thofe  folides  arc  in  proportio  the  one  to  the  other,  as  the  pyramids  orparal- 
lelipipedons,for  they  are  either  partes  of  equemultiplices  or  equemultiplices  to  partes. 


The  10.  T heoreme.  The  jo.  'Propofition. 

Tiiery  tone  is  the  third part  of  a  cilinder  Joauing  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe 
and  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude  loith  it. 


Fppofe  that  there  be  a  cone  hauing  tohis  bafe  the  circle  A  B  CD,  and  let  there  be  A 
cilmder  hauing  the  felfe  fame  bafe, and alfo  the  fame  altitude  that  the  cone  hath. 
T  hen  1 fay  that  the  cone  is  the  third fart  of the  cilinder,  that  is,  that  the  cilinder 
is  in  treble  proportion  to  the  cone.F  or  if  the  cilinder  be  not  in  treble proportion  to  the  cone, 
then  the  cilinder  is  either  in  greater  proportion  then  triple  to  the  cone, or  els  in  lefe.  Fir  Pi  let 
it  be  in  greater  then  triple .  And  defcribe  ( by  the  6.  of  the fourth )  in  the  circle  BCD  a 
fquare  ABCD. Now  the  fquare  ABC  D ,  H 

is  greater  then  the  halfe  of  the  circle  ABC- 
_D.  F  or  if  about  the  circle  ABC  D,  we  de¬ 
fcribe  a  fquare,  the fquare  defer ibed  in  the 
circle  Ta  BCD  is  the  halfe  of  the  fquare 
deferibed about  the  circle.  And  let  there  be 
P arallelipipedon  prifmes  deferibed  vpon 
thofe  fquares,  equall  in  altitude  with  the  E 
cilinder.  But  prifmes  are  in  that  proporti¬ 
on  the  one  to  the  other,  that  their  bafes 
are  (by  the  32.  oft  he  eleuenth,and  y.  Co¬ 
rollary  of  the  7 .  of  this  booke )  .Wherefore 
the  prifmc  deferibed  vpon  the  fquare  A- 
BCDis  the  halfe  of the prifme  deferibed 
vpon  the  fquare  that  is  deferibed  about  the 
circle,  Nynv  the  clinder  is  lejfe  then  the  * 

*  prifme 


ConftrttRmi 

1. 


TataMipipt - 
dons  called 
Vrifrnu 


prifme  which  is  made  of  thefquare  'deferibed  about  the  circle  A  BCD,  being  equal  in 
altitude  with  it, for  it  contayneth  it.Wherfore  the  prifme  defer  ibed  vpon  thefquare  A  BC- 
D  and  being  equall  in  altitude  with  the  cylinder ,  is  greater  then  half  the  cylinder.  Deuide 


Wh  erf  ere  euery  one  ofthefe  triangles  A  EB,BF  C,C  G  D  and  DH  A  is  greater  then  halfe 
of  that  fegment  of the  circle  A  B  C  D  which  is  deftribedabout  it,as  we  hatie  before  in  the  2. 
prep  oft  ion  declared. Defcribe  vpen  euery  one  ofthefe  triangles  AEB ,BFC,CG D  ,  and 
DBA  a prifme  of  equall  altitude  with  the  cylinder.  Wherefore  euery  one  of theft prifmes fo 
defended  is  greater  then  the  halfe  fart  of  the  fegment  of  the  cylinder  that  is  fet  vpon  the 
faydfegments  of  the  circle.  For  if  by  the  pointesE,  F,  G,  H,  be  drawen  par albell  lines  to  the 
lines  A  B,B  C,C  D  and  D  A,  and  then  be  madeperfeffi  the parallelogrammes  made  by  thofe 
par  ailed  lines,  and  moreouer  vpon  thofe parallelogrames  be  erected  par allelipipcdons  equall 
in  altitude  with  thecylinder ,  the  prifmes  which  are  deferibed  vpon  eche  of  the  triangles  A 
E  B,B  F  C,C  G  D,and  DH  Aar  e  the  halfes  of  euery  one  of  thofe parallelipipedons.And  the 
fegments  of  the  cylinder  are  leffe  then  thofe  paralklipipedons  fo  deferibed .  Wherefore  alfo 
euery  one  of  the  prifmes  which  are  deferibed  vpon  the  triangles  AEB  ,BFC,CGD  and 
D  H  A  is  greater  then  the  halfe  of  the fegment  of  the  cylinder fet  vpon  the  fayd  fegment. 
N  ow  therefore  deuiding  euery  one  of  the  circumferences  remaining  into  two  equall  partes, 
and  drawing  right  lines, and  rayfng  vp  vpon  euery  one  ofthefe  triangles  prifmes  equall  in 
altitude  with  thecylinder ,  and  doing  this  continually, we  fhall  at  the  length  (  by  the  first  of 
the  tenthyieane  certain e. figments  of  the  cylinder  which jhalbe  leffe  then  the  excejfe  whereby 
the  cylinder  excedeth  the  cone  more  then  thrift .  Let  thofe  fegments  be  A  E,E  B\B  F,F  C,C 
G,G  D,  D  B  and  H  A .  W her  fore  the prifme  remay  wing,  whofe  bafe  is  the  poligononfgure 
A  F  B  F  CG  D  H,  and  altitude  the  felfe 
fame  that  the  cylinder  hath, is  greater  then 
*  By  this  it  is  the  cone  taken  three  tymes *  But  the  prifme 
tnmifeQ  that  whofe  bafe  is  the  voligonon figure  AEB  F 
'  **.  C  G  D  If  and,  altitude  the  felfe  fame  that 

Ztudm  .mhk  t,  thejjramis 

alfo  vnder  the  whofe  haft  is  the  poligononfgure  AEBF 
name  of  a’  CG  DA  and  altitude  the  felfe fame  that  ^ 

the  cone  hath, by  the  corollary  of  the  3.  of 
this  booke.Wherfore  alfo  the pyramis  whofe 
baft  is  the  poligononfgure  AEB  F  CG  D 
B  And  toppe  the  ft  If  fame  that  the  cone 
hath  ,  is  greater  then  the  cone  which  hath 
to  his  Safe  the  circle  ABC D .  But  it  is 
alfo  leffe  ,for  it  is  contayned  of  it  which  is 
impofible .  Wherefore  the  cylinder  is  not  in 
greater  proportion  then  triple  to  the  cone. 

/ fay  moreouer  that  the  cylinder  is  not  in  leffe  proportion  then  triple  to  the  cone .  For  if 
it  be  pofible  let  the  cylinder  be  in  leffe  proportion  then  triple  to  the  cone .  Wherefore  by  Con¬ 
ner  fi  on, the  cone  is  greater  then  the  third  part  of  the  cylinder.  Defcribe  now  (  by  the fixth  of 
the  fourth)  in  the  circle  ABC  D  a fquare  A  B  CD.  Wherefore  thefquare  A  B  CD  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  halfe  of  the  circle  A  BCD  vpon  the  fquare  A  B  CD  defcribe  a  pyramis  hauing 
me  eft  the  felfe  fame  altitude  with  the  cone. Wherf ore  the  pyramis  fo  deferibed  is  greater  the 
halfe  of  the  cone.  (  F  or  if aswe  haue  before  declared  we  defcribe  a  fquare  about  the  circle, 
thefquare  BCD  is  the  halfe  of  the  fquare  deferibed  about  the  circle ,  and  if  vppon  the 
fquares  be  deferibed paralklipipedons  equall  in  altitude  with  the  cone,  which folides  are  alfo 
'  -  called 


3. 


ofEuclides  ElementeL  FoLyjU 

called prifmes,  the pri fine  or  paralhlipipedon  deferibed  vpo  the  f  quart  AB  CD  is  the  halfe  of 
the  prifme  which  is  deferibed  vpp  the fquare  defertbed  about  the  circle  for  they  are  the  one  U 
the  other  in  that  proportiothat  their  bafes  are(by  the  32.  of  the  eleueth ,  &  5.  corollary  of the 
7.  of this  booke.)W her  fore  alfo  their  third parts  are  in  the felffame  proportion  (by  the  15.  of 
the f ft)  .Wh  erf  ore  the  pyramis  whofe  bafeis  the fquare  ABC  D  is  the  halfe  of the  pyramis fet 
•upon  the fquare  deferibed  about  the  circle.  But  the  pyramis fet  vpon  the fquare  deferibed  a- 
boat  the  circle  is  greater  then  the  cone  w home  it  comprehendetb. Wherfore  the  pyramid  whofe 
bafe  is  the fquare  ABC  D,  and  altitude  the felf fame  that  the  cone  hath,  is  greater  then  the 
halfe  of  the  cone. )  Deuide  ( by  the  3  0  .of the  third )  euery  one  of  the  circumferences  A  B,B  C, 
C  D,and  D  A  into  two  e  quail partes  in  the  point  es  E,  F,  G,  and  H :  and,  dr  awe  thefe  right 
lines  A  E,  E  B,  BE,  F  C,CG,G  D,  D  H,and  H  A  .  Wherefore  euery  one  of  thefe  triangles 
A  EB,B  F  C,C  G  D  ,and  D  H  A  is  greater  then  the  halfe  part  of  the  fegment  of  the  circle 
deferibed  about  it .  Vppon  euery  one  of thefe  triangles  A  E  B,B  F  C,C  G  D,  and  D  H  A  de¬ 
fer ibe  a  pyramis  of equall  altitude  with  the  cone.' and  after  the  fame  maner  euery  one  of  ihofe 
pyramids fo  deferibed  is  greater  then  the  halfe  part  of  the  fegment  of  the  cone  fet  vpon  the 
fegment  of  the  circle. H^pw  therefore  diuidmg(by  the  30, of the  third)  the  circumferences  re¬ 
maining  into  two  equallparts,  &  drawing  right  lines  dr  rayfing  vp  vpon  euery  one  ofthofe 
triangles  a  pyramis  of  equall  altitude  with  the  cone, and  doing  this  continually, we 'jhal  at  the 
length  ( by  thefrjl  of  the  tenth  fleaue  certaync fegmentes  of  the  cone ,  which  Jhalbe  lejfe  then 
the  excejfe  whereby  the  cone  excedeth  the  third part  of  the  cylinder .  Let  thofe  fegmentes  be 
A  E,  E  B,  B F,  F  C,  C  G,G  D,D  H,  and  H  A.  Wherefore  the  pyramis  remay  ning ,  whofe 
bafe  is  the  poligonofgure  AEBFCGDH  and  altitude  the felffame  with  the  cone, is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  third  part  of  the  cylinder  .  But  the  pyramis  whofe  bafe  is  thepoligonon figure 
AEBFCGDH  and  altitude  the  felffame  with  the  cone,  is  the  third part  of  the  prifme 
whofe  bafe  is  the poligonofgure  AEBFCGDH  and  altitude  the felffame  with  the  cylin¬ 
der. Wherfore  *the  prifme  whofe  bafe  is  the  poligonon figure  A  EB  FCG  D  H,and  altitude 
the  felffame  with  the  cylinder, is  greater  then  the  cylinder  whofe  bafe  is  the  circle  A  B  CD. 
But  it  is  alfo  lefefor  it  is  contayned  of  it,  which  is  impofible.  Wherfore  the  cylinder  is  not  in 
lejfe  proportion  to  the  cone  then  in  treble  proportion.ffnd  it  is proued  that  it  is  not  in  grea¬ 
ter  proportion  to  the  cone  then  in  treble  proportion,wheref ore  the  cone  is  the  third  part  of  the 
cylinder  Wherfore  euery  cone  is  the  third  part  of  a  cylinder,  hauing  one  dr  the felffame  bafe, 
and  one  and  the felfe  fame  altitude  with  it:  which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated. 

f  Added  by  M.Iohi  !Dee. 

A  Theoreme.  t * 

T  hefkperficies  of euery  Upright  Cylinder ,  except  his  bafes  as  equall  to  that  circle  Whofe \ femidU - 
meter  is  middell proport  ionall  betvoenethe fide  of  the  Cylinder, and  the  diameter  of  his  bafe * 

Theoreme.  2. 

T hefkperficies  of  euery  vpright.or  Ifofceles  Cone ,  except  the  bafe,  is  equall  to  that  circle,  whofe 
femidiameter  is  middell  proportionall  betrnne  the  fide  of  that  Cone,  and  the femidiameter  of  the  cir¬ 
cle:  which  is  the  bafe  of  the  Cone. 

My  ententin  additions  is  not  to  amend  Eucltde:  Method, (which  nedeth  little  adding'or  none  at  all). 
But  my  defire  is  fomwhat  to  furnifh  you, toward  a  more  general  art  Mathematical  the  Euchdes  Elemets, 
(remayning  in  the  termes  in  which  they  are  written  )  can  fufficiently  helpe  you  vnto.  And  though  Eu- 
clides  Elementes  with  my  Additions run  not  in  one  Methodicallrace  toward  my  marke  5  yet  in  the 
meane  fpace  my  Additions  either  geue  light, where  they  are  annexed  to  Eueltdes  matter, or  geue  fome 
ready  ayde,and  fliew  the  way  to  dilate  your  dilcourfes  Msthematicall,or  to  inuent  and  pradtile  thinges 

EEe.j.  Mechanically 


*  */£  prifm 
baumgfor 
his  bafe  a  pod 
ligonen  figuri 
as  Tt>e  bane 
often  before 
notedynto 
you* 


Note:  M. 
Dee  bis  chiefs 
purpofeinbit 

additions , 


Mechanically.  And  (in  deede)ifmoreleyforhad  happened,  many  moreftraunge  matters  Mathematic* 
call  had,  (  according  to  my  purpofe  generall )  bene  prefently  publiflied  to  your  knowledge  :  but  want 
of  due  leafour  cauleth  you  to  want,that,which  my  good  will  toward  you, molt  hartely  doth  wifh  you. 

As  concerning  the  two  Theoremes  here  annexed,their  veritie ,  is  by  Archimedes ,  in  his  booke  of  the 
Sphere  and  Cylinder  manifeltly  demonitrated ,  and  at  large  :  you  may  therefore  boldly  trullto  them, 
and  vfethem,asfuppofitions3in  any  your  purpofes:  till  you  haue  alfo  their  demolirations.  Butifyou 
well  remember  my  mltrudtions  vpon  the  firlt  propofition  of  this  booke ,  and  my  other  additions  vpon 
the  fecond ,  with  the  fuppofitionshow  a  Cylinder  and  a  Cone  are  Mathematically  produced ,  you  will 
not  neede^rr^/wWwdemonftrationrnoryet  be  vtterly  ignoraunt  of  the  lolide  quantities  of  this  Cylin 
der  and  Cone  here  compared:  ( the  diameter  of  their  bafe,and  heith  being  knownein  any  meafure)nei~ 
thercan  their  croked  fuperficiesremayne  vnmeafured.  Whereof  vndoubtedly  great  pleafure  andcom- 
moditie  may  grow  to  the  lincere  ftudent,and  precifepradbfer. 


f  The  1 1. Theorem?.  '  The  iiSPropofition. 


Cones  and  Cylinders  being  Wilder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude  3  are  in 
that  proportion 3t he  one  other  that  their  bafes  are. 


Tiemonttrt' 
tion  4s  tou¬ 
ching  Cones . 


Fir  ft  cafe,  i* 


“MEt  there  be  take  cones  &  cylin  dr  es  vnder  one  and  the  felfe f me  altitude  whofe 
rJ—bafes  l£t  be  the  circles  ABC  D  and  E  F  G  Ft ,  and  axes  the  lines  K  L&  M  N, 
\f}T0)fnd  let  the  diameters  of their  bafes  be  AC  and  E  G.T he  I fay  that  as  the  circle 
ABC  D  is  to  the  circle  E  EG  H  ,fo  is  the  cone  A  L  to  the  cone  EN  ,  and  alfo 
1  GiyGAzyye  cylinder  A  L  to  the  cylinder  EN .  For  if  the  cone  A  L  be  not  to  the  cone  E- 
N  as  the  circle  A  B  C  D  is  to  the  circle  E  F  G  Hjhen  as  the  circle  A  B  C  D  is  to  the  circle  E- 

i  V  . 


FGHfo  is  the  cone  A  L  to  fome  folide  either  lefe  then  the 
cone  E  N, or  greater .  First  let  it  be  vnto  a  lefe  gamely ,  to 
the folide  X .  And  vnto  that  which  the folide  X  is  lefe  then 
the  cone  E  N,let  the  folide  T  be  equall .  Wherefore  the  cone 
E  Nis  equal  to  the  folides  X  dr  T.Befcribe(by  the  6.  of  the 
fourth)  in  the  circle  EFG  H  a  fquare  E  FGH.  Wherefore 
thefquareis  greater  then  halfe  the  circle .  Rayfe  vp  vpon 
the  fquare  E  F  G  H  a  pyramis  of  equall  altitude  with  the 
c  one .  Wherefore  the  pyramis  ,fo  ray  fed  vt>  is  greater  then 
halfe  of  the  cone.  For  if  wedefcribe  a fquare  about  the  cir¬ 
cle  ^and  vpon  that  fquare  rayfe  vp  a  pyramis  of  equall  al¬ 


titude 


> 


titudewith  the  cone ,  the  pyramis  which  is  Jet  'upon  the  fquare  defcrihed  with  in  the  circle  is 
the  halfe  of the  pyr  amis Jet  'upon  the fquare  defcrihed  about  the  circle, for  they  are  in  propor¬ 
tion  the  one  to  the  other  as  their  baJes.But  the  cone  is  lefe  then  the  pyr  amis  which  is j et  vpon 
the  fquare  defcrihed  about  the  circle.  Wherefore  the  pyr  amis  whofe  bafe  is  the  fquare  E  F- 
G  H  and  top  one  and  the fame  with  the  cone  is  greater  then  halfe  of the  cone ;  deuide  (by  the 
3  o.  of  the  third)  the  circumferences  E  F,F  G  ,G  H  and  H  E  into  two  equal  partes  in  the  points 
O ,P ,R,S ,and  draw  the fe  right  lines  H  0 , 0  E,E  P,P  F,F  R,R  G,G  S,andS  H .  Wherefore 
euery  one  of thcfe  triangles  H  O  E,E  P  F,  F  R  G,and  G  S  H  is  greater  then  halfe  the  fegmet 
of  the  circle  defcrihed  about  the. Ray  fe  vp  vpd  euery  one  oft  he  triangles  II  O  E,E  P  FSF  RG 
and  G  S II  a  pyr  amis  equail  in  altitude  with  the  cone.  Wherefore  euery  one  of  the  pyramids fe 
ray  fed  rup  is  greater  then  the  halfe  part  of  the fegment  of  the  cone  defcrihed  about  it .  2 'low 
thendeuiding  (by  the  $o.  of the  third)  the  circumferences  remayningint  6  two  equail  partes, 
and  drawing  right  lines ,  and  raffing  <vp  vppon  euery  one  of thofe  triangles  a  pyr  amis  of 
equail  altitude  with  the  cone,  and  thus  doing  continually ,  we  fall  at  length  by  the 
frit  of  the  tenth  leue  certayne  fegmentes  of  the  cone  which  fhall  be  lefe  then  the  folide 
T.  Let  thofe fegmentes  be  H  O  E,  E  P  F,F  R  G,and  GSH .  Wherefore  the  pyr  amis  remay - 
ning whofe  bafe  is  the poligonon  figure  II O  E  P  F  R  G  S  &  top  the  felfe  fame  with  the  cone f 
is  greater  then  the folide  X.  Infcribein  the  circle  A  BCD  a  poligononfgure  like  and  in  like 
fort ftuate  to  the  poligononfgure  H  OEP  F  RG  S,dnd  let  the fame  be  DT  AV  B  ZC  W, 
and  vpon  it  rayfe  a  pyr  amis  of  equail  altitude  with  the  cone  A  L.  'How for  that  as  the fquare 
of  the  line  A  C  is  to  the fquare  of  the  line  E  G,fo  is  the  pohgcnon  fgure  DT  AV  B  ZCW 
to  the  poligonon  figure  H  0  E  P  F  RG  S  (by  thefirfi  of this  booke)  .-But  as  the fquare  of  the 
line  A  C  is  to  the  fquare  oft  he  line  E  G,fo  is  the  circle  AB  CD  to  the  circle  EF  G  H(by  the 
fecond  oft  his  booke ).Wherefore(  by  the  i  /  .of the  fft  )as  the  circle  AB  CD  is  to  the  circle  E- 
F  G  H,fo  is  the  poligonon  fgure  DT  AV  B  Z  CWto  the  poligonon  fgure  H  0  E  P  FR  G- 
S  ( this foloweth  alfo  of  the  corollary  of  the  2. of this  booke) :  moreouer  as  the  circle  ABC  D 
is  to  the  circle  EF  G  H,fo  is  the  cone  A  L  to  the folide  X.  And  as  the  poligonon  figure  D  T~ 
AV  B  Z  CW,isto  the  poligonon  fgure  H  O  E  P  R  G  S ,  fo  is  the  pyr  amis  whofe  bafe  is 
the  poligononfgure  DT  AVBZCW,  and  toppe  the  poynt  L ,  to  the  pyr  amis  whofe  bafe  is 
the  poligononfgure  H  0  E  P  RS,and  toppe  tkepoynt  Wherefore(  by  the  it.  of  the  fft) 
as  the  cone  A  L  is  to  the  folide  X,fo  is  the  pyr  amis  whofe  bafe  is  the  pdigono figure  DT AV - 
B  ZC  W,and  toppe  the  poynt  L,  to  the  pyr  amis  whofe  bafe  is  the  poligononfgure  HEO  P- 
F  RG  S,and  toppe  the  poynt  N. Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  1 6.  of  the  fft)  as  the  cone  A  L 
is  to  the  pyr  am  is  which  is  in  it  ,fo  is  the  folide  X ,  to  the  pyramis  which  is  in  the  cone  E  H. 
But  the  cone  L,  is  greater  then  the  pyramis  which  is  in  it .  Wherefore  alfo  the folide  X  is 

greater  then  the  pyramis  which  is  in  the  cone  E  N.  But  it  is  alfo  lefife  by  conllrucHon  Which 
is  impofible.Wherfore  as  the  circle  AB  CD,  is  to  the  circle  EF  G  H,fo  is  not  the  cone  A  L 
to  any  folide  lefe  then  the  cone  E  N.  \ 

In  like forte  alfo  may  we  proue,that  as  the  circle  EF  G  H,is  to  the  circle  ABC  D,fo  is 
not  the  cone  E II  to  any  folide  lefe  then  the  cone  A  L.Tgow  I fay  that  as  the  circle  A  BCD , 
is  to  the  circle  EF  G  Bfo  is  not  the  cone  A  L  to  any  folide  greater  then  the  cone  E  H.For  if 
it  be  popble  let  it  be  vnto  a  greater ,  namely  to  the folide  X.  Wherefore  by  conuerfon,  as  the 
circle  EE  GH, is  to  the  circle  ABC  Dfois  the folide  X  to  the  cone  <^A  L  :  but  as  the folide 
X  is  to  the  cone  L,fois  the  cone  EH ,  to  feme folide  lefe  then  the  cone  A  L  (  as  we  may 
fee  by  the  ajfumpt  put  after  the fecond  of  this  booke ) :  Wherefore  (by  then,  of  thefft)as  the 
circle  E  F  GH  is  to  the  circle  ABC  G,fo  is  the  cone  EH  to  feme folide  leffe  then  the  cone  A- 
L, which  we  haue preued  to  be  impofiible.  Wherefore  as  the  circle  ABC  D,is  to  the  circle  E- 
F  GH  ^fo  is  not  the  cone  AL  to  any  folide  greater  then  the  cone  E  N .  And  it  is  alfo  proued 
that  it  is  not  to  any  leffe. Wherefore  as  the  circle  ABC  D ,  is  to  the  circle  EFGH  ,fo  is  the 
cone  A  L  to  the  cone  EH. 

But  as  the  cone  is  to  the  conefo  is  the  cylinder  to  the  cylinder, (by  the  i$.  of  the  fft) for 

EEe.ii.  tbs 


\ 

Second  cafie 


cThetypeluethcBo6ke 

pemonttrd-  the  one  is  in  treble  proportion  to  the  other  Wi  ercfore )by  the  ii.ofthefft)as  the  circle  o'f* 

twn  touching  BCD  is  to  the  circle  E  F  GH  ,fo  are  the  cylinders  which  are fet  upon  them  the  one  to  the 
cylinders ♦  other, the faid  cylinders  being, under  equall  altitudes  with  the  cones. Cones  therefore  and  cy¬ 

linders, being  under  one  <jr  the f elf  fame  altitude, are  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other , 
that  their  bafes  are  :which  was  required  to  be  demonf rated. 

fTbe  12.  Theoreme.  The  12.  Tropofition. 

Like  Cones  and  Cylinders  3are  in  treble  proportion  of that  in  "Which  the  du 
ameters  of their  hafes  are. 


Firfl  hart 
whtch  cancer-' 
neth  tones* 


Vppofe  that  thefe  Cones  and  Cylinders,  whofe  bafes  are  the  circles  t ^AB  C  D,  and 
E  F  GH,  and  diameters  of  their  bafes  B  D  and  F  H,  be  like ,  and  let  the  axes  of 
T^rdti'  the  Cones  or  Cylinders  be  K  L  and  CM  Ff,  and  let  the  centres  of  their  bafes  be 
the  pointes  K  and  M  .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  cone,  whofe  bafe  is  the  circle  AB  CD,  &  toppe 
the  point  L,  is  to  the  Cone,  who/ ?  bafe  is  the  circle  EF  GH,  and  toppe  the  point  N,  in  treble 
proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  H  .  For  if  the  cone 
A  B  CD  L  be  not  to  the  cone  EFGHN  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter 


Firfl  cafe  * 
ionjlrtitlion. 


B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  H,  the  cone  k^A  B  CD  L  Jhall  be 
in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  BD  is 
to  the  diameter  F  H, either  to  fome folide  lejfe  then  the  cone 
E  F  G  H  N,  or  to  fome  folide  greater .  Firfl  let  it  be  unto  a 
lejfe, namely, to  the  folide  X.Defcribejby  the  6. of the fourth) 
in  the  circle  EF  G  H,  a  fquare  EFG H  .  Wherefore  the 
fquare  EF  GH  is  greater  then  the  kalfe  of the  circle  EF - 
G  H .  Raife  up  from  the  fquare  EF  GH  a  pyramis  of equall 
altitude  with  the  cone.  Wherfore  the  pyramis fo  raifed  up, is 
greater  then  the  halfe  part  of  the  cone .  Diuide  now  ( by  the 
30.  of  the  third )  the  circumferences  E  F,F  G,GH,&  HE, 
into  two  equall  partes  in  the  pointes  O,  P,  R,  S,  and  dr  awe 
thefe  right  lines  Eo,  o  F,FP,P  G,G  R,RH2H  S,  and  S  E.  Wherfore  ettery  one  of  thefe 

triangles 


4k 


ofSuclicks  Elementes .  FoLyji* 

triangles  E  0  F,F  P  G,G RH,  and  H  S  E,  is  greater  then  the  halfe  of  the  fegment  of  the 
circle  EF  G  U ,  defcrihed  about  ech  ofthem.Erecte  vpon  tuery  one  ofthefetriangles  EOF, 

F P  Gy  G RH,  and  HSE,  a  pyramis ,  hauing  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude  with  the 
cone .  Wherefore  euery  one  of  the  pyramids  fo  raifed  vp,  is  greater  then  the  halfe  of  the 
fegment  of  the  cone  defcrihed  about  them .  Now  therefore  diuiding  the  circumferences 
remay ning  into  two  equall partes,  and  drawing  right  lines,  and  raifingvp  vpon  euery  one 
of  the  triangles  a  py  ram  is,  hauing  one  and  the felfe fame  altitude  with  the  cone,  and, thus 
doing  continually  *  we jhall  at  the  length  ( by  the  i.  of  the  tenth )  leaue  cert at  ne  fegmentes  of 
the  cone, which  jhall  be  lefe  then  the  excejfe  whereby  the  cone  E  F  G  H  N  excedeih  the  folide 
X .  Let  thofe  fegmentes  left  be  E  0,0  F,F  P,P  C,G  R,RH,H  S,  andSE.  Wherefore  the 
pyramis  remayuing,whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligonon figure  EO  FPGRH  S,and  toppe  the  point  Demon  ftrati* 
N,  is  greater  then  the folide  X .  Defcribe  (by  the  iS.of the  fixt )  in  the  circle  ARC  D,vn-  on  ieadingto 
to  the  Poligonon  figure  EO  F  P  G  RHS,a  Poligonon  figure  like  and  in  like fort fituate,and  an  impofsibr* 
let  the fame  be  AT  BVC  ZD  W,  and from  it  raife  vp  a  pyramis,  hauing  one  and  the felfe  Htte, 
fame  altitude  with  the  cone  ABC  L .  And  let  one  of  the  triangles  comprehending  the  pyra¬ 
mis,  whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligonon  figure  AT  BFCZD  W,and  toppe  the  point  L,  be  L  B  T, 
and  let  alfo  orie  of  the  triangles  comprehending  the  pyramis,  whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligonon  fi¬ 
gure  EO  F  P  G  Rti  S,  and  toppe  the  point  N,  be  NjF  0 ,  and  dr  awe  thefe  right  lines  K  T 
and  M  O  .  Andforafmuch  as  the  cone  ABC  D  L  is  like  to  the  cone  EF  G  H  N,  therefore 
(by  the  20. definition  of  the  eleuenth  )  as  the  diameter  B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  H,fo  is  the 
axe  K  L  to  the  axe  c M  Tfi :  But  as  the  diameter  B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  B,fo  (  by  the  15. 
of t  he fift)  is  thefemidiameter  BK  to  the femidiameter  F  M .  Wherefore  (by  then,  of  the 
fift)  asB  KistoF  M,foisI<  LtoM  N .  Wherefore  alternately  alfo  (by  the  16 .of the fifty 
as  B  K  is  to  K  L,fo  is  F  M  to  M  N .  Wherefore  the fides  about  the  equall  angles  b  K  L  and 
F  MN  (  which  angles  are  equall,  for  that  they  are  right  angles  (  by  the  iS.  definition  of the 
eleuenth  )  are proportionall .  Wherefore  (  by  the  1. definition  of  the fixt)  the  triangle  BKL 
is  like  to  the  triangle  F  MN .  Agame  for  that  as  BK  is  to  KT,fois  FM  to  MO,  and 
they  comprehend  equall  angles,  namely,  B  KT  and  F  M  O,for  what  part  the  angle  B  KT 
is  of thofe  fower  right  angles  which  are  made  at  the  centre  K,  the felfe fame  part  is  the  angle 
F  M  O  of  the  fower  right  angles  which  are  made  at  the  centre  CM :  forafmuch  therefore  as 
the  fides  about  the  equall  angles  are  proportionall,  the  triangle  BKT  is  like  to  the  triangle 
F  MO  .  Againe,  forafmuch  as  it  was proued,  that  as  B  K  is  to  K  L,fo  is  F  M  to  N M,  but 
B  K  is  equall  to  KT,  and  F  M  to  M  O,  therefore  as  T  K  is  to  K  L,fo  is  0  M  to  M  N.Wher- 
fore  the  fides  about  the  equall  angles  T  K  Land  OMN  (  which  angles  are  equall,  for  that 
they  are  right  angles  )  are  proportionall .  Wherefore  the  triangle  LKT  is  like  to  the  trian- 
gleMNO  .  And  for  that  ( by  the  6. of the  fixt )  and  by  reafon  of the  likenes  of  the  triangles 
LK  B  and  T(M  F ,  as  L  B  is  to  B  K  ,fi>  is  N  F  to  F  M,  and  againe  by  reafon  of  the  likenes 
of  the  triangles  B  KT  and  F  M  O,  as  K  Bis  to  B  T,fo  is  M  F  to  F  O,  therefore  of  equalitie 
(by  the  22. of  the  fift)  as  LB  is  to  B  T,fo  is  N^F  toFO  .  Againe  for  that  by  reafon  of  the 
likenes  of the  triangles  LKT  and  N  O  M,as  LT  istoT  K,fo  is  NjD  to  O  M,  and  by  rea¬ 
fon  of  the  likenes  of the  triangles  TKBfrO  ME, as  KT  istoT  B,fo  is  MO  to  OF  :ther - 
fore  of  equalitie  (by  the  22  .of the fift )  as  LT  is  to  T  B,fo  is  N  O  to  OF.  And  it  was  proued 
that  asT  B  is  to  B  L,fo  is  O  F  to  F  N .  Wherefore  againe  of equalitie,  as  T  Lis  to  LB,fo  is 
O  N  to  N  F .  Wherefore  the fides  of  the  triangles  LTB&NO  F, are proportionall.  Wher - 
fore  (by  they. of  the  fixt)  the  triangles  LT  B  and  NO  F,  are  equiangle  .  Wherefore  alfo 
they  are  like  .Wherefore  the  pyramis,  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  BKT,  and  toppe  the  point 
L,  is  like  vnto  the  pyramis, whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  F  MO  \ and  toppe  thepointN.  For  they 
are  comprehended  vnder  likeplainejuperficieces,  and  equall  in  multitude .  But  pyramids  be¬ 
ing  like,  and  hauingtrianglesto  their  bafes,  are  (  by  the  8. of  the  twelfth )  in  treble  proporti¬ 
on  the  one  to  the  other  of  that  in  which  fides  of  like  proportion  are .  Wherefore  the  pyramis 

EEe.iij .  B  RT  & 


The  tmlueth  <Book$ 

BFT  L  is  to  the  pyramis  FMO  N,  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  tine  B  K  is  to 
the  line  F  M.  And  in  like  fort  if  we  draw  right  lines from  thepointes  A,W,D,Z,  C,  and  F, 
to  the  pint  K,and  hkewife from  the  pointes  E,S,H,R,G,and  P,  to  the  point  tjtt,  andraife 
•vp  vpon  the  triangles  pyramids, hauing  the felfe fame  altitudes  with  the  cones,  we  mayproue 
that  euery  one  of thofe  pyramids  ofone  &  the felfe fame  order,  is  to  euery  one  of  the  pyramids 
of  the felfe  fame  order,  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the fide  of like proportion  B  K  is 
to  fide  of  like proportion  F  M,that  is,  of  that  which  the  line  h  J D  hath  to  the  line  F  H,  But  as 
one  of  the  antecedentes  is  to  one  of the  confequentes,fo  are  all  the  antecedentes  to  all  the  con - 
fequetes  (by  the  12. of thefift )  Wherfore  as  the  pyr amis  BKT  Lis  to  the pyr amis  F  MON, 
fo  is  the  whole  pyr  amis,  whofe  bafeis  the  Poligon  on  figure  AT  BFCZDW,  and  toppe  the 
point  L,  to  the  whole  pyr  amis, whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligonon figure  EO  F  P  G  RH  S, and  toppe 
the  point  N .  Wherefore  the  pyr  amis,  whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligonon  figure  A  T  BFC  Z  DW, 
and  toppe  the  point  L,  is  to  the  pyramis, whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligononfigure  EO  F P  G RH S, 
md  toppe  the  point  N,  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  line  BD  istotheline  F  H, 


And  it  is  fuppofedalfo  that  the  cone,  whofe  bafe  is  the  circle 
ABC  D,  and  toppe  the point L,  is  to  the  folide  X,  in  treble 
proportion  of  that  in  which  the  line  B  D  is  to  the  line  F  H. 

Wherefore  as  the  cone,  whofe  bafe  is  the  circle  A  BCD,  and 
toppe  the  point  L,  is  to  the  folide  X,fo  is  the  pyramis,  whofe 
bafe  is  the  Poligononfigure  AT  BFCZDW,& toppe  the 
point  L,  to  the  pyramis,  whofe  bafeis  the  Poligonon  figure 
EO  F  P  G  RH  S,  and  toppe  the  point  N .  Wherefore  alter¬ 
nately  (  by  the  1 6 .of  thefift )  as  the  cone,  whofe  bafe  is  the 
circle  A  B  CD, &  toppe  the  point  L,  is  to  the pyramis  which 
is  in  it,  whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligono figure  AT  BFC  Z  D  W, 

&  toppe  the  point  L,fo  is  the folide  X,to  the  pyramis,  whofe 
bafe  is  the  Poligononfigure  EO  F  P  G  RH  S,  and  toppe  the  point  2^.  But  the forefaid  cone 
is  greater  then  the  pyramis  which  is  in  it,  for  it  containeth  it .  Wherefore  the  folide  X 
is  greater  then  the  pyramis,  whofe  bafe  is  the  Poligononfigure  EO  F  P  G  RHS,  and  toppe 
the  point  N.But  it  was fuppofed  to  be  leffe:which  is  impofiible.  Wherfore  the  cone  ABC  D  L 
is  not  to  any  folide  lejje  then  the  cone  EF  GUN, in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the 

dimeter 


ofSuclides  Elemcntes.  FoUyj^ 

diameter  B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  H.ln  like fort  alfo  may  we  proue,that  the  cone  FF  G  Hid 
is  not  to  any folide  leffe  then  the  cone  A  BCD  L,in  treble  proportion  of that  in  which  F  H 
is  to  B  D  . 

‘How  alfo  I fay,  that  the  cone  BCD  L  is  not  to  any folide  greater  then  the  cone 
E  F  GH  N,m  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  H. 
For  if  it  be  pofible ,  let  it  be  to  a  greater ,namely,  to  the folide  X.  Wherefore  by  conuerfion  (by 
the  Corollary  of  the  a-.ofthefft)  the folide  X  is  to  the  cone  AB  C  D  L,in  treble  proportion 
of  that  in  which  the  diameter  F  H  is  to  the  diameter  B  D  .  But  as  the  folide  X  is  to  the  cone 
ABC  D  L,fo  is  the  cone  EFGHN  to fome folide  lefe  then  the  cone  AB  C  D  L  (  as  it  is 
eafie  to  fee  by  the  Afumpt  put  after  the  2.  Propofition )  .  Wherefore  alfo  the  cone  EFGHN 
is  vnto  fome  folide  leffe  then  the  cone  AB  CD  L,in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the 
diameter  F  His  to  the  diameter  B  D :  which  is proued to  be  impofible.  Wherefore  the  cone 
AB  CD  L  is  not  to  any folide  greater  then  the  cone  EF  GHNin  treble  proportion  of  that 
in  which  the  diameter  BD  is  to  the  diameter  F  H,  and  it  is  alfo  proued  that  it  is  not  to  any 
lefe .  Wherefore  the  cone  ABC  D  is  to  the  cone  EFGHN  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in 
which  the  diameter  B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  H. 

But  as  cone  is  to  cone,f>  is  cylinder  to  cylinder  (by  the  i$. of the  fft ) for  the  cylinder  is 
triple  to  the  cone  which  is  defer ibed  on  the  one  and  felfe  fame  bafe,  and  hauing  one  and  the 
felfe fame  altitude  with  the  cone .  For  it  is  proued  (  by  the  10.  of  the  twelfth  )  that  euery  cone 
is  the  third  part  of  a  cylinder,  h aping  one  and  the felfe fame  bafe  with  it,  and  one  dr  the felfe 
fame  altitude .  Wherefore  the  cylinder  is  vnto  the  cylinder  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in 
which  the  diameter  B  D  is  to  the  diameter  F  H.Wherfore  like  cones  dr  cylinders  are  in  treble 
proportion  of that  in  which  the  diameters  of  their  bafes  are:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


The  i3-Theoreme.  The  iy.TropoJttion, 

If  a  Cylinder  be  diuided  by  a  playne  fuperficies 
being  a  parallell  to  the  two  oppofte playne  fuper * 
feieces :  then  as  the  one  Cylinder  is  to  the  other 
Cylinder ,fo  is  the  axe  of  the  one  to  the  axe  of 
the  other. 


Fppofe  that  there  be  a  cylinder  A  D ,  whofe  axe  let 
be  EF ,  and  let  the  oppofte  bafes  be  the  circles  A- 
E  B,and  C  F  D,  and  let  AD  be  diutded  by  the fu- 
perfees  G  H  being  a  parallell  to  the  two  oppofte 
playne  fuperfcieces,  A  B,and  CD.T hen  I  fay  that  as  the  cylin¬ 
der  BG  is  to  the  cylinder  GD,fo  is  the  axe  EK  to  the  axe  K  F. 
Extend  the  axe  E  F  on  either  fide  to  the pointes  L  dr  CW.And 
vnto  the  axe  E  K  put  as  many  axes  equal!  as you  will,  namely , 
E  N,dr  N  L,dr  likewife  vnto  the  axe  F  Kput  as  many  axes  e- 
qual  as  you  w il, namely, F  X  dr  X  M.And  by  the  points  L,N,dr 
X,M,extede  playne  fuperfcieces  parallels  to  the  two  fuperfcieces 
A  B, dr  C  D  (by  the  corollary  of  the  j$.ofthe  eleueth)  :dr  in  the 
plaine fuperfcieces  thus  extended  by  the  pointes  L,  N,  X,  CW, 
imagine  to  be  drawne thefe  circles , namely,  0 P,RS ,TF, 
and  Z  W,  hauing  to  their  centers  the  pointes  L,  N,  M ,  X,  and 
let  them  be  equal  to  either  of  the  circles  A  B,and  C  D  :and  vp- 
pon  thofe  circles  imagine  thefe  cylinders  PR,R  B,D  T,T  Wto 

EEe.iiij.  he 


Second  cafe. 


Second part 
which  concer¬ 
ned  CiUin - 

den. 


ConJlruHm* 


Demonjlra- 

mth 


Coitfir action. 


Demmftrdti- 
on  touching 
Cylinders. 


T he  Welueth  2?  ookf 

Befit  .  Nfw forafinuch  as  the  axes  LN ,  N  E ,  and  E  K  are 
equall  the  one  to  the  other :  T her ef ore  the  cylinders  P R  ,RB, 
andB  G  are(  by  the  i  /  .of  the  twelueth )in  proportion  the  one  to 
the  other  as  their  bafis  are. But  the  bafis  are  e quail.  Wherefore 
alfo  the  cylinders  PR,RB,  and B  G  are  equall  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther.And  forafinuch  as  the  axes  L  N,N  E,  and EK  are  equal 
the  one  to  the  other,  and  the  cylinders  P  R,RB,  and B  G  are  ah 
fo  equall  the  one  to  the  other ,  and  the  multitude  of  the  axes  L- 
N,  N  E,and  E  K  is  equall  to  the  multitude  of  the  cylinders  P- 
R,  R  By  and  3  G:  therefore  how  multiplex  the  whole  axe  K  Lis 
to  the  axe  EK  ,fo  multiplex  is  the  whole  cylinder  P  G  to  tbe 
cylinder  B  G.  And  {by  the  fame  reafon )  alfo  how  multiplex  the 
whole  axe  M  K  is  the  axe  K  F,fo  multiplex  is  the  whole  cylin¬ 
der  WG  to  the  cylinder  G  D .  Wherfore  if  the  axe  K  L  be  equal 
the  axe  K  Mythe  cylinder  P  G  is  equall  to  cilinder  G  W.  iffnd 
if  the  axe  K  L  be  greater  then  the  axe  K  M ,  the  cylinder  P  G  is 
greater  then  the  cylinder  G  W.And  if  it  be  le/fe  it  is  lejfe .  Now 
therefore  there  are  foure  magnitudes ,  namely  ,  the  two  axes 
E  Kyand  K  F,and  the  two  cylinders  B  G ,  and  G  D  >  and  vnto 
the  axe  E  K,andto  the  cylinder  £  G,  namely  yto  thefrft  and  the 
third  are  taken  equemultiplices,  namely,  the  axe  K  L,  and  the 
cy  linder  P  G.  And  likewife  vnto  the  axe  G  F,  and  vnto  the  cy¬ 
linder  GrD,  namely,  the  fecond  and  the  fourth, are  taken  other 
equemultiplices, namely, the  axe  K  <Jp[,  and  the  cylinder  G  TV. 

Anditisprouedthat  if  the  axe  I<  L ,  excede  the  axe  K  M ,  the 
cylinder  P  G  excedeth  the  cylinder  G  W-and  that  if  it  be  equall 
it  is  eqmll,andifit  be  lejfe  it  is  lejfe.  Wherfore  ( by  the  6. defini¬ 
tion  of the f ft)  as  the  axe  E  K  is  to  the  axe  K  F,fo  is  the  cylinder  B  G  to  the  cylinder  GD.  if 
therfore  a  cylinder  bediuided  by  aplainefuperfcies  being  a  parallel  to  the  two  oppofte  plaine 
fuperfcieces.-then  as  the  one  cylinder  is  to  the  other  cilinder ,fi  is  the  axe  of  the  one  to  the  axe 
of  the  other :  which  was  required  to  be proued. 


If  The  i4.Theoreme.  The  i^/Propofition. 

'  '  .  -K  '•  ",  •.  al  A\ '  t"’\  '  -  «  '  '  V 

Cones  and  Cylinders  confining  hpon  equall  hafes^are  in  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other  as  their  altitudes . 

Vppofe  that  the  cylinders  F  D ,  and  EB ,  and  the  cones  AG  B,  and  C  K  D,do 
conjifle  vpon  equall  bafis ,  namely ,  vpon  the  circles  AB,and  CD.  Then 
I fay  that  as  the  cylinder  E  B  is  to  the  cylinder  F  D,fi  is  the  axe  GH  to  the  axe 
K  L.  Extende  the  axe  K  L  directly  to  the poynte  N,and  vnto  the  axe  G  B,put 
the  axe  L  N  equall  .-and  about  the  axe  L  N  imagine  a  cylinder  C  M  •  Now forafinuch  as  the 
cilinder s  E  B ,  and  CM,  ah  vnder  equall  altitudes,  therefore  (by  the  ti. of  the  twelueth) 
they  are  in  the  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as  their  bafis  are.  But  the  bafis  are  equall  the 
one  to  the  other .  Wherefore  alfo  the  cy  linders  E  B,and  C  M  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other . 
And  forafinuch  as  the  whole  cylinder  F  M,  is  diuided  by  a  playne  fuperfeies  C  D  being 
-  '  a  parallel 


ofEuclides  Elemehtes 


aparallell  to  either  of  the  oppofteplaine ft- 
perfcieces:  therefore  (by  the  13.  of  the  trvel- 
tteth) as  the  cylinder  C  M  is  to  the  cylinder 
F  Dfo  is  the  axe  L  2 fto  the  axe  L  K .  But 
the  cylinder  CM  is  equal  to  the  cylinder  E  B, 
and  the  axe  LN  to  the  axe  G  H .  Wherefore 
as  the  cylinder  E  Bis  to  the  cylinder  F  D  ,fo 
is  the  axe  G  H  to  the  axe  K  L. 

But  as  the  cylinder  EB  is  to  the  cylinder 
F  D,fo(bythe  i$.of  thefft)isthe  cone  AB£ 
G  to  the  cone  C  D  K  5  for  the  cylinders  are  in 
treble  proportion  to  the  cones  (  by  the  10  .of 
the  trvelueth )  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  //.  of  the 
fft )as  the  axe  G  H  is  to  the  axe  I(  L,  fo  is  the 
cone  ABG  to  the  cone  C  T>  K,dr  the  cylinder 
EB  to  the  cylinder  F  D  Wherfot  e  cones  dr  cy 
tinders  confuting  vpon  equal  bafes  are  in  pro¬ 
portion  the  one  to  the  other  as  their  altitudes: 
which  was  required  to  be  demon  ft rated. 


fT he  is.Theoreme. 


The  ifdPropoJition. 


In  equall  Cones  and  Cylinders ,  the  bafes  are  reciprokall  to  their  altu 
tudes.jlncl  cones  and  Cylinders  whoje  bafes  are  reciprokall  to  their  alti* 
tudes}are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

Fppofe  that  thefe  cones  A  CL, EG  Tier  thefe  cylinders  AX3EO 
are  the  circles  B  CD,  E  F  G  H, 

and  axes  K  L,and  M  N  (which  axes 

_ are  alfo  the  altitudes  of  the  cones  dr 

cylinders )  be  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  The  I fay 
that  the  bafes  of  the  cylinders  X  A  dr  E  O  are  red 
prokal  to  their  altitudes, that  is,  that  as  the  bafe  A- 
B  C  D  is  to  the  bafe  E  F  G  Hfo  the  altitude  M  2f_ 
to  the  altitude  K  L.  For  the  altitude  K  L  is  either 
equall  to  the  altitude  M  N  or  not.  Fir  It  let  it  be  e- 
quall.But  the  cylinder  Axis  equal  to  the  cylinder 
E  O.But  cones  and  cylinders  confi 'fling  vnder  one 
andthefelfe  fame  altitude,  are  in  proportion  the 
one  to  the  other  as  their  bafes  are(by  the  11. of  the 
twelueth )  Wherfore  the  bafe  ABC  D  is  equall  to 
the  bafe  E  F  G II.  Wherefore  alfo  they  are  recipro- 
kal:as  the  bafe  A  B  CD  is  to  the  bafe  EFG  Hfo 
is  the  altitude  M  2ft  0  the  altitude  I(  L. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  the  altitude  L  K  be  not 
equall  to  the  altitude  M  N ,  but  let  the  altitude 


MB 


VemnJlH- 
tion  touching 
Const • 


Firtl  part  of 
the  propo/itio 
demenjirated 
touching 
Cones. 

7 wo  cafes  in 
this  pnpofim 
tion. 

Tbefirjl  eafei 


Second  cafe* 
ContimlVm* 


Vewuftra- 
u*n  touching 
cylinders. 


Second  part 
demnjlrated. 


\ 


.  it 

O  i 

■)  I  ,  ,  ) 


v  p  ;  l  -  -  VS 

>•  '  ■ 'i 


I 


M  N  he  greater.  And  ( by  the  y  .of thefrjl  )from 
the  altitude  M  N  take  away  P  M  e quail  to  the  al¬ 
titude  K  L ,  fo  that  let  the  line  PM,  be  -put 
equal  to  the  line  K  L.  And  by  the  point  P  let  there 
be  extended  a  playne  fuperficks  T  V  S, which  let 
cut  the  cylinder  E  O  ,  and  be  aparallell  to  the  two 
oppofite playne  fuperficieces ,  that  is ,  to  the  circles 
E  F  G  H,and  R  0 .  And  making  the  bafe  the  circle 
E  F  GH,&  the  altitude  M  P  imagine  a  cylinder 
E  S.  And  for  that  the  cylinder  A  X  is  equall  to  the 
cylinder  E  0,  and  there  is  an  other  cylinder  ES, 
therfore( by  the  7  .of theff fas  the  cylinder  AX  is 
to  the  cylinder  E  S,fo  is  the  cylinder  EO  to  the  cy  ¬ 
linder  E  S.But  as  the  cylinder  AX  is  to  the  cylin¬ 
der  E  S,fo  is  the  bafe  0/  BCD  toihe  bafe  E  F  - 
G  H.  For  the  cylinders  A  X ,  and E  S  are  under  j  jj  ^ 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude  .  <_ And  as  the  | 
cylinder  EO  ,  is  to  the  cylinder  ES  ,fo  is  the  alti-  f 

tude  M  N  to  the  altitude  M  P  .For  cylinders  cof-  ^ - - 

fiing  upo  equall  bafes  are  in  proportion  the  one  to  ^ 

the  other  as  their  altitudes. Whcrf ore  as  the  bafe  ABC  Ditto  the  bafe  E  F  G  H,fo  is  the  al¬ 
titude  M  N  to  the  altitude  M  P.But  the  altitude  P  c JM  is  equall  to  the  altitude  K  L.  Where¬ 
fore  as  the  bafe  A  B  C  D  is  to  the  bafe  EFG  H,fo  is  the  altitude  CM  N  to  the  altitude  K  L. 
Wherefore  in  the  equall  cylinders  A  X,  and  E  0  the  bafes  are  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes. 
But  now  fuppofe  that  the  bafes  of  the  cylinders  AX, and  E  0  bereciprokalto  their  altitudes , 
that  is, as  the  bafe  ABC  D  is  to  the  bafe  E  F  G  H,fo  is  the  altitude  MN  to  the  altitude  KL. 
T hen  I  fay  that  the  cylinder  AX  is  equall  to  the  cylinder  E  0  .  For  the  felfe  fame  order  of 
confruciio  remayningfor  that  as  the  bafe  A  B  CD  is  to  the  bafe  EFG  Hfo  is  the  altitude 
CM  N  to  the  altitude  K  L,  but  the  altitude  K  Lis  equall  to  the  altitude  P  M.  Wherefore  as 
the  bafe  A  B  C  D  is  to  the  bafe  E  E  G  H,  fo  is  the  altitude  M  N  to  the  altitude  P  M .  But  as 
the  bafe  A  B  C  D  is  to  the  bafe  EFG  Hfo  is  the  cylinder  AX  to  the  cylinder  E  S  ,for  they 
are  under  equall  altitudes:  and  as  the  altitude  M  N  is  to  the  altitude  P  M,fo  is  the  cylinder 
E  0  to  the  cylinder  E  S  (by  the  14.  of  the  twelucth)  .Wherefore  alfo  as  the  cylinder  Axis  to 
the  cylinder  ES , fo  is  the  cylinder  EO  to  the  cylinder  E  S  .  Wherefore  the  cylinder  AX  is 
equall  to  the  cylinder  EO  (by  the  9.  of the f ft )  .  And  fo  alfo  is  it  in  the  cones  which  haue  the 
felfe  fame  bafes  and  altitudes  with  the  cylinders .  Wherefore  in  equall  cones  and  cylinders ? 
the  bafes  are  reciprokall  to  their  altitudes  &c. which  was  required  to  be  demonf  rated. 

A  Corrollary  added  by  Camp  am  and  Flu  fas. 

Hitherto  hath  bene fliewed  thepaffionsand  proprieties  of  cones  and  cylinders  'tohofe  altitudes fall 
perpendicularly  upon  the  bafes ■  Ffow  will  we  declare  that  cones  and  cilinders  whoje  altitudes fall  ob¬ 
liquely  vpon  their  bajeshauealfo  the  felfe  famepajfions  and  proprieties  which  the forefay  d  cones  and 
cilinders  haue. 

Forafmuch  as  in  the  tenth  of  this  bookeitwas  fayd,that  euery  Cone  is  the  third  part  of  a  cilinder 
hauingone,and  the  felfe  fame  bafe,&  one  &  the  felfe  fame  altitude  with  it,which  thing  wasderrioftra- 
ted  by  a  cilinder  geuen,whofe  bafe  is  cut  by  a  fquare/inferibed  in  it,  and  vpon  the  fides  of  the  fquare  are 
defcribed  Ifofceles  triangles ,  making  a  poligonon  figure ,  and  againe  vpon  the  fides  of  this  poligonon 
figure  are  infinitely  after  the  fame  maner  defcribed  other  Ifofceles  triangles  taking  away  more  the  the 
halfe,as  hath  oftetimes  bene  declared :  therfore  it  is  manifefl>that  the  folides  fet  vpon  thefe  bafes, being 

<■  vnder 


of Sue  tides  Elementeso  Pol,  375* 

vnder  the  lame  altitude  that  the  cilinderindinedis^  and  being  a!fo  included  in  the  lame  cilinder,  do 
take  away  more  then  the  halfe  of  the  cilinder,  and  alfo  more  the  the  halfe  of  the  reliidue,as  it  hath  bene 
prouedin  eredted  cylinders  .For  thefe  inclined  folides  being  vnder  equail  altitudes  and  vpon  equall  ba- 
feswith  the  eredted  folides  are  equall  to  the  eredted  folides  by  the  corollary  of  the  40.  oftheeleuenth* 
Wherfore  they  alfo  in  like  fort  as  the  eredted,  takeaway  more  then  the  halfe .  If  therfore  we  copare 
the  inclined  cilinder,to  a  Cone  fet  vpon  the  felfe  fame  bafe,  and  halting  his  altitude  eredted ,  and  reafon 
by  an  argument  leading,  to  an  irjrpoffibilitie  by  the  demonftration  of  the  tenth  of  this  booke ,  we  may 
prone  that  the  fided  folide  included  in  the  inclined  cylindef  is  greater  then  the  triple  ofhis  pyramis, 
and  it  is  alfo  equall  to  the  fame  which  is  impofllble.And  this  is  the  firft  cafe,whereinitwasproued  that 
the  cilinder  not  being  equall  to  the  triple  of  the  cone  is  not  greater  then  the  triple  of  the  fame  .And  as 
touching-’ the' Tecond  cafe ,  we  may  after  the  fame  maner  conclude  that  that  iided  folide  contayned  in 
the  cylinder  is  greater  then  the  cylinder  :  which  is  very  abfurd  .  Wherefore  if  the  cylinder  be  neither 
greater  then  the  triple  of  the  cohe,nor’lefte‘,it  muft  nedes  be  equall  to  the  fame  .  The  dempnilration  of 
thefe  inclined  cylinders  m  of  playnely  followCth  the  demon!!  ration  of  the  eredted  Cylinders :  for  it  hath 
already  bene  proued,that  pyramids,and  fided  folides  (  which  are  alfo  called  generally  Prifmes  )  being 
fet  vpon  equall  bafes  and  vnder  one  and  thefelfe  fame  altitude ,  whether  the  altitude  be  eredted  or  in¬ 
clined  ,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other ,  narnely ,  are  in  proportion  as  their  bafes  are  by  the  6.  of  this 
booke. Wherefore  a  cylinder  inclined  fhall  be  triple  to  euery  conefalthough  alfo  the  cone  be  eredted) 
fet  vpon  one  and  the  fame  bafe  with  it, and  being  vnder  the  fame  altitude  .  But  the  cilinder  eredted  was 
the  triple  of  the  fame  cone  by  the  tenth  of  this  booke.  Wherefore  the  cilinder  inclined  is  equall  to  the 
cilinder  eredted  being  both  fet  vpo'ri  one  and  the  felfe  fame  bafe ,  and  hauing  one  and  the  felfe  feme  al¬ 
titude  .The  fern  5  alfo  cometh  to  paffe  in  cones  ywhich  are  the  third  partes  of  equall  cilinders,  &  there¬ 
fore  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. 

Wherefore  according  to  the  eleuenth  of  this  booke  it  folio weth ,  that  cylinders  and  cones  incli¬ 
ned  or  eredted  y-being  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  feme  altitude ,  are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as 
their  bafes  are.  For  forafmuch  as  the  eredted  are  in  proportion  as  their  bafes  are,  and  to  the  eredted  ci¬ 
linders  the  inclined  are  equall:  therefore  they  alfo  fhall  be  in  proportion  as  their  bafes  are.  . 

And  therefore  by  the  iz.of  this  bookelike  cones  and  cylinders  being  inclined  are  in  triple  propor¬ 
tion  of  that  in  which  the  diameters  of  the  bafes  are  .  For  forafmuch  as  they  are  equall  to  the  eredted 
which  haue the  proportion  by  the  iz.of  this  booke,and  their  bafes  alfo  are  equall  with  the  bafes  of  the 
eredted,  thereforethey  alfo  fhall  haue  the  feme  proportion. 

Wherefore  it  followeth  by  the  13  .of  this  booke,that  a  cylinder  inclined,  being  cut  by  a  playne  fii- 
perficies  parallel  to  the  oppofite  playne  fuperiicieces  therof  fhall  be  cut  according  to  the  proportions  of 
the  axes  .  For  fuppofe  that  vpon  one  and  the  felfe  feme  bafe  be  fet  an  eredted  cylinder  and  an  inclined 
cylinder?being  both  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  feme  altitude ,  which  let  be  cut  by  a  playne  foperficies  pa¬ 
rallel  to  the  oppofite  bafes.Now  it  is  manifelt  that  the  fediions  of  the  one  cylinder  are  equall  to  the  fec- 
tion  of  the  o  ther  cylinder,for  they  are  fet  vpon  equall  bafes ,  and  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude, 
namely, betwene  the  parallel  playne  fuperiicieces .  And  their  axes  alfo  are  by  thofe  parallel  playne  fu- 
perficieces  cut  proportionally  by-the.  17,  of  the  eleuenth.  Wherefore  the  inclined  cylinders(being  equal! 
to  the  ered!ed  cylinders)lhallhaue  the  proportion  of  their  axes,  as  alfo  haue  the  eredted.  For  in  ech,the 
proportion  of  the  axes  is  one  and  the  feme, 

Wherefore  inclined  Cones  and  Cylinders  being  fet  vpon  equall  bafes,  fhall  by  the  t4.of  this  booke 
be  in  proportion  as  their  altitudes  are.  For  forafmuch  as  the  inclined  are  equall  to  the  eredted  which 
haue  the  felfe  feme  bafes  and  altitude,aftd  the  eredted  are  in  proportion  as  their  altitudes:  therfore  the 
inclined  fhall  be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as  the  felfe  feme  altitudes  which  are  common  to 
ech ,  namely,to  the  inclined  and  to  the  eredted. 

And  therefore  in  equall  cones  and  cylinders  whether  they  be  inclined  or  eredted ,  the  bafes  fhall 
be  reciprokaily  proportionall  with  the  altitudes,  and  contrariwife  by  the  if.  of  this  booke .  For  forafe 
much  as  we  haue  oftentimes  fhewed  that  the  inclined  cones  and  cylinders  are  equall  to  the  eredted,ha» 
uing  the  felf  feme  bafes  and  altitudes  with  them.and  the  eredted  vnto  whome  the  inclined  are  equall, 
haue  their  bafes  reciprokall  proportionally' with  their  altitudes,  therefore  it  followeth ,  that  theindi- 
ned(being  equall  to  the  eredted)haue  alfo  their  bafes  and  altitudes  (  which  are  common  to  eche  )  reci- 
prokally  proportionall.Likewife  if  their  altitudes  &  bafes  be  reciprokaily  proportionall,they  thefelues 
alfo  fhall  be  equall,  for  that  they  are  equall  to  the  eredted  cylinders  and  cones  fet  vpon  the  feme  bafes 
and  being  vnder  the  feme  altitude,  which  eredted  cylinders  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other  by  the  feme 
iy. of  th's  booke. Wherefore  we  may  conclude, that  thofepaffions  &  proprieties  which  in  this  twelfth 
booke  haue  bene  proued  to  be  in  cones  and  cylinders  whofe  altitudes  are  eredted  perpendicularly  to 
the  bafes,are  alfo  in  thofe  cones  and  cylinders  whofe  altitudes  are  fet  obliquely  vpon  their  bafes. How- 
beit  this  is  to  be  noted  that  fuch  inclined  cones  or  cylinders  are  not  perfedt  round  as  are  the  eredted : 


7 he  Welueth  cBooke 


Coujlrutthtn 


T.Dee. 

*  Note  this  L- 
M3lecaufe  of 
K^Z  in  t  he  next 
prop  opt  ion,  and 
here  the  point 
M:for  the  point 
Z  tn  the  next 
demonflration. 


*  For  that  the 
feilions  were 
made  by  the 
number  two: 
that  is,  by  ta¬ 
king  halites, and 

of  the  ref- 
due  the  halfe: 
and fo,to  L  D, 
being  an  halfe, 
and  a  refdue 
which  jhallbe  a 
comon  meafure 
backe  a  game, to 

make  fdes  of 
the  r  alt  gun  an 
fgure. 


fo  diat  if  they  be  cut  by  a  playne  fuperficies  pafling  at  right  angles  with  their  altitude,  this  fiction  is  a 
Conicall  fedion , which  is  called  Ellipfs, and  fhall  not  defcribe  in  their  fuperficies  a  circle  as  it  doth  in  e~ 
reded  cylinders  &  cones  ,but  a  certaine  figure, whofe  leffe  diameter  is  in  cylinders  equall  to  the  dime- 
tient  of  the  bafe :  that  is, is  one  and  the  fame  with  it.  And  the  fame  thing  happencth  alfb  in  cones  inch- 
iied,being  cut  after  the  fame  maner. 

The  i.  Trobleme*  ..  The  16.  Tropofition. 

T wo  circles  hauing  both  one  And  the  felfe  fume  centre  being geuenfio  in* 
jcribein  the  greater  circled  poligonon figure jtyhich  Jhallponfifi  of  equall 
and  euen  fide  s  find Jball  not  touch  the fuperficies  of  the  leffe  circle . 

FPpofe  that  there  be  mo  Circles  A  B  CD ,  and  EF  GH  hatting  one  &  the felfe 
fame  centre , namely, KAP  is  required  in  the  greater  circle  which  let  be  ABC  D 
j  to  infer ibe  a  poligonon figure  which  Jbalbe  of  equal  and  euenfides  and  not  touch 
the  circle  E  F  G  H. Dram  by  the  centre  K  a  right  line  B  D .  And( by  the  n.of 
the  firjljjrom  the  point  G  rayfe  vp  vnt  o  the  right  line  B  D  a  perpendicular  line  A  G,and  ex¬ 
tend  it  to  the  point  C .  Wherefore  the  line  A  C  toucheth  the  circle  E  F  G  H  (by  the  is-  of the 
third )  .Now  t  her  fore  if(  by  the  30.  of the  third)\ve  diuide  the  circumference  BAD  into  two 
equall partes ,  and againe  the  halfe  of  that  into 
two  equal  partes, and  thus  do  cotinually ,  we  jball 
(  by  the  corollary  of  the  1.  of  the  tenth  )  at  the 
length  leaue  a  cert ay ne  circumference  lejfe  then 
the  circumference  A  D  .  Let  the  circumference 
left  be  L  D  .  And from  the  point  L.  Drawe  (  by 
the  1 2.  of  the fir  ft)  aonto  the  line  B  D  a  perpendi-  B 
culare  line  *  L  M,  and  extende  it  to  the  point  N. 

And  dra  w  thefe  right  lines  L  D  and  D  N.  And 
f or f much. as  the  angles D M L ,  and D MN 
are  right,  angles-.,  th  erf  ore  ■(  by  the  3  .of the  third) 
the  right  line  B  D  dimdeth  the  right  line  L  Nh_, 
into  two  equall parts  in  the  point e  CM.Whcrfore 
( by  the  4.  of the firjl)  the  refi  of  the fides  of  the  triangles  D  M  L,and  D  M  N ,  namely ,  the 
lines  D  L,and  D  N  fhalbe  equall.  Andforafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  is  a  parallell  to  the  L  2^ 
( bjthe  2  8 . of  the  fir  ft )  :But  AC  toucheth  the  circle  EF  G  H,wherfore  the  line  L  M  toucheth 
not  the  circle  EF  G  H,and  much  lejfe  do  the  lines  L  D,  and  D  N^Poucb  the  circle  EF  GH . 
jf  therefore  there  be  applied  right  lines  equall  to  the  line  L  D  continually  into  the  circle  A- 
B  C  D  (by  the  1  .of the fourth )  there  fhalbe  defcribe d  in  the  circle  ABC  D  a  poligonon  figure 
whtch fhalbe  of  equall, and  *  euen fides, and fhall  not  touch  the  leffe  circle, namely*  EFGHt 
( by  the  14.0/ the  third  or  by  theap.)  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

f  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeU  that  a  perpendicular  line  drawenfrom  thepoynt  L 
to  the  line  B  D  toucheth  not  one  of  the  circles* 

•[An  Afiiimpt  added  by  Flujfas. 

if  a  Sphere  be  cut  of  a  playne  fhptrficies ,  the  common feUion  of  the fitperficieces, fhall  be  the  cir* 
cnmference  of  a  circle » 

Suppofe 


ofSuclides  Elementes, 


FoL$y6* 


Dimnjlr&~ 

ikn. 


Suppofe  that  the  fphere  ABC  be  cut  bytheplayne  fuperficies  A  E  B  *  and  let  the  centre  of  the 
fphere  be  the  poynt  D.  And  from  the  poynt  D ,  let  there  be  drawne  vnto  the  playne  fuperficies  A  E  B  a  Coiifttutthtt* 
perpendicular  line(bythe  1 1. of  the  eleuenth)  which  let  be  the  line  DE.  And  from  the  poynt  E  draw  in 
the  playne  fuperficies  A  E  B  vnto  the  common  fedion  of  the  fayd  fuperficies  and  the  fphere,  lines  how 
many  fo  euer, namely ,  E  A  and  E  B  .  And  draw  thefe  lines  D  A  and  D  B  .  Now  forafmuch  as  the  right 
angles  D  E  A  and  D  E  B  are  equall  (  for  the  line  D  E  is  e- 
reded  perpendicularly  to  the  playne  fuperficies).  And  the 
right. lines  D  A  &  D  B  which  fubtend  thofe  angles  are  by 
the  iz.  definirion  of  the  eleuenth  equall:  which  right  lines 
moreouer(by  the47*of  the  firil)do  contayne  in  power  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  D  E,E  A,and  D  E,E  B :  if  therfore  from 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  D  E,E  A,and  D  E,E  B  ye  take  away 
the  fquare  of  the  line  D  E  which  is  c6mon  Vnto  them,the 
refidue  namely  the  fquares  of  the  lines  E  A  &  E  B  Hull  be 
equal. Wherfore  alfo  the  lines  E  A  and  E  B  are  equall.  And 
by  the  fame  reafon  may  wcproue,  that  all  the  right  lines 
drawne  from  the  poynt  E  to  the  line  which  isthecomon 
fedionofthe  fuperficies  of  fphere  and  of  the  playne  fu¬ 
perficies, are  equall .  Wherefore  thatline  fhall  be  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  a  circle,  by  the  iy.  definition  of  thefirfl. 

*  But  if  it  happen  the  plaine  fuperficies  which  cutteth  the 

fphere, to  paffe  by  the  centre  of  the  fphere, the  right  lines  drawne  from  the  centre  ofthe  fphere  to  their 
common  fedion,flial!  be  equall  by  the  i  z  .definition  of  the  eleuenth.For  that  common  fedion  is  in  the 
fuperficies  of  the  fphere.  Wherefore  of  neceffitie  the  pkyne  fuperficies  comprehended  vnder  that  line 
of  the  common  fedion  fhall  be  a  circle,  and  his  centre  fhall  be  one  and  the  fame  with  the  centre  of  the 
fphere,  ( 

John  Dee. 

Euctide  hath  among  the  definition  of  folides  omitted  certayne,  which  were  eafy  to  conceaue  by  a 
kinde  of  Analogic.  As  a  fegment  of a  fphere, a  fedor  of  a  fphere, the  vertex,or  toppe  of  the  fegment  of  a 
fphere :  with  fuch  like.But  that(ifnede  be)fome  farther  light  may  be  geue.in  this  figure  next  before,vn- 
derfiand  a  fegment  cf  the  fphere  A  R  C  to  be  that  part  of  the  fphere  contayned  betwen  the  circle  A  B, 

(whofe  center  is  E)and  the  fphericall  fuperficies  A  F  B.  To  whichfbeing  a  lefle  fegment)  adde  the  cone 
ADB  (whofebafe  is  the  former  circle:  and  toppe  the  center  ofthe  fphere)  and  youhaueD  AFBa 
fedor  of  a  fphere, or  folide  fedor(as  I  call  it).  D  E  extended  to  F,  Iheweth  the  top  or  vertex  ofthe  feg- 
mer.t,to  be  the  poynt  F*andE  F  is  the  altitude  ofthe  fegment  fpherical!.Offegmentes,fome  are  grea¬ 
ter  the  the  halfe  fphere, fome  are  lefle  .As  before  A  B  Fis  lefle,the  remanent,  A  B  C  is  a  fegment  greater 
then  the  halfe  fphere. 

A  C orolkry  added  by  the  fame  F tufas. 

%  the  fore  fayd  affumpt  it  ismanifefi ,  that  if  from  the  centre  of  a  fphere  the  lines  drawne  per» 
pendicularly- vnto  the  circles  which  entte  the  fphere,  be  equall:  thofe  circles  are  equall.  tsAnd  the 
perpendicular  lines  fo  drawne  fall  vpon  the  centres  ofthe fame  circles . 

For  the  line  which  is  drawne  fro  the  centre  of  the  fphere  to  the  circumference,containeth  in  pow 
er,the  power  ofthe  perpendicular  line,and  the  power  of  the  line  which  ioyneth  together  the  endes  of 
thofe  lines. \yherfore  fro  that  fquare  or  power  ofthe  line  from  the  center  ofthe  fphere  to  the  circum¬ 
ference  or  cotnon  fediodrawne,which  is  the  femidiameter  ofthe  fphere,  taking  away  the  power  of  the 
perpendicular,  which  is  corn  on  to  them  round  about,it  followeth, that  the  refidues  how  many  fo  euer 
they  be ,  be  equall  powers,and  therefore  the  lines  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherefore  they  will 
defcribe  equall  circles ,  by  the  firft  definition  of  the  third.  And  vpon  their  centers  fall  the  perpendicular 
lines  by  the  s>.of  the  third  . 

’‘And  thofe  circles  vpon  which  falleth  the  greater  perpendicular  lines  are  the  lefle  circIes.For  the  pow-  #  ,  , 

ers  or  the  lines  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  fphere  to  the  circumference  being  ahvayes  one  and  e-  „  6tker  C#* 
qualbto  the  powers  ofthe  perpendicular  lines  and  alfo  to  the  powers  ofthe  lines  drawne  from  the  cen-  r° 
tres  ofthe  citcles  to  their  circumference ,  the  greater  that  the  pov/ers  of  the  perpendicular  lines  taken 
away  from  the  power  containing  them  both  are,  the  lefle  are  the  powers  and  therefore  the  lines  re¬ 
maining  ,  which  are  the  femidiameters  of  the  circles  and  therefore  the  lefle  are  the  circles  which  they 
defcribe.  Wherefore  if  the  circles  be  equall,the  perpendicular  lines  failingfrom  the  centre  of  the  fphere 
vpon  the,fhall  alfo  be  equall.For  if  they  Ihould  be  greater  orlefle,the  circles  fhould  be  vnequall  as  it  is  *  .  , 

before  manifefl.  But  we  fuppofe  the  perpendiculars  to  be  equall.  *  Alfo  the  perpendicular  lines  falling  .  tr  C*~ 
vpon  thofe  bafes  are  theleaftofall,thatare  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  fphere:  for  theother  drawne  is 

FFfj,  from 


*  Tie  circles  fe 
madetcr  fo  con- 
fdered  m  the 
fphere ,  are  cel¬ 
led  the  great  eli 
circles:  j4ll  o- 
they,  rsst  ha¬ 
tting  the  center 
ef  the  fphere,  to 
he  their  center 
stlfe  :are  called 
lefe  ctrcles, 
Note  thefe  */<?<* 
feriptioxs. 


ConttruRian* 

*  Thisisalfo 
prouedin  the 
Afiumpt  be¬ 
fore  added 
out  of  Flu f- 
fas. 

Note  what  a 
greater  or 
greatefl  circle 
in  a  Spere  is. 
FirR  part  of 
the  Conflruc- 
tim. 


7 he  tweketh  (Boo^e 

from  the  centre  of  the  Iphere  to  the  circumference  of  the  circles,  are  in  power  equall  both  to  the  pow= 
ers  of  the  perpendiculars  and  to  the  powers  of  the  lines  ioyning  thefe  perpendiculars  and  thefe  fu  bten- 
dent  lines  together :  making  triangles  re&angleround  about:  as  molt  eafily  you  may  conceaue  of  the 
figure  here  annexed. 


A  the  Center  of  the  Sphere, 

AB  the  lines  from  the  Center  of 
the  Sphere  to  the  Circumfe- 
'  rence  of  the  Circles  made  by 
the  Sedion, 

B  C  B  the  Diameters  of  Circles  made 
by  the  Sedion s, 

AC  the  perpendiculars  from  the 
Center  of  the  Sphere  to  the 
Circlesrwhofe  diameters  B  C- 
B  are  one  both  fides  or  in  any 
fituation  els, 

CB  theSemidiametrs  of  the  Cir¬ 
cles  made  by  the  Sedions. 

AO  a  perpendicular  longe  then 
A  C :  and  therefore  the  Semi¬ 
diameter  O  B  is  lelfe. 

ACB,  &  A  O  B  triangles  redangle. 


f  The  2  JProbleme. 


The  n.Tropofttion. 


T mfpheres  conjtjling  both  about  one  &  the felfe  fame  cetre fbehiggeue , 
to  infcribe  in  the  greater Jphere  afolide  of  many  fides  (  Tohichis  called  a 
(P olyhedron )tbich 'jhall not  touch  the Juperfcies  of  the  leffe  Jphere. 

Fppofe  that  there  be  two  jpheres  about  one  &  the  felfe  fame  cetre, namely,  about 
S A.  It  is  required  in  the  greater jphere  to  infcribe  a  Polyhedron, or  a  folide  of ma- 
*  ny fides, which Jhal  not  with  his fuperfcies  touch  the fuperfcies  of the  leffe Jphere . 
Let  the Jpheres  be  cut  by  fome  cneplaine fuperfcies  pafiing  by  the  center  A. Then 


jhall  their feffios  be  circles .*  lFcr(  by  the  12  .definition  of  the  eleuenth )  the  Diameter  remai¬ 
ning  fxed,  and  the femicircle  being  turned  round  about  maketh  a  jphere .  Wherefore  in 
what  pofitio fo  euer  you  imagine  the  femicircle  to  be, the  playne fuperfcies  which  paffeth  by  it 
jhal  make  in  the fuperfcies  ofy jphere  a  circle.  And  it  is  manifef  that  is  alfo  a  greater  circle , 
for  the  diameter  of the jphere  which  is  a  jo  the  diameter  of  the  femicircle ,  and  therefore  alfo 
of  the  circle  is  (by  the  15  of  the  third )  greater  then  all  the  right  lines  drawne  in  the  circle  or 
jphere ]  which  circles  jhall  haue  both  one  center  being  both  aljoin  that  one  playne fuperfcies, 
by  which  the  Jpheres  were  cut .  Suppofe  that  that fettion  or  circle  in  the  greater Jphere  be  B  C- 
D  E, and  in  the  leffe, be  the  circle  F  Gfi .  Dr  awe  the  diameters  of  thofe  two  circles  in fitch 
forte  that  they  make  right  angles, and  let  thofe  diameters  be  B  D ,  and  C  E.  And  let  the  line 
A  G,  being  part  of the  line  A  B ,  be  the  femidiameter  of  the  lefe Jphere  and  circle ,  as  A  Bis 
the femidiameter  of  the  greater  fphere  and  greater  circle:  both  the Jpheres  and  circles  hauing 
one  and  the  fame  center.  Flow  two  circles  that  is  ,B  CD  E,and  F  GH  conffling  both  about 
one, and  the  felfe  fame  centre  being geuen ,  let  there  be  deferibed  ( by  the  propoftion  nexte 
going  before)in  the  greater  circle  BCDEa  poligonon  figure  conffling  of  equall  and  euen 
fides, not  touching  the  leffe  circle  F  G  H.  And  let  the fides  of  that  fgure  in  the fourth  part  of 
the  circle ,  namely,  in  B  E,beB  K,K  L,L  M,  and  M  E.  draw  a  right  line  from  the 

point 


; 


ofSuclides  Elementes . 


point  K  to  the  point  A, and  extende  it  to  the  joint  N.  And  (by  the  12 .  of  the  eleuenth  )  from 

the  A  rayfe  vp  to  the fuperfcies  of  the  circle  B  C  D  E  aperpedicular  line  A  X,and  let  it  light  ^ 

<vppon  the  fuperfcies  of  the  greater f  here  in  the  point  X .  And  iy  the  line  A  X,  and  by  either  *  you  know 

cfthefe  lines  B  D ,and  K  N  extend play ne  fuperfct eces. Flow  by  that  which  was  before fpoke,  fnti well, 

thofe  plains fuperf dec  es  fbalin  the  * fuperfcies  ofy  Jphere  make  two  greater  circles  .Let  their 

femicircles  conffing  vpon  the  diameters  B  D,and  K  N  be.  B  X  D .and  K  X N.^And foraf-  fihere,oneiy  the 

circumferences  of  the  cir¬ 
cles  are:  hut  by  thofe  cir¬ 
cumferences  the  limit  at  10 
andafiign/ng  of  circles  ts 
Srfediandfo  .the  circumfe¬ 
rence  of  a  circle,  Sfuallj 
called  a  circle ,  which  in 
this  place  can  not  offend. 

This  figure  is  reflated  by 
M.Dee  his  diligence .  Tor 
in  the greeke  and  Latine 
£uclides,the  line  G  L,the 
line  A  G,and the  line  /(_- 
Z,  ( in  which  three  lynes 
the  chief e  pinch  of  both 
the  demon firat  ions 
doth f  und),  are  'imtrueiy 
dr aw en:  as  bj  Comparing , 
the  (ludtous  maj  per- 
ceaue , 

Note. 

Tou  mu(l  imagine 
the  right  line  A  X,  to  be 
perpedicular  Sipon  the  di¬ 
ameters  B  D  and C  El 
though  here  AC  the  fe- 
mtdiaterffeme  to  be  part 
of  AX.  Andfo  in  other 
pointes,tn  this  figure,  and 
many  other, firengthen 
your  imagination  ^accor¬ 
ding  to  the  tenor  of  con » 
firutttons  :  though  in  the 
delineatio  in  platne,fenfe 

is  creeled  perpendicularly  to  the  playne  fu-  benotfattffied \ 

per  foies  of  the  circle  BC  D  E.T  berfore  al  tbeplaine fuper faeces 
which  are  drawne  by  the  line  X  A  are  erected  perpendicularly  to 
the  fuperfcies  of the  circle  BC D  E  (  by  the  18.  of  the  eleuenth) . 

Wherefore  the femicircles  B  X  D,and  i(  X  N  are  erected  perpen¬ 
dicularly  to  the  playne fuperfcies  of  the  circle  BCD  E :  And  for- 
afmuch  as  the  femicircles  B  E  D,B  X  D  , andKX 
for  the y  conff  vpon  e quail  diameters  B  D,  and-K  N : 
alfo  the  fourth  parts  or  quarters  of  thofe  circles  /namely  ,B 

and  K  X  are  equal  the  one  to  the  other.  Wherefore  how-many  fdes  of a  polygon  oh  figure  there 
are  m  the fourth parte  or  quarter  B  E ,  fo  Many  alfo  are  thereinthe  other  fourth  partes  or 
quarters  B  X,and  I<X, squall  to  the  right  lines  B  K,  I(  L,L  M,  and  M  E.  Let  thofe  fdes  be 
defcribed.and  let  them  be  B  0,0  P,  P  R,RX,  K  S  ,ST,T  F,  and  F-X and  dr  awe  thefe  B  o  e^St9 
right  lines  SOfiE  P, and  F  R.  And from  tbepointesO  and  S  Drawe  to  the  playne  fuperfcies  B  K>i*  refit 
of  the  circle,  BCD  E  perpendicular  lines  r  which  perpendicular  lines will-fall vp  on  the  com-  °fM' Dee  hf 
monfeciions  of  the  flame fuperfemes }mmelyfof  on  the  lines  BDy&  KN,(by  the  38. of  the  fffZt™'0* 

FFf.iq.  eleuenth) 


The  melueth  ‘Boofy 

dcutnth  )  for  that  the  playne  fuperfckces  of the  femicirclesB  X  D  >K  X  N  are  eroded per- 
f  sr^fg  fendktdarly  to  the  playne fuperfcies  of  the  circle  B  CD  E  .  Let  thofe  perpendicular  lines  be 

GZyf  and  $  W.And  dr  awe  a  right  line from  the  point  Z  to  the  point  W.  And forafmuch  as 
the  equall femkircles  BX  D  And  KXNthc  right  lines  B  O,  and  K  S  are  equallfrcm  the 
dtvftvdM.  tK^s  wheref are  drawne  perpedicular  lines  O  Z,and  S  W>therfere(  by  the  corollary  of  the  3$. 

4em~  of  the  eleueth )  the  line  O  Z  is  equall  to  the  line  S  the  line  B  Z  is  equal  to  the  UneKW, 

Jjkastoa,  {Fiiiffas  proueth  this  an  other  way  thus.*  Forafmuch  as  in  the  triangles  SWK,  and  O  Z  B,the  two  an¬ 

gles  S  W  K,and  O  Z  B  are  equal, for  that  bycoftru<5Hon  they  are  right  angles,and  by  the  27 .of  third  the 
angles  W  K  S,and  Z  B  O  are  equall.for  they  fubtend  equal  circumter  ences  S  X  N  and  O  X  D,  and  the 
£de  $  K  is  equall  to  the  fide  O  B  as  it  hath  before  ben  proued.  Wherefore  (by  the  z6.  of  the  firft)  the  o- 
ther  fides  &  angles  are  equal!,  namely ,  the  line  O  Z  to  the  line  S  Wjand  theline  BZ  to  the  line  KW,] 

1L 


But  the  whole  line  B  A  is  equall  to  the  whole  line  K  A:  by  the  defi¬ 
nition  of  a  circle  Wherfore  the  ref  due  Z  A  is  equall  to  the  ref  due 
W  A  Wherf ore  the  line  ZW  is  a  parallel  to  the  line  B  K  (by  the  2. 
of  the fixt )  .And forafmuch  as  either  ofthefe  lines  0  Z,&  S  W  is 
ere'tizd  perpendicularly  to  the  play  ne fuperfcies  of  the  circle  BCD 
E  ytheref ore  the  line O  Zisa par allell  to the  line  S  W,(J?y  the  6.  of 
the  deueth)and  it  is  proued  that  it  is  alfo  equal  vnto  it. Wherfore  ^ 
theisms  W  Z  and  S  0  are  alfo  equall  and parallels  (by  the  yffthe 
deuenthyand  the  3  3  ..ofthefrfl,andby  the  3  .ofthefr&)And for- 
afmuch  asW  Z  is  a  parallellto  S  0  :But  ZWis  aparallell  is  to  KB :  Wherefore  S  0  is  alfo 
a.  paralkll  to  K  B,  ( by  the  p  .oftheekuenth)  .And  the  lines  B  0,  andK  S  do  knit  them  toge¬ 
ther  Wherefore  the fower fidcdfgure  BO  K  Sis  in  one  and  the felfe fame  playne  fuperfeies* 

For 


*1 .  V  ,  .  , 


For  (by  the  7. of  the  eleventh  )if there  be -any  two  parallel!  right  Unes^and  if  in  either  of  them, 
be  taken  a  point  at  allauentures^a  right  tine  drawn  by  thefe  points  is  in  one  >  &  the  feife fame 
playne fuperfcies  with  the  parallel.  And  by  the fame  reafon  alfoeuery  one  of the  fewer  fided 
fgures  SOP  T,and  TP  R  V  ism  one  and  the filfe fame  playne fuperfcies.  And  the  triangle 
V  RX  is  alfo  in  one  and' the  feife  fameplaine fuperfcies(bythe  2. of the  eleue  nth)  .Flow  if  we 
imagine  right  lines  drarvne fro  the  pointesO,S,P(T}  R,F,to  the  point  A, there  fialbe  defer u 


V 


bed  a  Polyhedro  or  a  folidefgure  of  many  fides  ,betwene  the  circu 
ferences  B  X  and  K  X  compofed  of  pyramids ,  whofe  bafes  are  the 
fower  fided  figures  B  K  O  sfs  0  P  T,  T  P  RF, and  the  triangle 
V  R  X,and  toppe  the  point  A.  And  if  in  euery  one  ofthefides  K- 
L,L  Mand  M  Erie  vfe  the feife  fame  confirucHon  that  we  did 
in  B  K,  and moreouer  in  the  other  three. quadrants  or  quarters , 
and  alfo  in  the  other  halfe  of  the f  her  either e  (hall  then  he  made 
a  Polyhedron  or  folidejiguge  confifiing  of  many  fides  deferibed 
in  thejphere,  which  Polyhedron  is  made  of -the  pyramids  whofe 

bafes  are  the  forefay d  fower  fided figures ,  and  the  triangle  V  R  X\Kand others  which  are  in 
the feife  fame  order  with  them andcommon  toppe  to  them  all in  the  point  ^A.  ,  v} 

2iow  I faythat  the f or  fay  d polihedron  fofideofmany  fides  toucheth  not  the  fuperfcies  of  the 
kfje fiherein  which  is  the  circle  FG  £l..p/ya^(by4he  11. of  the  pleuenth)frothepoynt  A  to  Second  pm 
the  playne fupprficks  of  the fower. fided  figure  K  BOS  a  perpendicular  line  AT ,  and  let  it  ^heem- 
falL  vponthe, playne fuperficies  in  the  point  T .  And  dr  awe  thefe  right  lines  BT&T  K.  And 
forafmuch  af  the  line  A  T  is  eretted  perpendicularly  to  the  playne  fuperfcies  of  BROS, 

r  T'r:::  therefore 


v:A,\\  'va.v\V'-  V-  '  '  ,1  i  ‘  :l 


Y  A  is  a  right  angle .  And  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  K  are  equal 
the  fquares  of  the  lines  4  T  and  Y  K-  Wherefore  the  fquares  of 
the  lines  A  Y.and  T  B  are  equal  to  the  fquares  of  fhfUdesxffT, 
and  Y  K:  take  away  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  Y  which  is  common 
to  than  bo  th. Wherefore  the  reft due, namely  }the fquare  of  the  B- 

Y  is  equalltothe  reftdue ,  namely ,  to  the fquare  of  the  line  Y  K 
Wherefore  the  line  B  Y  is  e quail  to  the  line  Y  K.  In  like fort  alfo 
may  mgr oue  that  right  lines  drawne  from  the point  Y  to  the 
formes  o,  arid  $  >are  equall  to  either  of  the  UnesB  Y,  andY  K, 

Wher  fore  making  the  Center  thepoynt  Y ,  and  the  face  either  the  line  i 3  Y  of  the  lineT 
K  deferibe  a  circle  ,andit  Jbhlpajfe  by  the foyrii&O ,  and S  ,and  the  f outer  fided figure  K- 
B  6  S'fbalbeinficribed  inthecircle :  Andfordfmuchas  the  line  KB  is grfateri  then  the  line 
WZ{by  the  2. of  the fixtybecaufe  A  K  is  greater  then  A  Wfbut  the  line  WZ  is  equall  to  the 

limS  owherfore  the  line  B  K  is  greater  the  the  lineS  0.  But  the  line  B  K  is  equal  to  either 

,,V.  *  •-  ■  ,  fc  *  ,/ 


ikathn*^  fore  the  line  AY  is  erected  perpendicularly  to  either  ofithefe  lines  B  Y ,  and  Y  K .  Andforg 

much  as(by  the  j$ .definition  of  thefirfl)iheline  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line  A  K ,  therfiore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  c_xf  B  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  K.  And  to  the  fquare  of the  line 
A  B  are  equall  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  Y,andY  B  (by  the  47.  ofthefrjl )  for  the  angle  B~ 


7 


oftht  Urns  K  S,and  BO  by  confiruchon.  Wherefore  either  of  the  lines  K  S,andB  O  isgrta * 
ter  then  the  line  S  O  .Andforafmuch  as  in  the  circle  is  a fower fided figure  K  BO  S ,  and  the 
fides  B  K,B  O  and  K  S  are  equaled  the fide  O  Sis  Icjfe  then  any  one  of  them ,  and  the  line 
B  T  is  brawne from  the  centre  of  the  circle :  therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  K  B  is  greaier 
then  the  double  of  the fquare  of  the  line  B  T  ( by  tk.  e  12. of  the fecond )  (for  that  it fubtendeth 
an  angle  greater  then  a  right  angle  contayned  of  the  two  equall  dines  B  T ,  and  T  K, which 
angle  BT  K  is  an  obtufe  angle.  For  the  4. angles  at  the  ceter  T  are  equal  to  4. right  angles:  of 
which  three, namely, the  angles  B  T  K,K  T  S ,  and  BT  O  are  equall  by  the  4.  of  the  frfi,and 
the  fourth  namely, y  angle  ST  O  is  lefie  then  any  of thofe  three  angles, by  the  2$. of the  firfi.) 
Dr  awe  ( by  the  1. 2 , of  the  fir  si)  from  the  point  K  to  the  line  B  Z,  a  perpendicular  line  $2  K  Z. 
Andforafmuch  as  the  line  B  D  is  leffe  then  the  double  to  the  line  D  Z  (for  the  line  B  D  is 
double  to  the  line  D  A,  which  is  lefie  then  the  line  D  Z)  :  but  as  the  line  B  D  is  to  the  line 
D  Zffoistheparallelogramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  D  B  and  B  Z,  to  the  parallelo- 
gramme  contained  vnder  the  lines  D  Z  and  ZB 
(by  the  1.  ofihefixt )  :  therefore  if  ye  defcribe  vp- 
on  the  line  B  Z  a  fquare,  and  making  perfecle  the 
parallel ogramme contained vnder  the  lines  ZD 
and  ZB,  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 


£ 


.A 


Z,  % 


D  B  (fi  B  Z ',  fhall  be  leffe  then  the  double  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  D  Z  and 
Z  B  .  And.  if  ye  draws  a  right  line  from  the  point  K  to  the  point  D,  that  which  is  contained 
■vnder  the  lines  D  B  and  B  Z,  is  equall  to  the fquare  of the  line  B  K  (by  the  Corollary  of  the 
$  .of the fixt ) for  the  angle  BKD  is  a  right  angle,  by  the  3  1  .of the  third, for  it  is  in  the fe* 
micircle  BED):  and  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lims  D  Z  and  Z  B,  is  equall  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  K  Z  (by  the  fame  Corollary  )  .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  KB, 
is.  lefie  then  the  double  to  the fquare  of  the  line  K  Z .  But  the  fquare  of  the  line  K  Bis  greater 
then  the  double  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  T, as  before  hath  bene  proued. Wherfore  the  fquare 
of  the  line  K  Z,  is  greater  then  the  fquare  of  the  line  BX  (by  the  io.ofthefft )  .  Andforaf 
much' as  ( by  the  15. definition  ofthefrsi)  the  line  B  A, is  equall  to  the  line  K  A :  therefore  aU 
fo  the fquare  of  the  line  BA  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  K  A. But  (by  the  4j.ofthe firfi) 
vnto  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B,  are  equall  the fq  Bares  of  the  lines  B  T  &  T  A :  ( for  the  an - 
gle  BT  A  is  byconUruclion,  a  right  angle)  .And  (by  the fame  reafon)  to  the fquare  of the 
lincK  A,  are  equallthefquares  of  the  lines  KZ  and  Z  A:  ( for  the  angle  K  Z  A  isalfoby 
confiruttion,  a  right  angle)  .Wherefore  the fquares  oft  he  lines  B  T  and  T  A,  are  equall  to 
the fq  uares  of  the  lines  KZand  Z  A: Of which  the  fquare  of  the  line  KZ  isgreaterthen 
the fquare  of the  line  BT,  as  hath  before  bene proued  .  Wherefore  the  refidue,  namely,  the 
fquare  of  the  line  Z  A,  is  lefie  then  the  fquare  of the  line  T  A .  Wherfore  the  line  T  A  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  line  AZ  .*  Wherefore  the  line  A  T  is  much  greater  then  the  line  AG.  But 
the  line  A  T  fal/eth  vpon  one  ofthebafes  of  the  Folihedron ,  and  the  line  G  falleth  vpon 
thefu^erfeies  of the  leffe fphere.  Wherefore  the  Polihedron  toucheth  not  the fuperfeies  of  the 
leffe fph ere.  >.■  ,/'■  .  V  ,y 


An  other  and  more  ready  demonfir ation  to  proue  that  the  line  AT  is  greater  then  the 
line  A  G.Raife  vp  (by  the  11.  of  the  firfi  )  from  the  peynt  G  to  the  line  AG  a  perpendicular 
line  G  L.And  draw  a  right  line  fig  the  point  A  to  the  poynt  L.Now  the  deuidwg  (by  the  30. 
efthe  third)  the  circumference  E  B  into  halms,  &  agayne  that  half  e  into  halues, dr  thus  do¬ 
ing  continually, we jhall  at  the  length  by  the  corollary  of  the frf  of  the  tenth, leaue  a  certayne 
circumference  which jhal  be  lefie  then  the  circumference  of  the  circle  BCD  which  is  fiubten- 
ded  of a  line  equall  to  the  line  G  L. Let  the  circumference  left  be  K  B. Wherfore  alfio  the  right 
line  K  Bis  lefie  then  the  right  line  G  L  .  And forafmuch  as  thefower  fided  figure  B  I(  CDS  is 


tVhich  of 
r.ecefsty  (halt 
f.ill  ‘vpon  Z,  ns 
M.  Dee  proud k 

it:  and his 
profe  is  jet  af¬ 
ter  at  this 
marke  ❖ 
following. 


I.&ce. 

*  But  A  Z  is 
greater  the  A- 
C,asin  the  for * 
mer  propcgtif 
IfM  was  e ai¬ 
de  ht  to  te  grea¬ 
ter  then  ICJ3: 
fo  may  it  alfo 
be  made  mans* 
fefi  that  If  Z 
doth  neyther 
touch  nor  cut 
the  circle  V  C- 
H. 

An  other  proue 
that  the  line  A 
T  is  greater  the 
the  line  A  G. 


The  twelueth  Hookf 

m  4  circk,md  the  lines  O  B,B  E,and  K  S  are  equalled  the  line  0  Sis  lefe, therefore  the  an 
gle  BTK  is  an  obtufe  angle  .Wherefore  the  line  B  K  is  greater  then  the  line  BT  .But  the  line 
G  L  is  greater  then  the  line  K  B  .Wherefore  the  line  G  Lis  much  greater  then  the  line  BT. 
Wherefore  alfo  the fquare  of  the  line  G  L  is  greater  then  fquare  of  the  line  B  T .  And  fora f- 
unuchas  ( by  the  definition  of  the firfijthe  line  A  L  is  equall  to  the  line  A  B,  thereforethe 
fquare  of  the  line  A  Lis  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B  .But  vnto  the fquare  of the  line 
A  L  are  equall  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  G  and  G  L ,  and  to  the fquare  of the  line  A  B  are  e- 
quail  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  T  and  T  A .  Wherefore  the fquares  oft  he  lines  A  G  and  G  L 
are  equal!,  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  T  and  T  A  ,of which  the fquare  of  the  line  B  T  is  lefe 
then  the  fquare  ofthe  line  G  L.  Wherefore  the  refidue, namely ,  the fquare  of  the  line  T  A  is 
greater  the  the fquare  oft  he  line  A  G.  Wherfore  alfo  the  line  A  T  is  greater  the  the  line  A  G. 
Wherfore  two  fpheres  conf fling  both  about  one  and  the felfe fame  center  ping  qeuen,  there 
is  infcribed  in  the  greater fphere  a  polihedron  orfolide  of  many fdes  which  toucheth  not  the 
fuperficies  of  the  lejfe fphere:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

-  ,11  ■  r.  —  ■  .  I  .  •  -*  •  y 

f  Corollary. 

\Mndjfin  the  other  fphere, namely  ,in  the  lejfe  fphere  be  infcribed  a  Polihedron  or fo~ 
Ude  of  many fides  like  to  the  polihedron  infcribed  in  the  fphere  BCD  E,  then  the  polihedron 
infcribed  in  the  fphere  B  C  D  E  is  to  the  polihedron  infcribed  in  the  other  fphere  in  treble 
proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  of the  fphere  BCD  E  is  to  the  diameter  of the  other 
fphere.  For  thofe  folides  being  deuided  into  pyramids  equall  in  number  and  equall  in  ordery 
the  pyramids fall  be  like. But  like  pyramids  are  (by  the  8.  of the  twelfth )  the  one  to  the  other 
in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  fide  of  like  proportion  is  to fide  of  like  proportion.  Wher¬ 
fore  the  pyramis  whofc  bafe  is  thefower fided figure  K  BO  S  and  toppe  the poynt  A  is  to  that 
pyramis  which  is  of  like  order  in  the  other fphere, in  treble  proportion  of that  in  which fide  of 
like  proportio  is  to fide  of like  proportio,  that  is  of  that  in  which  the  fide  A  B  which  is  drawnt 
fro  the  ceter  oft  he fphere  which  is  about  the  ceter  A,is  to  the fide  which  is  drawn  fro  the  ceter 
of  the  other fphere.  And  in  like fort  alfo  euery  one  ofy  pyramids  which  is  iny fphere  which  is 
about  the  cetre  A  is  to  euery  one  of  the  pyramids  of  the  felfe fame  order  in  the  other fphere 
in  treble  proportio  of  that  in  which  the  fide  AB  is  to  the fide  which  is  drawne 
from  the  center  of  the  other  fphere. But  as  one  of theantecedentes  is  to  one 
of  the  confequentes  ,  fo  are  all  the  antecedents  to  all  the  confe- 
quentesby  the  iz.  ofthe fifth .  Wherefore  the  whole polihe - 
dronfolide  of  many  fides  which  is  in  the  fphere  which 
is  about  the  center  A, is  to  the  whole  polihedron  or 
folide  of  many  fides  which  is  in  the  other 
fphere, in  treble  proportion  of  that  in 
which  the fide  A  B  is  to  the  fide 
which  is  drawne  from  the 
center  ofthe  other 

fphere,  that  is, of  that  which  the  diameter 
BD  is  to  the  diameter  ofthe  other 
fphere,bythe  15. of the  fifths 
which  was  required  to  be 
demonfirated. 


I 


Folt^S  o* 


M.Dee  his  deuife,  to  helpe  the  imagina¬ 
tion  to  young  ftudets  in  Geometry*  and  to 
make  his  demonftration  more  euident  as 
concerning  the  errors  by  hym  corrected  ia 
Euclides  figure,  by  the  ignorant,  millined- 


LDer. 

This  figure  is  anfwerable  to  the  folk 
plainer  which, cutting  the  two  Spheres  by 
their  common  center  A,  made  two  concern- 
tricail  circles  fhauing  the  fame  center  With 
the  two  Spheres)  namely  BCD  E,and  F  G- 
H.  Vpponwhich,  if  you  aptly  reare  perpen¬ 
dicularly  ,  the  feccr.d  figure  contayning 
two  concentricall  circles ,  (to  the  firft  e- 
quallj  and  make  thepointes  noted  with  like 
letters  to  agree, and  afterward  vppon  the  fe- 
ccd  figure, fet  on  the  third  figure  being  here 
for  the  better  handling  made  a  femicircle.* 
which  vppon  the  firft  figure  mull  alfo  be  e- 
redled  perpendicularly  r  And  laftly  if  you 
take  the  little  quadrangled  figure  BOKS, 
and  make  euery  point  to  touch,hislike:  & 
then  reade  the  conftru&ion  &  wey  the  de- 
monftratio  (twife  or  thrife  being  red  ouer J 
{hall  you  in  this  delineatio  inapt  paftborde, 
or  like  matter  framed,finde  al  things  in  this 
probleme  Very  euident. 

Ineedenotwarneyou.that  the  line  AY 
may  eafely  be  imagined, or  with  a  fine  thred 
fupplyed:  or  of  the  right  lines  imaginable 
betwene  P  and  T,  and  betwene  R  and  V,  I 
neede  fay  nothing,  trufting  that  the  great 
exercife  paft,  by  that  tyme  you  are  orderly 
come  to  this  place,  will  haue  made  you  lufi- 
ficient  perfedt  to  fupply  any  farther  thinge 
herein  to  be  confidered. 

The  little  foW’ercomerd  peeces  remay 
ning  to  the  femicircle,  are  to  be  let  through 
the  firft  ground  playne:  therby  to  ftay  this  fe 
micircle  the  better  in  his  apt  place  and  licu- 
ation:  which  it  will  the  more  aptly  doo,  if 
yc  do  abate  flauntingly,the  contrary  arafles 
of  the  flirt  of  it, and  of  the  Hitt  of  the  fccond 
figure,intowhichitisto  be  let:  abating  the 
alike  much;  a  litle  will  ferue.  Experience, 
by  aduife,  will  teach  fufficiently. 

4 


f  Majler  T)ee  7ns  aduife  and  demonjlr at\on}  reforming  a  great  errour 
in  the  defignation  of the  former  figure  of Euclides fecond  Problemeiwitb 
two  Corollaries  (  by  him  inferred  )  vpon  his faid  demonstration, 

#  ^Theorems. 


V1  ‘ '  !  ’-I  "  ; 

*Thit.asan  „ 
afumptjt  ,, 
frefntly  „ 
proaed,  „ 


■rr 


t 

*  W 


't  t  O  H 


lO'Ji.al  .  _i 

i;dj  nx  a^m.ij 

YAenil  v  • 
baiiis  orih  sd; 
! 

i  .7  bat  1  •; . 


Xh- 


!>>«» 


ui  151 


1  A'  I  v  * 

•*5«  'fhatarigbt  line  drawer  from  the  point  K,  perpendicularly  vpon  the  line  rB  Z,  doth  fill  vpon 
the  point  f:  \ve  W  til, thus, make  euident.  .  .  \ 

T>  Ythe  premifiesfit  is  manifeft,  that  the  point  Z  is  that  point  where  a  right  line  from  the  point  0,be- 

ing  perpendicularly  let  fall  to  the  circle  BCDE,  doth  toueh-che  fame  circle.  Which  point  Z  alio  is 
proued  to  be  in  the  right  line  BAD,  the  common  fedtion  of  two  circles  cutting  eche  otner.-being  one 
to  the  other  perpendicularly  eredied  .  Thefe  thinges,with  other,before  demonfirated,  I  here  make  my 
fuppofitions  •  Confider  now  the  two  triangles  rediangles  O  Z  B  and  K  Z  B  :  Of  which,  the  angle 
O  Z  B  is  equall  to  the  angle  K  Z  B  .  For,  by  confirudhon,  they  are  both  right  angles  :  *  and  the  angle 
Z  B  O  is  equall  to  the  angle  Z  B  K  .  For,  d  from  D  to  K  you  imagine  a  right  line  :  and  the  like  from  D 
to  O  :  you  hauetwo  triangles  in  equal!  femicircles,  redtan  gfes,n  am  ely ,  DKB  and  DOB:  which  haue 
the .diameter  B  D  common  :  and  B  K,  the  Chord,  equall  to  B  O  the  Chord,  by  confirudhon .  Where¬ 
fore  (by  the  47  .of  the,  firil).  the  third  fide,  namely,  D  K,  is  equall  to  the  third,  name!y,D  O  :  Wherefore 
(by  the  5.  of  the  fixt)  the  angle  Z  B  0,W'hich  is*D  B  O,  is  equall  to  Z  B  K,  which  isD  BK  .  (For  the  line 
Z  B,  by  cordlcudHon,  is  part  of  D  8  ) .  And  feing  two  angles  of  O  Z  B,are  proued  equall,to  two  angles 
ofKZB,  ofncceffiue  the  third, namely,  Z  O  B,is  equall  to  the  third,namely,Z  KB,by  the3i.ofthefirft. 
Wherefore  the  two  triangles  rediangles  O  Z  B  and  K  ZB,  are  proued  equiangled.  By  the  fourth,  there- 
fore>Qfthe  fix.t,.theirfides  are  proportional! :  therefore  by  the  premises,  proued,  as  BO  is  to  BK,fo 
is  O  Z  to  K  Z,  and  the  third  line,  which  fubtendeth  the  angle  Z  O  B,  to  the  third  line  which  fubten- 
deth  thetangls:  Z" KB  .  But,  by  conftrudlion,B  O  is  equall  to  B  K  :  therefore  O  Z  is  equall  to  K  Z  :  And 
the  third  alio  is  equall  to  the  third  *.  Wherefore  tile  point  Z,in  refpcdle  of  the  two  triangles  rediangles, 
OZB  and  K  Z  Bideterminedi  one  and  the  lame  magnitude,  in  the  line  B  Z  .  Which  can  not  be  :  if  any 
other  point,  if)  thelineBZ,  were ^aflignedl  nearer,  or  farther  of,  from  thepoint  B  .  Oneonely  poynt 
therefore,  is  that,  at  which  the  two  perpendiculars  KZandOZ  fall  :  But,  byconllrudiion,  OZ  fal- 
leth  at  Z  the  point,  and  therefore  at  the  fame  Z,  doth  the  perpendicular,  drawen  from  K,  fall  likewyfe: 
'Which  was  required.to  be  demonstrated.  / 

Although  a  briefe  monition,  mought  herein  haue  ferued  for  the  pregnant  or  the  humble  learner,yet 
For  them  that  are  well  pleafed  to  haue  thinges  made  plaine,  with  many  wordes, and  forthefiiflfenecked 
bufie  body,  it  was  necefiary,  with  my  controlment  of  other,  to  annexe  the  caufe  &  reafon  therof,both 
inuincibleandalfo  euident. 


cusq  - 


#  ocf Corollary,  t. 


• om 


'i  ■  I  »  ,  M  -  .  .  . 

9 iz:nt  .  Qi  \ 

-uiii  bas  eor,!q . 
It  ,00b  vhqs  c 
?7isis  X'(-*Ija  •• 
bncovi  -  it;  to  a< 

OiU  2  lilKOs  . 


Hereby  it  is  manifest,  that  two  equall  circles  cutting  one  the  other  by  the  whole  diameter, if  fit... 
one  and  the  fame  end.  of  their  common  diameter, equall  port  ions  of  their  circumferences  be  taken :  and 
fiom  the  point  es  ending  thofe  equall  portions ,  two  perpendiculars  be  let  downe  to  their  common  diame¬ 
ter,  thofe  perpendiculars fall  fall  vpon  one  and  the  fame  point  of  their  common  diameter . 

q".<b!  ;  2. 

|  ^llB,  ’I*  ,I>4  i  ,  (  •. 

Secondly  it. follow eth  that  thofe  perpendiculars  are  equall . 


.1 '  10  1 

ivAxou 

■  i  c  • 


<X{pt<LJ. 


From  circles  in  our  firft  fuppofition  eche  to  other  perpendicularly  eredied,  we  procede  and  inferre 

now  thefe  Corollaries,  whether  they  be  perpendicularly  eredied  or  no  :  by  reafon  the  demonftratioa 
hath  a  like  force ,  vpon  our  fuppofitions  here  vfed. 


ff  The  16.  Theoreme. 


The  18.  Tropofition . 


Spheres  are  in  treble  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  of  that  in  which  their 
diameters  are. 


ofSuclides  Elementes,  FoLftu 

Vpfofe  that  there  he  two  fpheres  ABC  and  DEF ,  and  let  their  diameters  he 
B  C  and  EF  .T hen  I fay  that  the  fphere  A  B  Cist o  the fphere  D  E  Fin  treble 
proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  B  C  is  to  the  diameter  E  F.  For  if  not, 
then  the Jphere  ABC  is  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  B  C  is  to  EF ,  ei¬ 
ther  to  fome fphere  lejfs  then  the fphere  D  E  F ,  or  to fome Jphere  greater .  Firf  let  it  be  vnto 
a  lefe, namely,  to  G  H  K .  ^And  imagine  that  the  fpheres  DEF  and  GH  K  be  both  about 
one  and  the felfe fame  centre.  And(  by  the  propofttion  next  going  before  )defcribe  in  the  grea¬ 
ter fphere  D  EF  a  polihedron  or  a  fohdc  of many fides  not  touching  the fuperfcies  of  the  lefe 
fphere  GH  K .  And fuppofe  alfo  that  in  the fphere  ABC  be  infcribed  a  polihedron  like  to 
the  polihedron  which  is  in  the fphere  D  E  F  Whereforefby  the  corollary  of  the fame )  the  po¬ 
lihedron  which  is  in  the  fphere  ABC ,  is  to  thepolihedron  which  is  in  the  fphere  D  EF  in 
treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  BC  is  to  the  diameter  E  F.But  by fuppoftion 
the fphere  ABC  is  to  the fphere  G  H  K  in  treble proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  B- 
C  is  to  the  diameter  E  F  Wherefore  as  the  fphere  ABC  is  to  the fphere  GHK  ,fo is  the  poll - 
hedro  which  is  defer ibed  in  the fphere  ABC  to  the  polihedro  which  is  deferibed  in  the Jphere 
DEF  by  the  n-of t  he f ft. Wherf ore  alternately  ( by  the  id.  ofthefft)as  the fphere  ABCis 
to  the  polihedron  which  is  deferibed  in  itfo  is  the  fphere  GH  K  to  the polihedron  which  is  in 


the fphere  D  E  F.But  the fphere  ABC  is  greater  then  the  polihedro  which  is  deferibed  in  it, 
Wherfore  alfo  the  fphere  G  H  Kis greater  then  the polihedro  which  is  in  the fphere  DEF  by 
the  i4.ofthc f ft. But  it  is  alfo  lefe  for  it  is  contayned  in  it, which  impoffible*  Wherefore  the 
fphere  ABCis  not  in  treble  proportio  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  BC ,  is  toy  diameter  EF, 
to  any fphere  lefe  then  the fphereD  EF.ln  like  fort  alfo  may  we  prone  that  the fphere  DEF 
is  not  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  EF  is  to  the  diameter  BC,  to  any 
fphere  lefe  then  the fphere  ABC.  Now  I  fay  that  the fphere  ABCis  not  in  treble  proportio  of 
that  in  which  the  diameter  B  C  is  to  the  diameter  E  F  to  any  fphere  greater  the  the fphere  D 
E  F.  For  if  it  be  pojfible ,  let  it  beto  a  greater, namely,  to  LMN. Wherfore  by  conuerfon  the 
fphere  LMN  is  to  the fphere  A  B  C  in  treble  proportion  of  that  in  which  the  diameter  E  F 
is  to  the  diameter  B  C.But  as  the  fphere  LMN  is  to  the  fphere  A  B  C,fois  the fphere  DEF 
t  o  fome fphere  lejfe  the  the  fphere  A  B  C  fas  it  hath  before  bene  prouedfor  the fphere  LMN 
is  greater  then  the  fphere  D  E  F.  Wherfore  the fphere  DEF  is  in  treble proportio  of  that  in 

which 


Two  cafes  m 
this  pripofi- 
tiou. 

7b;  fir  ft  cafe < 
Demonstra¬ 
tion  leading  to 
an  mpofiibt* 
iitie. 


Second  cafe, 

*  Asititeafk 

to  gather  hy 
the  afiumpt  put 
after  the feeeisA 
tfthit  heoty. 


7  he  tmluetb  2?  ookf  / 

which  the  diameter  EF  is  to  the  diameter  BC  to  feme fphere  lefe  the  the fphere  ABC,  which 
is  firmed  to  he  impoffible.  Wherefore  the fphere  A  B  C  is  not  in  treble  proportion  of that  in 
which  B  E  is  to  E  F  to  any  ffhere  greater  the  the fphere  D  E  F.And  it  is  alfoproued  that  it  is 
not  to  any  lefe. Wherefore  the  fphere  ABC  is  to  the fphere  D  E  F  in  treble  proportion  of that 
in  which  the  diameter  BC  is  to  the  diameter  E  F  '.which  was  required  to  be  demonf rated. 

A  Corrollary  added  by  Flujfas. 

Hereby  it  is  ntanifeftyhat  fpheres  are  the  one  to  the  other, as  like  Polihedrons  and  in  like fort  def¬ 
er  ibedm  them  are:namely  ,eche  are  in  triple  proportion  of  that  in  Which  the  diameters . 

#  A  Corollary  added  by  MJDee. 

It  is  then  euident,  how  to  gene  two  right  lines ,  hatting  that  proportion  betwene  them,  Which, any 
two  Fpheres  geuen,  hatte  the  one  to  the  other . 

Vv'i  ..  .  V  4..;  •  .  .  .  -i\  V>  V.O-.'  •  -  •  J  *>  »  ‘ 

For,if  to  their  diameters,  as  to  the  firft  and  fecond  lines  (  offower  in  contlnnall  proportion  )  you 
adioyne  a  third  and  a  fourth  line  in  eontinuall  proportion  (  as  I  haue  taught  before)  :  Thefirlland 
jSTotei  agent-  fourth  linesdhallaunfwere  the  Probleme  .  How  generalities  rule  is,in  any  two  like  folides,with  their 
rdlrult.  correfpcndent  (orOmologall)  lines,  Ineede  not,  with  more  wordes,  declare. 

f  Certain?  T heoremes  and  Troblemes  ( lebofe  ife  is  manifolde P  in 

Spheres, Cones, Cylinders  ,and  other  folides)  added  by  loh.Dee. 

#  T  heoreme.  r . 


T he  whole  fiperficies  of  any  Sphere,  is  quadrupla,  to  the  great  eft  circle,  in  die  fame  Ffhere  con* 
t  ay  tied. 

It  is  needeles  to  bring  Archimedes  demonifration  hereof,  into  this  place  tfeing  his  boke  of  the  Sphere 
and  Cylinder,  with  other  his  woikes,are  eueiy  where  to  be  had,  and  the  demoilration  therof.eafie. 

AT heoreme.  2. 

Ettery  if  here,  is  quadrupla, to  that  Cone ,  Whofe  baft  is  thegreateft  circle  b&  height ,the  femidia- 
meter  of  the  (ante  ffhere. 

*~11 

This  is  the  ji.Propofition  of  Archimedes  firft  booke  of  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder. 


-■  ■ 


$  k-A Probleme. 


1. 


Sphere  being  gen  en, to  make  an  vpright  Cone3equall  to  the pint :  or  in  any  other  proportion, 
geuen, betwene  iworight  lines .  ;  ’ '  :  . 

V  i  •  5  -  W  ‘  ■  _  . 

Suppofe  the  Sphere.geuen,  to  be  ^his  diameter  beings  C,  and  center  D:  with  a  line  equall  to  the 
femidiamerer  ED  (  which  let  be  NO)  defenbe  a  circle  NRP:  whofe  diameter  let  be  N  P,  and  center 
o,  it  is  euidenr,  that ,N  R  Pis  equall  to  the  greateif  circle  in  A,  contay  ned.  At  the  center  O,  let  a  perpen¬ 
dicular  be  reared  equall  to  S  D  (  the  femlchameteroF^  )  which  fuppofe  to  be  O  Qj  Itisnowpfaine 
that  to  the  Cone,  whofe  bafe  is  the  circle  #  £ >,  and  height  O  Q^,  the  Sphere  A,  is  quadrupla  :  by  the 
a.Theoreme  here,  and  by  conftrudtiori  ..  Take aline  equall  to  NP,  which  let  be  ££ :  and  with  the  fe- 
nbdiainetcr  f'£  (making  the  point  T  center  )  deferibe  a  circle  :  which  fuppofe  to  be  £  K.G,  and  dia¬ 
meter  E  o  .  Attheceriterf,  reare  a  line  perpendicular  to  £  /(.G,by  the  iz.oftheeleuenth  :  andmake 
it  equall  to  ©  .SZj  Let  that  line  be  f  L  .  I  fay  that  the  Cone,  whofe  bafe  is  the  circle  £ 'Kfi,  and  height 
y  '  "  the  line  Ti,  is  equal!  to  Forfeing  f  ^thefemidiameteirof  £/{.£,  is  equal!  to  A 1 1‘  ( the  diameter 
Wetnpnif‘au of N  R  P)  by  conflrudiion  :  EG,  the  diameter  of  £  K^G,  fhall  be  double  ,to  N  P  .  Wherfore.the  fquare 
mn\  '  cf£  c?,is  quadrupla  to  the  fquare  of  NP:  by  the  -j.bfthe  fecond .  But  as  the  fquare  of  E  G,  is  to  the 


ConfttuBion, 


i  \\  riiK  ~ 


ofSuclides  Elementeu 


FoL$i. 


r  .'.M'lJ  V 

Jhefecond 
part  cf  the 
'’feme 


ttt>o  'tooyei 
executed, 
i. 


(quare  of  tf,P,  fo  is  the  circle  e  K.  G  to  the  circle  if  RP,  by  the  t  .of  this  twelueth  *  Wberefoi&fclie  citelt 
JE  K.G,  is  quadruple  to  the  circle  N RE  .  And  F  / ,  the  height  is  (  by  conftru&ion  )  equall  to  O  ^the 
height .  Wherefore  the  cone,whofe  bafe  is  the  circle  E  i(.G,  and  height  F  t,  is  quadruple  to  the  cone, 
whofe  bafe  is  N  R  E,  and  the  height  0  Qj  by  the  n  .of  this  twelfth  .  But  vnto  the  fame  cone  whofe 
bafe  is  N  R  P,  and  height  o  £f,  ■  1  r 

the  Sphere  A  is  like  wife  pro  ued 
quadruplab  Wherefore  the  cone 
whofe  bafe  is  EigG  and  height 
F  L,  is  'equall  to  the  Sphere  As 
by  the  7.of  the  fifth  To  a  Sphere 
being  geuen  therefore,  we  haue 
made  an  vpright  cone  equall. 

And  as  concerning  the  other 
partofehis  Probleme,  it  is  now 
eafie  to  execute, and  that  two 
Wayes  :  I  meane  to  a  the  fpr  ere 
geuen*.  to  make  an- vpright  cone 
in  anvproportiongeuen  bet  wen 
two  right  lines.  For,  let  the  pro¬ 
portion  geuen,  be  that  which  is 
betwene  Xand  r .  By  the  order 
of  my  additions,  vpon  the*,  of 
this  twelfth  booke  :  to  the  circle 
£/<,<?  make  an  other  circle  in 
that  proportion  fhat  X  is  to  Ts 
which.lctbe  Z  .Vpon  the  center 
of  z rearc  a  line  perpendicular 
and  equall  to  F  L  .  I  fay  that  the 
cone,  whofe  bafe  is  Z ,  and  the 
height  equall  to  PL, is  to  A,  in 
the  proportion  of  X to  T. For  the 
cone  vppon  z,  by  conffru&ion, 

hathhe^ht  equan^the  herghc  ,,  . . .  .  .. 

or  the  cone  l.  E  IgG ami  z,hv 

conlfru&ibn ,  is  to  k  \  G,  as  x  is  t  •  'Wher afore,’  by  the  n  .of  this  twelfth, the  Cone  vpon  2,  is  to  the 

cone  L  E  R_G,asXisto  r.  But  the  cone  L  E  F(,(7isproued  equall  to  the  fphere -rf.Wherfore  thecone 
vpon  z,  is  to  A,  as  X  is  tor, by  the7.0fthefift.T0a  Sphere  grutn  therefore,  we  haue  made  a  cone  in 
any  proportion  geuen,  betwene  two  right  lines .  SenbcJdiy,  UtiXis  fO-Tl  fo  to  PL, let  there  be  afourth 
line,  by  the ;  1  .of  the  fist  s  and  fuppofe  it  to  be  IV.  I  that-  a  cone*  whofe  bafeds  equall  to  E  IgG, 

and  height  the  line  IV M  to  A, a sjt;  is  to  r  .For.  by  the  :4'ofithis  twelfth;  cones  being  feton  equall  bales, 
are  one  to.  the  other,  as  their  heighces  are  •  But,  by  ccnftruiUon,  ih'e  height/^,  is  to  the  height  F  /-,ai  * 
jris  to  r .  Wherefqie  the  cor.c  which  hath  his  |afeeqtuUuto:  tE^d’yand  height  the  line  tV,  is  to  the 
coner  £I{.G,  asXlsio  T  .And  itisproued.  that  to  thevvrse  LEJgG.  the  Sphere  A  is  equall :  Wher- 
fore,  by  the  7  .of  the  fitr,  the  cone,  who  ft  bale  is  equal!  to  E  G,  and  height  the  line  W,  is  to  A,  as  jris 
tor.  Therefore  a  Sphere  being  geuefi,  we-  haue  made  an  vpright  code;  in  any  proportion  geuen  be¬ 
twene  two  rightlines  .  And  before,  we  tirade  an  v  pright  cone,  equall  to  the  Spheregeuen  .  Whertore  ^fn  •Vbtfalt 
a  Sphere  being  geuen,  we  haue  made  an  vpright  cone,  equail  to  the  fame,  or  in  any  other  proportion,  ‘  ® 

geuen  betwene  two  right  lines .  I  cail  that  an  vpright  cone,whofe  axe  is  perpendicular  to  his  bafe.  - C  - 


a. 


A  Corollary . 


Hus 


Ofthcj&ft  part  of  the  demonstration,  it  is  euident :  A  Sphere  being  propounded that  a  Cone, 
tybofe  bafe hath  his fimidiameter,  equall  to  the  diameter  therofand  height  equall  to  the  femidiame- 
ter  eft  he  fame  Sphere,  is  equall  to  that  fp  here  propounded . 


if  A  Probleme.  2. 

UJC.l  -7  tr:Lnd  /id; 


Sphere  being  geuen, an  da  circle, to  reare  an  vpright  Cone,vpon  that  circle  (as  a  bafe)  equall 
to  the  Spheregeuen :  or  in  any  proportion  betwene  two  right  lines  ajjigned. 

an  vjKfe  thc  SP1.1.ere  »  be  Qj  and  the  circle  geuen  to  be  C  i  By  the  firft  Probleme  make 
an  vpright  cone  equall  to  Qthe  Sphere  geuert  :  which  cone  fuppofe  to  be  A  :  andfbythea.Probleme 
of  my  additions  vpon  the  fecond  of  this  twelfth  booke;  as  C  the  circle  geuen, is  to  the  bafe  of  A,fo  let 

GGg.j.  the 


I 


The  fecond 
fart  of  the 
Prebiemc, 


The  fecond 
part  of  the 
fro  blrne. 


7 be  twelueth  ‘Bookg 


the  heigh*  of  A*  be  to  a  line  found  i  which  let  be  D. 
Then  it  is  euident,  that,  the  cope,  which  hath  for  his 
bafe  C,  the  circle  geucn,  an 3  height  the  line  D,laft 
found, {hall  be  equall  to  Qthe  Spheregeuen ".which 
cone  let  be  F  .  For,  by  conftru&ion,  F  hath  his  bafe 
and  height  in  reciprokall  proportion  with  the  cone 
A,  made  equall  to  Q„the  Sphere  geuen  :  Wherfore 
by  the  xy.of this  twelfth,  and  7.of  the  fifth,  this  vp¬ 
right  cone  F,  reared  vpon  C,  the  circle  geuen, is e- 
quall  to  Q^,  the  Sphere  geuen  :  which  thing  the 
Problems  firft  required. 

And  the  fecond  part  of  this  Probleme  is  thus  per¬ 
formed  .  Suppofe  the  proportion  geuen  to  bethae 
which  is  betwene  X  &  Y.Then,asX  is  to  Y,fo  let  an 
other  right  line  found,be  to  the  height  ofF  :  which 
line  let  be  G.  For  this  G,thefound  height  (by  con- 
ftrudion)  being  to  the  height  of  F,as  X  is  to  Y,  doth 
caufe  thiscone  (which  let  be  M)  vpon  C,the  circle 
geue  (or  an  other  to  it  equall)duely  reared,to  be  vn- 
to  the  cone  F,  as  X  is  to  Y,  by  the  i4.of  this  twelfth. 
But  F  is  proued  equallto  the  Sphere  geuen :  Wher¬ 
fore  M,  is  to  the  Sphere  geuen,as  X  is  to  Y.  And  M, 
is  reared  vpon  the  circle  geuen :  or  his  equall.Wher- 
fore,  a  Sphere  being  geuen, &  a  circle,  we  haue  rea¬ 
red  an  vpright  cone,  vpon  that  geuen  circle  (  as  a 
bafe)  equall  to  the  Sphere  geuen  :  or  in  any  propor¬ 
tion,  betwene  two  right  lines  affigned  :  which  was 
required  to  be  done. 


<J[  ^  Probleme. 


G 


n  ■ 


‘V*  -'j 


* >4  Sphere  being  geuen, and  a  right  line ,  to  make  an  vpright  cone ,  equall  to  the  Sphere  geuen,  or 
in  any  other  proportion  geuen  betwene  two  right  lines  :  Which  made  cone, fhall  haue  his  height  equall 
to  the  right  line  geuen. 


jT 


SUppofe  the  Sphere  geuen,  to  be  R  :  and  the 
right  line  geuen,.to  be  S.  To  R  the  Sphere  geuen, 
tuafce.atl  vpright  eone,equall:  by  tHefirlt  Probleme: 
which  cone  fuppofe  to-beA.ThenasS,  the  line  ge- 
uefl,  is- to  the  height  of  A,  fo  let  the  bafe  of  A,  be  to 
au'0 ther  circle,  which  let  be  K,  by  my  additions,vp- 
cn  the  fecond  Propofition  of  this  twelfth  booke.I 
fay  Khar  an  vpright  cone,  hauing  his  height,  equal! 
to  S,i the  right  line  geuen,  and  his  bafe  K,is  equall  to 
the  Sphere  gpuen  .  Let  this  cone  be  noted  by  L :  for 
by  conftruftien  ,  thys  cone  L,  and  A  ,haue  theyr 
heightesand  bafes  reciprokall  in  proportio:  Wher¬ 
fore  this  cone  L,  and  the  cone  A,  are  equall,’ by  the 
ty.of  the  twelfth) .  B  ut  A  is  equall  to  the  Sphere  ge¬ 
uen  by  conftru&ion.  Wherefore  L  is  equall  to  the 
Sphere  geuen  .  And  the  height  of  L, is  equall  to  the 
right  line  geuen,  bycontlrudion  :  which  ought  to 
be  done. 

For  the  fecond  part :  finde  a  circle,  which  fhall 
haue  to  the  bafe  of  L,  any  proportion  appointed’in 
right  lines  :  as  the  proportion  of  X  to  Y  :  which,by 
my  additions,vpo  the  fecond  of  this  booke,  ye  haue 
learned  to  do.  Then,  with  the  height,  equall  to  the 
heigth  oft  reared  vpon  this  laft  found  circle,  which 
let  be  T,  as  a  bafe,  you  fhall  fatiffie  the  Probleme. 
LetthatConebe  V  .For  this  laft  cone  V,isto  L,as 
his  bafe  is  to  the  bafe  of  L,  by  the  ii  .of  this  twelfth  . 
But  Ais  proued  equall  to  the  Sphere  geuen :  Wher- 
Ibre  by  the  7.  of  the  fift,  this  laft  cone  V*  hath  to  R, 


n  ?  <  s 


ofSucMes  Elementes . 


MVS* 


/ 

\ 

0  \ 

K  ~N 

_ 

li 

the  Sphere  geuen,  that  proportion  which  is  betwene  X  and  Y  affignc'd  :  and  forafmuch  as  the  height 
ofthisconeV,is  equallto  the  height  of  L  :  and  the  height  of L,  equall  to  Sg  the  right  line  geuen  (  by 
conftrudion  )  :  it  is  euident,  that  a  Sphere  being  geuen ,  &  a  right  line, we  haue  made  an  vpright  cone, 
equall  to  the  Sphere  geuen,  or  in  any  other  proportion  geuen  betwene  two  right  lines  :  which  made 
cones,  haue  their  height  equallto  the  right  line  geuen  :  which  ought  to  be  done. 

Vuwillinglam  to  vie  thus  many  wordes,  in  matters  fo  plaine  andeafie.  But  this  (Ithinke)can 
not  hinder  them ,  that  by  nature  are  notfo  quicke  ofinuention,  as  to  lead  euery  thing,  generally  fpo- 
ken,  to  a  particular  execution.  v 

c  ‘f  * 

«[  A  Th  corime.  /» 

Euery  Cylinder  Which  hath  his  bafe  tthe greateft  Circle  in  a  Sphere,  &  heith  equall  to  the  diame- 
ter  of  that  Sphere,  is  Sefquialterato  that  Sphere.  a4lfd  the fuperficies  of  that  Cylinder ,  With  his  two 
bafes  is  Sefquilatera  to  the fuperficies  ofithe  Sphere:  and  without  histWo  bafes ,  is  equall  to  the  fuperfi¬ 
cies  of  that  Sphere 

Suppofe,a  fphere  to  be  fignified  by  A,  and  an  vpright  cylinder  hading  to  his  bale  a  circle  equall  to 
the  greateft  circle  in  A  contayned ,  and  his  heith  equallto  the  diameter  of  A ,  let  be  fignified  by  FG  .1 
fay  that  F  G,isfefquialter  to  A:  Secondly  I  fay  that  the  croked  cylindricall  fuperficies  of  F  G  ,  together 
with  the  fuperficieces  of  his  two  oppoiit  bafes,  is  fefquialtera  to  the  whole  fuperficies  fphericail  of  A. 
Thirdly  I  fay  that  the  cylindricall  fuperficies  of  F  G  ,  omitting  his  two  oppofite  bafes ,  is  equallto  the 
fuperficies  ofthefpere  A  .Let  the  bafe  of  FG,  be  the  circle  FLB  :whofe  center,  fuppofe  M,  and 
diameter  FB.  And  the  dxe  of  the  fame  FG,letbe,MH.  Which  is  his  heith  (for  we  fuppofe  the  cy¬ 
linder  to  be  vpright) :  and  fuppofe  FT, to  be  his  toppe  or  Vertex.  Forafmuch  as ,  by  fuppofition  M  H  is 
equall  to  the  diameter  of  A. Let  M  H  bedeuided  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  N  ,  by  a  playne  fu¬ 
perficies  palling  by  the  point  N,and  being  parallell  to  the  oppofit  bafes  of  F  G.By  the  thirtenth  of  this 
twelfth  booke,it  then  foloweth,that  the  cylinder  F  G  ,  is  alfo  deuided  into  two  equall  parts :  being  cy¬ 
linders;  which  two  equall  cylinders  let  beIG,andFK:  theaxeofl  Gfuppofe  to  be  H  N  ;andof  FK 
the  axe  to  be  N  M.  And  for  that,F  G,is 
an  vpright  cylinder  ,  and  at  the  poynt 
N,cut  by  a  playne  Superficies  parallell 
to  his  oppofite  bafes ,  the  common  fe- 
£tion  of  that  playne  fuperficies  and  the 
cylinder  F  G,muft  be  a  *  circle,  equall, 
to  his  bafe  FLB,  and  haue  his  center, 
the  point  N.  Which  circle,let  be  I O- 
K :  And  feing  that  F  L  B  is ,  by  fuppofi¬ 
tion,  equallto  the  greateft  circle  in  A, 

I O  K,alfo,  fhall  be  equall  to  the  grea¬ 
teft  circle,in  A.contained:  Alfo, by  rea- 
fon  M  H,is  by  fuppofition ,equal  to  the 
diameter  of  A  :  and  N  H  ,  by  conftru- 
dtio,ha!fofM  H,  it  is  manifeft  thatN- 
H  is  equall  to  the  femidiameter  of  A. 
l£thercfore,you  fuppofe  a  cone  to  haue  the  circle  I O  K  to  his  bafe  :  and  N  H  to  his  heith,the  fphere 
A,fhall  be  to  that  Cone, quadrupla  ,  bythez.  Theoreme.Let  that  cone  be  H  I O  K  .  Wherefore  A,is 
quadrupla  to  H  I O  K.And  the  Cylinder  I  G  hauing  the  fame  bafe,  with  HI  O  K(the  circle  I  O  K)and 
the  fame  heith,(the  right  line  N  H)is  triple  to  the  cone  H I  O  K‘.  by  the  ro.of  this  twelfth  booke.  But 
to  I  G,the  whole  cylinder  F  G,is  doublets  is  proUed :  Wherefore  F  G,is  triple  and  triple ,  to  the  cone 
HIOK,  that  is ,  fextuple  .  And  A  is  proued  quadrupla  to  the  lame  H I  O  K .  Wherefore  F  G  is 
to  HI  O  K,as  6. to  i:and  A,is  to  H I O  K,as  4. to  1:  *  TherforeF  G  is  to  A,as  6,104:  which  in  theleaft 
termes,is,as3  toz.butj  to  2, is  the  termes  of  fefquialtera  proportion.  Wherefore  the  cylinder  F  G, 
is  to  A  fefquialtera  in  proportion  .  Secondly,  forafmuch  as  the  fuperficies  of  a  cylinder(his  two  oppo¬ 
fite  bafes  excepted  )  is  equall  to  that  circle  whofe  femidiameter  is  middeli  proportionall  betwene  the 
fide  of  the  cylinder,  and  the  diameter  of  his  bafe:  (as  vnto  the  10. of  this  booke  ,1  haue  added.^1  But 
<?fF  G,thefideB  G,being  parallell  and  equallto  the  axe  M  H,  muft  alfo  be  equall  to  the  diameter  of  A. 
And  the  bafe  F  L  B,being(by  (uppofition)equall  to  the  greateft  circle  in  A  contained, muft  haue  his  di¬ 
ameter^  B)equal  to  the  fayd  diameter  of  A. The  middle  proportional  therfore  betwene  B  G  and  FB, 
being  equall  eche  to  other,.ihall  be  a  line,  equall  to  either  of  them. 

[As  if  you  fet  B  Q  and  F  B  together ,  as  one  line ,  and  vpon  that  line  eompofed ,  as  a  diameter  make  a 
femicircle;  and  from  the  center ,  to  the  circumference  draw  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  fayd  diameter: 
by  the  i3.oithefixth,thatperpendicular,ismiddel  proportional  betwene  FB  and  B  G,the  femidiame- 
ters  :and  he  him  felfe  alfo  a  femidiameter :  and  therfore  by  the  definition  of  a  circle,  equall  to  F  B ,  and 
likewife,to  B  G .]  And  a  circle,hauing  his  femidiameter,equall  to  the  diameter  F  B,is  quadruple  to  the 
circle  FLB.  [  For  the  fquare  of  euery  whole  line  ,is  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of  his  halfe  line ,  as  may 

GGg.ij.  be 


K 


B 


t* 


*  This  may  ea* 
fe\y  be  demon- 
ftr  ated,as  tn  the 
1 7  -proportion 
the feff/on  of  a 
fphere  was  pro* 
Med  to  he  a  cir¬ 
cle. 


*  For  taping  a* 
tray  all  doubt, 
this,  as  a  Lem - 
ma,afterward 


ts 


A  Lemma 
(as  it  were')  ,, 
prefently  de-  ,, 
monf rated*  ,, 


The  Welueth  Hooke 


be  proued  by  the  4. of  the  fecond :  and  by  the  fecond  of  this  twelfth  jdrcles  are  on  e  to  the  other,  as  the 
fquares  oftheir  diatneters^re.]  Wherfore  the  fuperficies  cylindricall  of  F  G,alone,is  quadrupla  to  his 
bale  F  L  B .  But  if  a  certayne  quantity  be  dupla  to  one  thing ,  and  an  other ,  quadrupla  to  the  fame  one 
thing, thofe  two  quantities  together  are  fextupla  to  the  fame  one  thing.Therefore  feing  the  bafe,oppo- 
fite  to  F  L  B/being  equall  to  to  F  L  B) 
added  to  F  L  B,  maketh  that  copound, 
double  to  F  L  B  :  that  double  added  to 
the  cylindrical!  fuperficies  of  F  G,doth 
make  a  fuperficies  fextupla  to  F  L  B,. 

And  the  fuperficies  of  A,  is  quadrupla 
to  the  fame  FLB,  by  the  firfi:  Theo- 
rerne.  Therefore  the  cylindricall  Paper- 
ficies  of  F  G,  with  the  fuperficieces  of 
his  two  bafes  is  to  the  fuperficies  FLB, 
as  €  to  x .  and  the  fuperficies  of  A  to  F- 
L  B,is  as  4  to  1.  Wherfore  the  cylindri¬ 
call  fuperficies  of  F  G,&  his  two  bafes, 
together,  are  to  the  fuperficies  of  A,as 
6  to  4  •.  that  is,  in  the  fmalldl  termes,as 
3  to  1.  Which  isproper  to  fefquialtera 

proportion. Thirdly, it  is  already  made  euident  that  the  fuperficies  cylindrical,ofF  G’(onely  by  itfelf) 
is  quadrupla  to  F  L  B .  And  tifo  it  is  proued ,  that  the  fu  perficies  of  the  fphere  A ,  is ’quadrupla  to  the 
fame  F  L  B,  Wherefore  by  the  7.of  the  fifth,  the  cylindricall  fuperficies  of  F  G,  is  equall  to  the  fuperfi¬ 
cies  of  A  .Therfore,euery  cylinder, which  hath  his  bafe  the  greatell  circle  in  a  fphere,and  heith  equal  to 
the  diameter  ofthatfphere,is  fefquialtera  to  thatfpere:  Alfo  the  fuperficies  of  that  cylinder  with  his 
rwo  bafes,  is  fefquialtera  ,to  the  fuperficies  of  the  fphcre.-and  without  his  two  bafes  is  equall  to  the  fu- 
perfieies  of  the  fphere:  which  was  to  be  demonllrated, 


rx; 

N 

L 

M 


K 


3 


G 

A 


B 


The  Lemma. 

If  A  be  to  C,as  6, to  1  :and  B,to  C,as  4  to  1  :A,is  to  B^as  6, to  4. 

For,feing,B  is  to  C,as  4  to  i,by  fuppofition :  therefore  backward,by  the  4.of  the  fifth,C  is  to  B,as 
1, to  4.  Imagine  now  two  orders  of  quantities, the  firft, 

A,C,and  B  the  fecond,<f,i,and  4.Forafmuch  as, A,is  to 
C,as<t,  to  1,  by  fuppofition:  and  C  is  toB,  as  1,  to  4, as 
we  haue  proued :  wherfore, A  is  to  B,as  6  to  4,by  the  zz 
of  the  fift.Therfore,  if  A  be  to  C  as  6  to  i,and  B  to|C,a$ 

4  to  1 :  A  is  to  B,as  6,to  4.which  was  to  be  proued. 

t - -  ....  ,  ,.y 

Notes. 

Sleight  thingsffome  times)  lacking  euidet  proufe,brede  doubt  or  ignorance.And,I  nede  notwame 
yoUjhow  gen  trail, this  demonfiration  is :  for  if  you  put  in  the  place  of  6  and  4, any  other  numbers,  the 
like  mannerofconclufion  will  follow.So  likewifefin  place  of  1. any  other  one  number  may  be,  as,  if  A 
be  to  C  as  6  to  y  rand  B  vnto  C,be  as  7  to  $ :  A,fhall  be  to  B,as  6  to  7.  &c. 


6 


-  1 
.JC- 


4 

s 


Probleme.  4. 


To  a  Sphere  geuen,  to  make  a  cylinder  equall,  or  in  any  proportion geuen  betwene  two  right  tines. 

( 

Suppofe  the  geuen  Sphere  to  be  A  :  and  the  proportion  geuen  to  be  that  betwene  X  and  Y.  I  fay 
that  a  cylinder  is  to  be  made, equall  to  A:  or.  els  in  the  fame  proportion  to  A,  that  is  betweneXtoY. 

_  .  Let  a  cylinder  be  made  (fuch  one  as  the  Theoreme  next  before  fuppofed)that  lhall  haue  his  bafe  equall 

C  onjtmtm.  to  the  greatefl  cjrcie  jn  A,  and  height  equall  to  the  diameter  of  A  :  Let  that  cylinder  be  the  vpright  cy¬ 
linder  B  C.Let  the  one  fide  of  B  C,be  the  right  line  QC.Deuide  Q^C  into  three  equal  parts:  of  which, 
let  QEcontaine  two,  and  let  the  third  part  beCE.  By  the  point  E  fuppofe  a  plaine  (  parallel  to  the 
bafes  of  B  C  )  to  paffe  through  the  cylinder  B  C,  cutting  the  fame  by  the  circle  D  E .  I  fay  that  the  cy- 
IinderBE  is  equall  to  the  Sphere  A.  For  feing  B  C,  being  an  vpright  cylinder,  is  cut  by  a  plaine,  pa- 
raliel  to  his  bafes,  by  conftru&ion  :  therefore  as  the  cylinder  D  C,  is  to  the  cylinder  B  E,  fo  is  the  axe 
lkmott;ir4-  0f  DC,  to  the  axe  of  BE,  by  the  1 3. of  this  twelfth.  Whereforeas  the  axeistotheraxe,fois  cylinder 

tm>  to  cylinder .  B  ut  axe  is  to  axe,  as  fide  to  fide,namcly,  C  E  to  QJE,  becaufe  the  axe  is  parallel  to  any  fide 

ofan 


I 


0, 


of  an  vpright.  cylinder  :  by  the,  definition  of  a  cylin¬ 
der.  And  the  circle  of  the  feSjon,  is  parallel  to  the 
bafts,  by  conftru£?tion.  Wherefore  irvthe  parallelo¬ 
gram  me  (made  of  the  axe,  and  of  two  ftmidiame- 
ters,  on  one  fide  parallels,  one  to  the  other,  being 
coupled  together  by  aline  drawen  betwene  their  d 
endes  in  their  circumferences, whicklineis  the  fide 
QC  )itiseuident,  that  the  axe  ofBCis;cut  in  like 
proportion,  that  the  fide  QC  is  cut.  Wherfore  the 
cylinder  D  C,  is  to  the  cylinder  B  E,  as  EC  is  to 
QJi  .  Wherefore,  by  compofition,  the  cylinders  - 
D  C  and  BE,  that  is,  whole  BC,  are  to  the  cylinder  ° 
B  E,  as  C  E  and  QE  (the  whole  right  line  Q_C)  are 
to  QJE.But by coilruction,  QCis  ofj.fuch  partes,  S 
as  QJ2  cont2ineth  z.  W  herefore  the  cylinder  B  C, 
is  of  3  .fuch  partes,  as  B  E  contayneth  z.  Wherefore 


F0/.384* 


B  C  the  cylinder,  is  to  B  E,  as  3  .to  2 :  which  is  fefquialtera  proportion.  But  by  the  former  Theoreme, 
B  C  is  fefquialtera  to  the  Sphere  A  :  Wherefore,  by  the  7.  of  the  lift,  B  E  is  equall  to  A.  Therefore  to  a 
Sphere  geuen,  we  haue  made  a  cylinder  equall. 


Or  thus  more  briefely  omitting  all  cutting  of  the  Cylinder, 


Eorafmuch  as  B  C  is  an  vpright  Cylinder  this  fides  are  equall  to  his  axe  or  heith:  therefore  the  two 
cylinders ,  whereof  one  hath  the  heith  QC  and  the  other  the  heith  QE,hauing  both  their  bafes,the 
greateft  circle  in  the  Sphere  A,are  one  to  the  other  as  QC  is  to  QE,by  the  14. of  this  twelfth,but  QC 
is  to  Q_E,as3-to  2.,  by  conftru6fion:and  3  .to  2. is  in  Sefquialtera  proportion:  therefore  the  cylinder  B  C 
hauing  his  heith  QC,&  his  bafe  the  greateft  circle  in  A  coteyned,is  Sefquialtera  to  the  cylinder  which 
hath  his  bafe  the  greateft  circle  in  A  conteyned,[and  heith  the  line  QE  .But by  the  former  Theoreme, 

B  C,is  alfo  Sefquialtera  to  A :  wherfore  the  cylinder  hauing  the  bafe  B  Q(which  by  fuppofition,is  equal 
to  the  greatefi circle  in  A  conteyned)andheirh,  QE,  is  equall  to  the  fphere  A,by  the7.ofthefift .  And  ~befeton& 
now  it  can  not  be  hard, to  geue  a  cylinder,  to  A,  in  that  proportion ,  which  is  betweneXand  Y .  For  let  part  of  the 
the  fide  QE,be  to  QP,as  Y  is  to  X,  by  the  12  .of  the  fixt.  Therefore  backeward ,  QP  is  to  QE  as  X  to  Problems* 
Y.  Wherefore  the  cylinder  hauing  the  bafe  the  qreateft  circle  in  A  and  heith  the  line  QP ,  is  to  the  cy-  * 

linder  hauing  the  fame  bafe, and  heith  the  line  QE,as  X  is  to  Y,by  the  i4.of  this  twelfth :  but  the  cylin¬ 
der  hauing  the  heith  QE,&  his  bafe  the  greateft  circle  in  A,  contevned,  is  proued  equall  to  the  Sphere 
A.Wherefore  by  the  7. of  the  fife, the  cylinder  whofe  heith  is  QP  and  bafe  the  greateft  circlein  A,con- 
teyned,is  to  the  fphere  A, as  X  to  Y.Therefore  to  a  fphere  geuen :  we  haue  made  a  cylinder,  in  any  pro¬ 
portion  geuen  betwene  two  rightlihes.and  alfo ,  before' we  haue  to  a  fphere  geuen, made  a  cylinder  e- 
quall.T  here  fore  to  a  fphere  geuen,we  haue  made  a  cylinder  equall,or  in  any  proportion  geuen  betwene 

A  Problem*,  f. 

csf  Sphere  beinggeuen,  and  a  circle  ,vpon  that  circle  as  a  bafe,torerea  cylinder,  equall  tothe 
fphere  geuen:  or  in  any  proportion  geuen  betwene  two  right  lines ♦ 

A  Probleme.  6. 


A  Sphere  b  eing geuen  ,  and  aright  line, to  make  a  cylinder ,  equall  to  the fphere  oeuen,or  in  any  0- 
ther  proportion, betwene  two  right  lines, geuen.  °  J 

•  '  \ 

In  this  /.and  ^.probleme, firft  make  a  cylinder  equall  to  the  fphere  geuen, by  rhe4.probleme:and 
then  by  the  order  of  the  s  and  3  .problemes,in  cones,execurc  theft  accordingly  in  cylinders. 


A  Probleme.  j. 

Two  vnltke  Cones  or  Cylinders, being geuen, tofinde  two  right  lines ,  which  haue  the  fame  propor¬ 
tion  one  to  the  ot  her, that  the  two  geuen  cones  or  cylinders  haue  one  to  the  other , 

Vpon  one  of  their  bafts  rere  a  conefif  cones  be  compared)or  a  cylinderfif  cylinders  be  compared) 
equall  to  the  other  :  by  the  order  of  the  ftcond  and  third  problcmcs :  and  the  heith  of  the  coneor  cy  - 

GGg.iij.  linder. 


4 


The  Welueth  cBooke 

linder,on  whofe  bafe  you  rered  an  equall  cone  or  cylinder ,  with  the  new  heith  found ,  haue  that  pro¬ 
portion,  which  the  cones  oj  cylinders  haue,one  to  the  other4by  the  i4.of  this  twelfth  booke. 

A  Problem.  S. 


Demon fir  a- 
tion , 


D 


±An  vpright  Cone ,  and  Cylinder ,  being geuen  •.  tofinde  two  right  lines, hauino 
the  one  to  the  other ,Vehich  the  Cone  and  Cylinder  haue, one  to  the  other. 

Suppofe  ,  gjs  Kl  an  vpright 
cone  and  a  b  an  vpright  cylinder  jp* 

geuen  .  I  fay  two  right  lines  are  to 

CmflruUhn.  be  geuC‘ which  ll5fn  hauc  that  Pro~ 

*  portion  one  to  the  other,  which 

/Cand  A  B  haue  one  to  the  o- 
ther.Vpon  the  bafe  B  H,  eredea 
Cone,equaIl  to  <?£/<>  by  the  or¬ 
der  ofthefecod  pro bleme:  which  • 
let  be  o  B  H,  and  his  heith  let  be 
O  C,and  let  the  heith  of  ab,(  the 
cylinder),  be  C  s,  produce  cs  to 
P :  fo  that  C  p ,  be  tripla  to  C  s,8c 
make  perfed  the  cone  P  B  H .  I 
fay  that  P  C  and  o  c  haue  that  pro 
portion,which  A  B  hath  to  £fEl\j. 

For ,  by  conflradion,  OB  H  is  e- 
quallto  ££_E /Oand  P  B  His  equal 
to  A  5, as  we  Willproue,(Affumpt 
wife)  .  And  p  B  //,  and  OB  H are 
vpon  one  bafe,namelyi?.//:wher-  o 
fore  by  the  14 .of  this  twelfth,/1 /?- 
H  and  o  B  H  are  one  to  the  other 
as  their  heithes r  C ,  and  o  C ‘  are 
one  to  the  other  )  wherefore  the 

cylinder  and  cone  eqpall  to  P  B  H  and  O  B  //are  as  PC  is  to  O  C.-by  the  7.ofthe  fifth. But  AB  the  cylin¬ 
der  o^E  /(, the  cone , are  equal}  to  PBH  and  o  B  H: by  conilrudion :  wherefore  A  B  the  cylinder,is  to  Q? 
£  /<.  the  c©We,as  P  Cfis  to  OC .  Wherefore  we  haue  found  two  right  lines  hauing  that  proportion  that 
a  cone  an'cfa  cylinder  geuen,haue  one  to  the  other  .Which  thing  we  may  execute  vpon  the  bale  of  the 
cone  geuefoas  We  did  vpon  the  bafe  of  the  cylinder  geuen ,  on  this  maner .  Vpon  the  bafe  of  the  cone 
An  other  way  which  bafedet  be  £  i(,  ered  a  cylinder ,  equall  to  AB ,  by  the  order  of  my  fecond  probleme. 

of  executing'  Which  cylinder  let  be  e  z>,and  G  T  his  heith,and  let  the  heith  of  the  cone  £^E  /(,,be  qj. 7.Take  the  line 
this  brobleme  G,  chir^  Part  ^L°h(by  the  9.  of  the  fixth) :  and  with  a  playne  paffing  by  /^parallel  to  E  /£ ,  cut  of 

“  *  the  cylinder  £  /.-which  ihali  be  equall  to  the  cone  /Oby  the  affumpt  following;  Ifay  now,  tha.tA- 

B,the  cvlinder,is  to  £^.E/Cthecone,asG,;r,isto  CjR.For  the  cylinder  E  D  is  to  the  cylinder  E  F, as  GT 
is  to  C/tfoy  the  14.  of  the  twelfth  :  and  to  E  D  is  the  cylinder  AB  equall:  by  conilrudion  :  and  to  E  F, 
we  haueprou/d  the  cone  £>JE  /fo  equall,  wherefore  by  they,  of  the  fifth ,  A  B  is  to  QE  tg,as  GTi*  to 
G  R  .  Wherfqre  an  vpright  cone,&  a  cylinder  being  geuen,we  haue  found  two  right  lines  hauing  the 
fame  proportion  betwene  them  ,  which  the  cone  and  the  cy linder,haue  one  to  the  other  :  which  was 
requifite  to  be  done. 


/T 

/ 

1 

\ 

I< 


G 


Anajfumpt. 

If  a  cone  }and  a  cylinder ,  being  both  on  one  bafe.are  equall  one  to  the  other :  the  heith  of the  cone 
is  tripla  to  the  heith  of  the  cylinder' .  zsf nd  if  a  cone  and  a  cylinder  being  both  on  one  bafe,  the  heith  of 
the  cone  be  tripla  to  the  heith  of  the  cylinder  y  he  cone  and  the  cylinder  are  equall . 

We  will  vfe  the  cylinder  A  B  &  the  cone  PB  Hin  the  former  probleme:  with  their  bale  &  heithes 
fo  noted  as  before.Ifay  ifP  B  H  be  equall  to  A  B,that  C  P  the  heith  ofP  B  H,  is  tripla  to  C  S  the  heith 
of  the  cylinder  A  B.  Suppofe  vpon  the  bafeB  H,  acone  to  be  rered  of  the  heith  of  C  S,  which  let  be  S- 
B  H:  it  is  manifefi  that  A  B  is  tripla  to  that  cone  S  B  H,  by  the  10. of  this  twelfth.  Wherfore  a  cone  equal 
to  A  B  the  cylinder  is  tripla  to  S  B  H  the  cone,  by  the  7,  of  the  fifth ,  butP  B  H  is  fuppofed  equall  to 
A  B.Therefore  P  B  H  is  tripla  to  S  B  H,therefore  the  heith  ofP  B  H  lhall  be  tripla  to  the  heith  of  S  B  H 
by  the  i4.of the  twelfth  .But  the  heith  of  P  B  H,is  C  P  :and  of  S  B  H,the  heith  is  C  S  .-wherefore  C  P  is 
tripla  to  C  S  .And  C  S  is  the  heith  of  the  cylinder  A  B  by  fuppofition  .  Therefore  a  cone  and  a  cylinder. 


of  cue  tides  Element es. 


Fol.fr. 


being  both  on  one  bale, and  e  quail,,  the  heith  of  the  coneistriplato  the  heith  ofthe  cylinder .  And  the 
fecond  part, as  ealely  may  be  confirmed.For  if  A  B  a  cylinder,  and  P  B  H.a  cone ,  baue  one  bafe ,  as  the 
circle  about  B'H:  arid  theheithofP  B  H5  be  tri  plato  the  heith  of  AB,tlay  thatPB  Ff,andA  B  areequaf*  The  COMUetfe 
The  heith  of  AB  let  be(asafore)CS:  and  of  P  B  H ,  the  heith,  let  be  C  P;of  the  heith  C  S ,  imagine  a  ofthe  aJSfipt* 
ConeVpon  thefamebaleB  H t  by  the  ro.ofrhis  twelfth,  A  B  lhallbe  triple  to  that  cone .  Andchecone 
P  B'H'hduiiSg  h'eith-CP^byfuppohtionytripla'toG  S,  (hall  alfo  be'triplato  that  cone  S  B  H;  by  the  14, 
of  this  twelfth.  Wherefore  by  the  7.of  the  fifth  AB  and  P  B  H  are  equalf  Therefore,  if  a  cone  and  a  cy* 
linder  being  both  on  one  bafe, the  heith  of  the  cone  be  tnpla  to  the  heith  of  the  cylinder,  the  cone  and 
the  cylinder  are  equall  .S  o  hauc  we  demonlhtated  both  par-tes-:-a$  was  required . 


uli. 


fooreme.  4. 


T he  fuperficies  of  the  fegment  orprotionof  any  fpherefis  equad  tothe  circle ,  whofe femidiameter, 
is  equal!  to  that  right  line  Which  is  dr  awn  e from  the  toppeof that  fegment  to  the  circumference  ofthe 
circle, Which  is  the  bafe  of  that  portion  or fegment. 

,  •  ■  ■„  ‘  ...  .  V  rvt  m  I 


As  hf  the  Sphere  :  11  o;  ; 

A,  a  Segment  being  cu  t 
of  by  the  circle ,  whofe 
diameter  is  CEV&  the 
fame  circle  being  the 
bafe  of  the  Segment, 
whofe  top  alfo  is  D.-the 
croked  fuperficies  fphe- 
ricall  of  the  lame  Seg¬ 
ment  >  is  equall  to  a  cir¬ 
cle  whofe  Semidiame¬ 
ter  is  equall  to  the  right 
line  D  C  .  As  is  the  cir¬ 
cle  B. 

This  hath  Archimedes  demonftrated  in  this  firft  booke  of  the  Sphere  and  Cylinder,in  his  40.and  4* 
propofitions  -.and  I  remitte  them  thether ,  that  will  herein  demonffratiuely  be  certified  .*  I  would  wifli 
all  Mathematiciens,  as  well  of  verities  eafy,as  of  verities  rare  and  obfeure ,  to  feeke  the  cauies  demon- 
flratiue,thefinallfruite  thereof,is  perfection  in  this  art.  1 


l 


IK  J 


.  ’U, 


Befides  all  other  vfes  and  commodities ,  that  ate  of  the  Croked  fuperficieces  ofthe  Cone,  Cylin- 
demand  Sphere,fo  eafely  and  certaynely,of  vs  to  be  dealt  with  all :  this  is  not  the  leall,that  a  notable  Er- 
ror,which  among  Sophifticall  brablers,and  vngcometricall Mailers  and  Do61ors,hath  alongtime  bene 
vpholden  :  may  moll  euidently,  herebybe  confuted,  and  vtterly  rooted  out  of  all  mens  fantafies  for  e- 
Uer.The  Error  is  this,  Curui,ad  rettum,, nulla  efiproporno,  that  is/  Betwene  croked  and  llraight ,  is  no  pro,  A  great  error 
portion  ,  This  error ,  in  lines  ,.fuperficieces,and  folides,  may  with  more  true  demonllrations  be  oue/v  commonly 
throwne,  then  the  fauourers  of  that  fond  fantafie  are  able,  with  argument ,  either  probable  or  Sophi,  maintained. 
fficall  to  make  Ihcw  or  pretence  to  the  contrary  .In  lines,!  omitte  (  as  now  )  Archimedes  two  wayes,for 
the  finding  of  the  proportion  of  the  circles  circumference  to  a  llraight  line.  I  meane,  by  the  infeription 
andcircinnfcription  oflike  poligonon  figures,  and  that  other,byfpiralllines.And  I  omitte  Jikewile  (as 
now)in  folides,of  a  parallelipipedon,equalI  to  a  Sphere,Cone,or  Cylinder; or  any  fegment  or  fedtor  of 
the  fayd  folides .  And  onely ,  here  require  you  to  cortfider  in  this  twelfth  booke,  the  wayes  brought  to 

your  knowledge, how  to  the  croked  fuperficies  of  a  cone  and  cylinder,  and  of  a  fphere,  (the  whole,any  ® 

fegment  or  fedtor  thereof)  a  playne  and  llraight  fuperficies  may  be  geuen  equall :  Namely ,  a  Circle  to  *»  ®etwetm 
be  geuen  equall ,  to  any  of  the  fayd  croked  fuperficieces  aifigned ,  and  geuen  .  And  then  farther  by  my  »  freight 
Additions  vpon  the  fecond  propofition,you  haue  meanes  to  proceede  in  all  proportions,that  any  man  >»  ana  crake  4 
can  in  right  lines  geue,or  alfigne.Therfor  zfiuru-i  ad  re  (hrm, proper tio  omnimoda  poteft  dan  One  thing  it  is,  »  tnamr 
to  demqnllrate,that  betwene  a  croked  lineand'aftraightroracrokedfuperficiesandaplayneorltraight  »  ofpropor- 
fuperficies,  &rc.  there  is  proportion.  And  an  other  thing  itis,  to  demonllrate  a  particular  and  fpeciall  ttomax  he 

kinde  ofproporuon,being  betwene  a  croked  fuperficies  and  allraight  or  playne  fuperficies.  For  this  al-  oeuett 

fo  confirm  eth  the  firll..  Thislhort  warning  will  caufe  you  to  auoyde  the  layd  error,  and  make  vou  alfo  99  *  * 

hable  to  cure  them,\vhich  are  infedbd  therewith.  1 

ATheoreme.  $. 

<&sf ny  two  Spheres  being  geuen ,  as  the  Sphericall  Superfcies  ofthe  one, is  to  the  Sphiricall  Super * 

fries 


e 


■  ■  (  .  i »]  . . .  . . 

For  the  fuperficies  ofeuexy  fphere  is  c;u  u;  rim  to  t.o  his  greateft  circle, by  my  firft  Theoreme:  wher- 
forc,  of  two  geuen  Spheres ,  :a§  t.hftlph  Alkali  id^fidessqf  the  one,  is  to  his  greateft  circle,  fois  the 
iphericallfuperhdesofrhe  otherjto  in-  !.-;ii?.tcr.  -irc'e:,tnertore  by  alternate  proportion,as Spherical  fu- 
m§mhm  (phericAl  fuperfidies,fo  is,  gtmeu  prctetxjagy&tfeeft  Circle.  And  therfore  alfo  as  greateft  cir- 
cle,is  to  greateft  circle,fo  is  fphericalTupgiftci«SftU  (phencall  fuperficies:  which  was  to  be  denjpftrated, 

^4&robltm£^  .:9  f 

A  ^pjperrbpurg  geuen, togenedn  othfcSphirejg  \vhof;Sphmcallfperfcies,the^ Jhperficies  Spbe* 
ricaU  cf the  Sphere  geuen jhaU-hme  anypropomon  ,betwwj\vo  right  imesgeuen- 

v\ -  •  i  ,:\\i  vAXiS  Vtix&'g jkyfo 

Suppofe  A,to  be  a  fphere  geuen ,and  the  proportion  geuen,to  be  that, which  is  betwene  the  right 
lines  X  and  Y.I  fay  that  a  fphere  is  to  be  geuen  to  whofe  Iphericall  fuperficies,  the  fuperficies  fphericall 
ofA,fhallhaue  that  proportion  which  Xhath  to  Y.Let  thejgreafeftcirde,contcyncdin  A  the  fphere  b/e 
Conjlrttttioit.  the  circle  B  C  D.And  by  the  probltme  of  my  additionsrvpon -th^fecond  propofitiqn  pf  thislaooke  ,  as 
X  is  to  Y,  fo  let  the  circle  B  C  D  be  to  an  other  circle  found,  let  that  other  circle  be  E  F  G  :  and  his  dia¬ 
meter  EG,  I.  fay  that 
the  fphericall  fuperfici- 
es  of  the  fphere  A,  hath 
to  the,  fphericall  fuper¬ 
ficies  of  the  fphere, 
whofe  greateft  circle  is 
EFG,(or  his  equally 
that  proportion,  which 
X  hath  to  Y.For(by  con 
ftrudion)£  C  D  is  to  E- 
F  G.asXis  tp  Y:and  by 
the  theorem e  nextbe- 
fore^as  B  C  D  is  to  E  F- 
G,  fo  is  the  fpherical  fu 
perficies  of  A  (  whofe 
greateft  circle  is  BCD, 
bv  fuppofuion  )  to  the 
fphtricall  fupe:ficies,of 


Vemn/lnt* 

tim » 


taw 


t-  7  1 


SO  i’s  the  fglnricall  fti-  _ 
prfScies  of  A. ,  to  the 


simoiictenue: 


fph'eficall  fuperficies  of  the  fphere,  whofegreafeft  circle  is  E  F  G :  wherefore,  the  fphere  whofe  diame¬ 
ter  is  E  G^fthe  diameter  alfo  cffi'F  G  j  is  thelphere ,  to  whofe  fphericall  fuperficies  ,  the  fphericall  fu- 

_ 02 _ fA:2f.i _ \  i.-.k  .k«..  _ _ 1 ...  a  lUiv,.,  k«: _  .w _ c _ _ 


B , 


A  Problems,  to. 


n  k"  Y. 


sA  Sphere  being  geuen, and  a  Circle  lejfethen  the  greateft  Circle,  in  the fame  Sphere  conteyned, 
to  coapt  in  the  Sphere  geuen,  a  Circle  equall  tot  he  Circle geuen. 

*» 

Suppofe  A, to  be  the  fphere  geuen  rand  the  circle  geuen  lefte  then  the  greateft  circle  in  A  contey- 
ne d,to  be  F  K  G  .1  fay, that  in  the  Sphere  A, a  circle, equall  to  the  circle  F  K  G,is  to  be  coapted.  Firft  vn- 
tio  cf  a  cir-  ,,  derftand,what  we  meane  here,by  coapting  of  a  circle  in  a  Spht  re. We  fay,  that  circle  to  be  coapted  in  a 
cle  coapted  ,,  Sphere,  whofe  whole  circumferece  is  in  the  fuperficies  of  the  fame  Sphere.  Let  the  greateft  circle  in  the 
tti  a  Sphere.  Sphere  A  conteyned, be  the  circle  B  C  D.  Whofe  diameter  fuppofe  to  be  B  D ,  and  of  the  circle  FKG, 

touHruhUotu  1£C  F  G  be  the  diameter  .By  the  i.  of  thefourth,  let  a  line  equall  to  F  G,  be  coapted  in  the  circle  BCD. 

Which  line  coapted, let  be  B  E.And  by  the  lineB  E/uppofe  a  playne  to  paffe,cutting  the  Sphere  A, and 

s©bc 


Jhedifpm - 


ofEucMes  Elementes * 


to  be  perpendicularly  ere&ed  to  the  fuperficies 
of  B  C  D  .  Seing  that  the  portion  of  the  playne- 
remayningjn  the  fphere,is  called  their  common 
feOion:  the  layd  lection  ihall  be  a  circle  ,  as  be¬ 
fore  is  proued .  And  the  common  fectiin  ofthefijd 
pUjr.e^pd  the  greatefl  circle  BCD,  (vdhich  is  B  Z 
hy  fufpofition  )  Jb.tHbe  the  diameter  of  the  fame  cir- 
tle ,  as  ftc  will  prone  .  For, let  that  circle'be  B  L- 
EM.  Eet  the  center  of  the  fphere  Ajbe  the  point-; 

H:  which  H,is  alfo  the  ceter  of  theL-irclq  B  C  D/ 
becaufe  B  C  D  is  the  greateft  circle  in  A  contey- 
ned.FromH,  the  center  of  the  fphere  A,  let  a 
line  perpendicularly  be  let  fall  to  the  circle  B  L-- 
EM.;LetthatlmebeH  O:  anditis  euident  that 
H  O  (hall  fall  vpori  the  common  feftton  B  E,  by 
the  38. of  the  eleuenth.Andit  deuideth  B  E,into 
two  cquall  parts,  by  the  fecond  part  of  the  third 
proppfition  of  the  third  books:  by  which  poynt- 
O ,  all  other  lines  drawnc  in  the, circle  BLEM, 
are,  at  the  farhe  points  O  ,  deuided  into  two  c« 
quail  parts.  As  if  from  the  poynt  M,by  the  point 
0,a  right  line  be  drawne  one  the  o;ther  fide  com 
ming  to  the  circumference ,  at  th^poynt  N :  it  is 
manifeft  that  N  O  M  is  deuided  into  two  equall 
partesatthepoyntO:byreafori,iffrom  thecen-  • 
ter  H,  to  thepoyntes'Nahd  M,  right  lines  be 
drawne,H  N  and  H  M  ,  the  fquares  of H  M ,  and 
HN  are  equal! :  for  that  all  the  fern  id;  amt  tors  of 
the  fphercarc  equal;  an  d  therefore  ;thefrTquares 
are  cquall  one  to  the  othcr:andth(f-i'qu;ut:  ofthe 
perpendicular  H  Oyis  common  :  Wherefore  the 
iquare  of  the  third  line  M  O  is  equall  to  the 
fquare  of  the  third  line  N  O  :  and  therefore  the 

line  M  O  to  the  lineN  O.So  therefore  is-blM  equally  deuided  at  the  poynt  O  .  And  fo  may  be  proued 
of  all  other  right  lines,  drawne  in  the  circle  B  L  E  M,pafling  by.  the  poynt  O,to  the  circumference  one 
both  fides. Wherefore  O  is  the  center  of  the  circle  B  L'E  M' :  and  therefore  B  E  palling  by  the  poynt  O 
is  the  diameter  of  the  circle  B  L  E  M.Which.circle(I  fay)is  equal  to  F  K  G :  for  by  confiruftion  B  E  is  e  - 
quail  t&FQVahd  B:EisprpUedthedilhretetof  RL.EMi  afid  F  G  is  by  fuppofition  the  diameter  of  the 
circle  F  K  G:  wherefore  B  L  E  M  is  equall  to  PE  G  the  circle  geuen,:  and  B  L  E  M  is  in  A  the  fphere  gcuf. 
Wherfore  wc  haue  in  a  fphere  geuen  coapted  a  circle  equall  to  a  circle  geuen -.which  was  to  be  done. 

bnr  H  Z-  irnwied  2!  rhidw  ,Ja.h  od  o:. 

V  vabinsqul  iirri <  - :  ii  t Corollary : 

’ 


U  ir'Xift 


fi:i  Ur.  1  . 


'Tiefides  our  prmcipdll purpofefih ibis*ProbUi»e$uidepty  demonstrated,  this  is  alfo  made  mani¬ 
fest  :  that  if  the  greateft  circle  in  a  Sphere ,  he  cut  by  an  other  circle  ,er  deed  vponhim  at  right  angles, 
that  the  other  circle  is  cut  by  the  center  ,and  that  their  common fcEtion  is  the  diameter  of  that  other 
eirde  ;  and  therefore  that  other  circle  deuided  is  into  two  equall  partes . 


#  o'/  Probletne. 


11 . 


I  -  -  •  .  s.  . 

Sphere  being  geuen, and  a  circle, left-then  double  the  greatest,  circle  in  the  fame  Sphere  con* 
tamed,  to  cut  of,  a fegment  of  the fame  Sphere, WhofeSpherioallfv.perf ties,  fhall  be  equall  to  the  cir * 

tie  geuen . 

SuppofeK  to  be  a  Sphere  geuen,  whofe  greateft  circle  let  be  ABC:  and  the  circle  geuen, fuppofe 
So  be  D  E  F  .  I  fay, that  a  fegment  of  the  SphcreK,  is  to  be  cut  of,  fo  great,  that  his  Spherical!  fuD.erfi- 
cics,  Ihall  be  cquall  to  the  circle  D‘EF  .Let  the  diameter  ofthe  circle  ABC,  be  the  line  AB  .  At  the 
point  A,  in  the  circle  ABC,  coapt  a  right  line  cquall  to  the. femidiameter  of  the  circle  DEF  (By  the 
firft  of  the  fourth) .  Which  line  fuppofe  to  be  A  H  .  From  the  point  H,  to  the  diameter  A  B,  let  2  per¬ 
pendicular  line  be  drawen  :  which  fuppofe  to  be  HI .  Produce  HI  to  the  other  fide  ofthe  circumfe¬ 
rence,  and  let  it  come  to  the  circumference  at  the  point  L .  By  the  right  line  H 1 1.  (  perpendicular  to 
A  B  )  fuppofe  a  plains  fuperficies  to  pafle,  perpendicularly  erected  vpon  the  circle  A  B  C and  by  this 

HHh.j. 


Detncnfira- 

tkn, 

j 


This  is  mam* 
fefl-.ifyou  con 
fuler  the  t  w  0 
triangles  rcfl- 
aughsJiO  M 

and  H  ON: 

and  then  with 
allfo/e  the  47. 
ofthe  firft  of 
Eu  slide. 


2. 


3» 


Conft  ruction. 


Tkmonjltatio 


ConUruRion. 


Vtmoiijlratio 

This  in  matter 
of  a  Lemma,  ,/s 
prefentij  pro- 
ieed. 


plain e  fuperficies,  the  Sphere  to  be  cut  into  two  feg- 
snentcs  :  one leffe  then  the halfe  Sphere, namely,  H  A* 

1 1 :  and  the  other  greater  then  the  halfe  Sphere,  name- 
ly,HBLI.  I  fay,  that  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the 
fegment  of  the  Sphere  K,  in  which  the  fegment  (of  the 
greateft  circle)  H  A  L  I,  is  contayned,(whofe  bafe  is  the 
circle  paffing  by  H I L,  and  toppe  the  point  A  )  is  equall 
to  the  circle  DEF.  For  the circle,whofe  femidiame- 
ter  is  equall  to  the  line  A  H,is  equall  to  the  Sphericall  fu¬ 
perficies  of  the  fegment  H  A  L,by  the  4.Theoreme  here 
added  .And  (by  conftru&ion  )  A  H  is  equall  to  the  femi- 
diameter  of  the  circle  DEF:  therefore  the  Sphericall 
fuperficies  of  the  fegment  of  the  Sphere  K  (cut  of  by  the 
circle  paffing  by  H I L  )  whofe  toppe  is  the  point  A,  is  : 
equall  to  the  circle  DEF.  Wherefore,  a  Sphere  being 
geuen,  and  a  circle  leffe  then  double  the  greateft  circle 
in  the  fame  Sphere,  we  haue  cut  of,  a  fegment  of  the 
fame  Sphere,  whofe  Sphericall  fuperficies,  is  equall  to. 
the  circle  geuen  ;  which  was  requifite  to  be  done. 

aduife. 

Innotingorfignifyingof  Spheres,  fomerimes  we 
vfe  by  one  and  the  fame  circle,  in  plaine  defigned,to  re- 
prefent  a  Sphere  and  alfo  tire  greateft  circle  in  the  fame 
•contained  :  and  likewife,by  a  fegment  of  that  arcle,fig- 
nifie  a  fegment  of  the  fame  Sphere,  as  by  a  ltraightlme,  we  often  fignifie  the  circle,  which  is  the  bale  of 
a  fegment  of  a  Sphere,Cone,or  Cylinder :  and  fo  in  fuch  like,  Wherin,cqnfider  our  fuppdiitiojrs:  an4 
take  heede  when  we  fhift  from  one  fignification  to  an  other,in  one  and  the  fame,defignation  :  and 
withall  remember  the  principal!  intent  of  our  drift :  and  fueh  light :  thinges,  can  not  either  trouble  or 
offend  thee .  Compendiouihes  and  artificiall  cuftome ,  procureth fuch  meanes  ;,fufficient3to  ftirre  yp  i- 
snagination  Mathematicall :  or  to  informe  the  praftiferMechanicalh  ,  ,  / 

'  '  1  ‘  ■  '  utr-  ^  i  .  21  0  V'  \  .  v  *  »/  >  ■  • ! '  -)  (f*  oi  i > 


#  Problem.  i2.  1 

■  S  •’  r  r!>ul  //.  ,V  7  T  :  '  .  . 

T oaa  a  Sphere  geuen,  into  two fuch fegmentes,  that  the  SpherksttljHp&jf  piece, 
jh'allbaue  one  to  the  other,  any  proportion  geuenhetwenetworight  lines . 


Suppofe  F  to  be  a  Sphere  geuen :  and  the  proportion  geuen,to  be  that,  which  is  betwene  G  H  and 
H I .  I  fay,  that  the  Sphere  F,  is  to  be  cut  into  two  fuch  fegmentes ,  that  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  of 
thofe  fegmentes,  lhallhaue  that  proportion,  one  to  the  other,  which,  the  right  line  GH,hath  to  the 
rightlin.eHI .  Suppofe  A  B  C  E  to  be  a  greateft  circle,  in  the  Sphere  F,  contained ;  and  his  diameter, 
tobe  AB.DeuideABintotwofuchpartes,asGlisdi-  . 

uided  into,in  the  point  H(by  the  ro .of rhe  fixt)Let  thofe 
partes  be  A  D,  and  D  B .  So  that,  as  G  H  is  to  H  I,  fo  is 
A  D  to  D  B .  By  the  point  D,  let  a  plaine  fuperficies  paffe, 
cutting  the  Sphere  F,  and  the  diameter  AB  :  So,  that 
vnto  that  cutting  plaine,  the  diameter  A  B,  be  perpendi¬ 
cular :  and  the  Sphere  alfo  thereby  deuided  into  two  feg- 
mentes,  whofe  comon  bafe  fuppofe  to  be  the  circle  C  E, 
hauing  the  center, the  point  D:  and  the  toppe  of  theone 
to  be  the  point  A,  and  the  toppe  of  the  other  to  be  the 
point  B  :  and  the  fegmentes  them  felues,  to  be  noted  by 
E  A  C,andEBC  :  Drawe  from  the  twotoppes,  A  and 
B,  to  C  ( a  point  in  the  circumference  of  their  common 
bafe )  t\yo  right  lines  A  C  and  B  C  .  I  fay  now,  that  the 
Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the  fegment  E  AC,  Hath  to  the 
Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the  fegment  E  B  C,  the  fame 
proportion, Which  G  H  hath  to  H  I .  For,  forafmuch  asf 
circles  haue  that  proportion,  one  fo1  the  other ,  that  the 
fquares  of  theft  diameters  Haiid  hnero  thffother  (  by  the 
i  of  this  twelfth  )  •  4ndike  fqudies'isf  they?  JemidUnte- 
ters  j  haue  the  fame  prhpdr'tfon  one  (o  rhedther; ^vfht  'ch  the 
fa u ares  of  thejr  diameters  haue .  [  'For 'like  partes  haue 

chat 


Q 

fir 


ofSuclides  Elementes •  Fol.fiy. 

that  proportion  one  to  the  other,  that  the  whole  magnitudes,  whofe  like  partes  they  are ,  haue the  - 
one  to  the  other  :  by  the  i  y  .ofthe  fift .  But  the  fquare  ofeuery  diameter  is  quadruple  to  thefquareof  « 
hisfemidiameter  :  as  hath  often  before,  bene  pro ued  t  therefore,  circles  haue  one  to  an  other,  that 
proportion,  that  the  fquares  of  their  lemidiametershaue  one  to  the  other  ]  .  Wherefore,  feing  A  C 
and  B  C  are  femidiameters  of  two  circles,  whereof  eche  is  equall  to  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the  feg¬ 
mentes,  betwene  whofe  toppes  and  circumference  of  their  bafe,  they  are  drawen  :  by  the4.Theorcme 
of  thefe  additions :  it  followeth  that  both  thofe  circles,  whofefemidiameters  they  are  :  and  alfo  thofe 
Sphericall  fuperficieces,  which  are  equall  to  thofe  circles,  haue  the  one  to  the  other,  the  fame  propor¬ 
tion,  which  the  fquare  of  A  C  hath  to  the  fquare  ofB  C  .  But  A  C  is  drawen  betwene  the  circumference 
of  the  bafe,  and  toppe  of  the  fegment  Sphericall,  E  A  C,  by  conftrudion  :  and  likewife  B  C  is  drawen 
betwene  the  toppe,  and  circumference  of  the  bafe,  of  the  Sphericall  fegment  E  B  C,  by  conitrudion: 
Wherefore  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the  fegment  E  A  C,  is  to  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the  feg- 
ment  E  B  C,  as  the  fquare  of  A  C  is  to  the  fquare  of  B  C  .  But  the  fquare  of  A  C  is  to  the  fquare  of  B  C, 
as  A  D  is  to  D  B  :  by  the  Corollary  of  the  Problemc  of  my  additions  vpon  the  fecond  of  this  twelfth*. 
And  A  D  is  to  D  B,  as  G  H  is  to  H I :  by  conftrudion .  Wherefore  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the  feg¬ 
ment  E  AC,  is  to  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  ofthe  fqgment  E  B  C,  as  G  H  is  to  HI .  We  haue  therfore, 
cut  the  Spheregeuen,  into  two  fuch  fegmeutes,  that  the  Sphericall  fuperficieces  ofthe  fegmences,haue 
one  to  the  other  any  proportion  geuen  betwene  two  right  lines  :  which  was  to  be  done. 

A  Corollary,  i. 

Here  it  appeareth  demonstrated,  that,  circles  are  one  to  the  other,  as  the fquares  of  their  femidi¬ 
ameters  are, one  to  the  other . 

Wherby  (as  occafion  {hall  feme)  you  may,  by  force  of  the  former  argument,  vfe  other  like  partes 
of  the  diameter,  as  well  as  halues. 

Corollary .  2. 

It  is  alfo  euident, that  the  Sphericall  fuperficieces  of  the  two  fegmentes  of  any  Sphere ,  to  whofe 
common  bafe,  the  diameter  (  puffing  to  their  two  toppes.  )  is  perpendicular,  haue  that  proportion  the 
one  to  the  other,  that  the  portions  of  the fayd  diameter, haue  the  one  to  the  other :  that  fuperficies  and 
that  portion  ofthe  diameter  on  the  one  fide  of  the  common  bafe, being  compared  to  that  fuperficies ,  and 
that  portion  ofthe  diameter,  on  the  other fide  ofthe  common  bafe . 

’a  ifif  C2  Hxi  *4  U .  .  j\\'j  3*! 

«[[  A  Corollary.  3. 


It  likewife  euident  ly  followeth , that  the  two  Sphericall fuperficieces  of  two  fegmentes  of  a  Spheres 
1 Vehich  two  fegmentes  are  equall  to  the  Sphere, are  in  that  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, that  their  axes 
( perpendicularly  creeled  to  their  bafes  )  are  in,  one  to  the  other ;  Where  foeuer  in  the  Sphere  thofe  feg¬ 
mentes  betaken. 


I  fay  thatthe  Sphericall  fuperficies  ofthe  fegment 
CAE,  and  the  Sphericall  fuperficies  of  the  fegment 
F  G  H ,  hauing  their  axes  A  D  and  G I  (  perpen  dicular 
to  their  bafes  )  :  are  in  proportion  one  to  the  other,  as 
AD  is  to  GI:  if  the  fegment  ofthe  Sphere  contai¬ 
ning  CAE  with( the  fegment  ofthe  fame  Sphere) 
F  G  H,  be  equall  to  the  whole  Sphere .  For  feing  the 
diameter  (  or  axe  )  A  D,  extended  to  the  other  pole  or 
toppe,  oppdfitetoA  (which  oppofite  toppe,  let  be 
Q_)  doth  make  with  the  fegment  CAE,  the  comple¬ 
ment  of  the  whole  Sphere:  and  by  fuppofition,  the 
fegment  F  G  H,  with  the  fegment  C  A  E,  are  equall  to 
the  whole  Sphere  ;  Wherefore  from  equall ,  taking 
CAE  (the  iegment  common)  remayneth  the  feg¬ 
ment  C  QE,  equall  to  the  fegment  F  G  H .  Andther- 
by.  Axe,  Bafe ,  Solitie ,  ana  fuperficies  Sphericall  of 
the  fegment  F  G  H,  mull  (  of  neceflitie)  be  equall  to 


Note  here  of 
Axejbafeyfy 
Joliditteymore 
then  l  nede  to 
bring  any  far 
therproofe 
for. 


HHhdj. 


the 


T'he  welueth  Hooke 


Axe,Bafe,Solidi?ie,and  fuperficies  Spherfcall  of  the  fegment  C  QJi :  Wherefore,  by  the  fecond 
Corollary  here,  and  the  7. of  the  fift,  our  conclufion  is  inferred,  the  fuperficies  Sphcricall,  of  the  feg- 
snent  C  A  E,  to  be,  to  the  iuperficies  Sphericall  of  the  fegment  F  G  H,  as  A  D  is  to  G I. 


AThcoreme.  6. 


To  any  [slide  fed  or  of  a  Sphere, that  v fright  Cone  is  eejuaH ,  Whofebafeis  e  quail  to  the  conttcx 
Sphericall  fuperficies  of  that  feet  or, and  heitb  equallto  thefemtdtamtcr  of  the fame  Sphere . 


Note. 


Lihl-frop.%. 

deSphera  & 
Cjltndro. 


Q_- 


#  1  fay  halfe  a 
circular  reso¬ 
lution:  for  that 
fufffeth  tn  the 
whole  diameter 
ST, to  deferthe 
a  circle  by:  if  it 
be  moiled  about 
his  center 


Hereof  the  demonftration  in  refpeft  of  the  prerhi- 
fes :  and  the  common  argument  of  infeription  and  cir- 
cumfcription  of  figures  is  eafy  :  and  neuerthelefle,  if 
your  owne  witte  will  not  helpe  you  fufficiently  :  you 
may  rake  helpe  at  Archimedes  hand ,  in  his  firti  booke  & 
lalt  propofition  of  the  fphere  and  cylinder .  Whether  if 
ye  haue  recourfe ,  you  lhall  perceaue  how  your  Theo- 
xeme  here  amendeth  the  common  tranilation  there: 
and  alfo  our  delineation  geueth  more  liuely  ihewof 
the  chiefe  circumftances  neceffary  to  the  conitruftion, 
then  there  you  fhall  finde.  Of  the  fphere  here  imagined 
to  be  A, we  note  a  folide  feitor  by  the  letters  P  QJt  O, 

So  thatP  QJI  doth  fignifie  the  fphericall  fuperficies,  to 
that  folide  fedtor  belonging  [which  is  alfo  common  to  the 
fegment  of  the  fame  fphere  T  ti  Q  )  and  therefore  aline 
drawne  from  the  toppe  of  that  fegment,  (  which  toppe 
fuppofe  to  be  Q_,  )  is  the  femidiameter  oi  the  circle, 
which  is  equall  to  the  fphericall  fuperficies  of  the  fayd 
folide  fecto'-for  fegment  •  as  before  is  taught.  Let  that 

linebeQJr’.By  Qjiraw  a  line  contingent:  which  letbeS  QJT.At  the  poynt  Qwfrom  the  line  QJ5 ,  ctic 
aline  equalltoP  Q_which  let  be  S  Q^And  vntoS  Q_,  make  QJT  equall,then  draw  the  right  lines  O  S 
O  T  and  O  Q_.  About  which  O  Qj" as  an  axe  fattened)  ifyou  imagine  the  triangle  O  S  T,  to  make  aa 
*halfe  circular  reuolution,you  fhall  haue  the  vpright  cone  O  S  T:  (whole  heith  is  O  Q^,  the  lemidia- 
metcr  of  the  fphere,and  bafe  the  circle,  whofe  diameter  is  S  TJequall  to  the  folide  fedtor  P  QJi,  O. 


AThcoreme .  7. 

T 0  any  fegment, or  portion  of  a  Sphere,  that  cone 
is  equal! ,  which  hath  that  circle  to  his  ha/e  ,  which 
is  the  bafe  of  the  ft?, net, and  hetth ,  a  ri?ht  line,  which 
vnto  the  heith  of  the fgmet  hath  that  proportto , which 
the  femidiameter  of  the  Sphere  ,  together  With  the 
heith  of  the  other fegment  remayning  hath  to  the  heitb  , 
of  the fame  other fegment  remayning .  A- 

This  is  well  demonftrated  by  Archimedes  8c  there¬ 
fore  nedeth  no  inuention  of  myne,  to  confirme  the 
fame  :  and  for  that  the  fayd  demonftration  is  ouer  long 
here  to  be  added  ,  I  will  refere  you  thether  for  the  de¬ 
monftration  :  and  here  fupply  that  which  to  Archimedes 
demonftration  fhall  geue  light, and  to  your  farther  fpe- 
culation  and  orach  fe,lhal  be  a  great  ayde  and  direction. 
Suppofe  K  to  be  a  fphere  :  &  the  greatell  circle  K  in  co- 
teyned,let  be  ABC  E,and  his  diameter  B  E,&  cecer  D. 
Let  the  fphere  K,be  cutte  by  a  playne  fuperficies ,  per¬ 
pendicularly  ere&ed  vpon  the  fayd  greatdt  circle  A  B- 
C  E:let  the  fedhon  be  the'  circle  about  A  C  '.And  let  the 


G 


F 

D 

■  i§ 

/ 

,  ./ 

fegmentes 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


fegmentes  of  the  fphere  be  the  one  that  wherein  is  A- 
B  C,  whofe  toppe  is  B.-and  the  other  let  be  that  where¬ 
in  is  A  E  C  and  his  toppe ,  let  be  E  :  I  fay  that  a  cone 
which  hath  hisbafe  the  circle  about  AC, &  heithaline 
which  to  B  F(the  heith  of  the  fegment,  whofe  toppe  is 
B,  )  hath  that  proportion  that  a  line  compofed  of  D  E, 
the  feroidiameter  of  the  fphere ,  and  E  F  ( the  heith  of 
the  other  remayning  fegment ,  whofe  toppe  is  E  )  hath 
to  EF,(the  heith  of  that  otherfegment  remayning)  ,  is 
equall  to  the  fegment  of  the  fphere  K ,  whofe  toppe  is 
B.To  make  this  cone ,  take  my  ealy  order  thus  .  Frame 
your  worke  for  the  findmgof  thefourth  proportionall 
line.-by  making  E  F  the  firihand  i  line  compofed  of  D- 
EandEF,thefecond.-andthethird,IetbeB  F:  then  by 
the  ix.  of  the  fixrh,  let  thefourth  proportionall  line  be 
found:  which  let  beF  G  .•  vpon  F  the  center  ofthebafe 
of  the  fegment, whole  toppe  is  B ,  ereft  a  line  perpendi¬ 
cular  equall  to  F  G  founa  .and  drawe  the  lines  G  A  and 
G  C :  and  fo  make  perfect  the  cone  G  A  C  .  I  fay ,  that 
the  cone  G  A  C ,  is  equall  to  the  fegment  (of  the  fphere 
K)whofe  toppe  isB.  In  like  maner.for  the  other  fegmet 
whofe  toppe  is  E,to  finde  the  heith  due  fora  cone  equal 
to  it :  by  the  order  of  the  Theoreme  you  mull  thus 
frame  your  lines:  let  the, full  beB  Ftthefecond  DB  and 
B  F,  compofed  in  one  right  hue ,  and  the  third  mult  be 
E  F:  where  by  the  ia.  ofthelixth  ,  finding  the  fourth,  it 
fhall  be  the  heith  ,  to  rere  vpon  the  bafe ,  ( the  circle  a- 
bout  A  C  , )  to  make  an  vpright  cone, equall  to  the  feg- 
raent/whofe  toppe  is  E. 


C  Logistical^.  31 

The  Logifticall  finding  hereof  is  moll  eafy :  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  being  geuen ,  and  the  por¬ 
tions  of  the  diameter  in  the  fegmentes  conteyned  (  or  axes  of  thefegmentes )  being  knowne.Then  or¬ 
der  your  numbers  in  the  rule  of  proportion ,  as  I  here  hauc  made  moil  playne,  in  ordring  of  the  lines: 
for  thefought  heith  will  be  the  produce. 


#  Corollary. 


r. 


Hereby, and  other  the  premifes  it  is  eitidem  that  to  any  fegment  of  a  Sphere,  Whofe  whole  diame¬ 
ter  is  knowne  and  the  Axe  of  the  fegment  geuen,  Ak  vpright  cone  may  be  made  equall :  or  in  any  pro- 
portion  ,  betwene  two  right  lines  nfpgned:  and  therefore  ulfo  <t  cylinder  may  to  the  fay  d fegment  of  the  Sphere  jbe 
made  equall }or  in  any  proportion  geuen  Jietwene  txvo  right  lines . 


A  Corollary. 


2, 


an  if e fly  alfo  ,ofthe  former  theoreme,  it  may  be  inferred  that  a  Sphere ,  and  his  diameter  be¬ 
ing  deuided,by  one  and  the  fame  play  tie fuperficies  ,  to  which  the  fay d  diameter  is  perpendicular  •  the 
two  fegmentes  of  the  Sphere, are  one  to  the  other  in  that  proportion ,  in  which  a  rettangle  parallelipipe - 
don  hauingfer  his  bafe  thefquare  oft  he  greater  part  of  the  diameter,  and  his  heith  a  line  compofed  of 
the  leffe  portion  of  the  diameter, and  thefenddiameter.to  the  rettangleparallelipipedon,hauingfor  his 
bafe  thefuare  of  the  leffe  portion  of  the  diameter ,&  his  heith  a  line  compofed  of  the femidiameter  <& 
the  greater  part  of  the  diameter. 

A  Theoreme.  S. 


Euery  Spnere,to  the  cube, made  of  his  diameter,  is  (in  matter ) as  n.to  zt. 

HHh.iiju  As 


Kobe* 


7 he  Welueth  <Boo%e 


As  vpon  the  firft  and  fecond  propofitios  of  this  booke, 1  began  my  additions  with  the  circle  ('be¬ 
ing  the  chiefe  among  plaync  figures)and  therein  brought  manifold  considerations,  about  circles  :  as  of 
the  proportion  betwene  their  circumferences  and  their  diameters  .-of  thecontent  or  Area  of  circles:  of 
the  proportion  ofcircles  to  the  fquares  defcribed  of  their  diameters  :&  of  circles  to  begeuen  in  alpro 
portions, to  other  circles;  with  diuerfe  other  molt  necelfary  problemes  (  whofe  vfe  is  partly  there  fpeci- 
Sed);  So  hauel  in  the  end  of  this  booke,added  fomefuch  Problemes  &  Theoremes,  about  thefphere 
( being  among  folides  the  chicfe )  as  of  the  fame  ,  either  in  itfelfe  conildered ,  or  to  cone  and  cylinder, 
compared  (by  reafon  offupexficies,or  foliditie,in  thehole,or  inpart;)fuch  certaine  knowledge  demon 
ftratiue  may  arife,and  fuch  mechanical  exercife  thereby  be  deuifed,that(fure  I  am)to  thelincere  &  true 
iludent  great  light, ayde, and  comfortable  courage  (farther  to  wade)will  enter  into  his  hart:  and  to  the 
Mechanicall,  witty,and  indultrous  deuifermew  manet  of  inuentions,  &  executions  in  his  workes  will 
(with  fhuil  trauayle  for  fete  application)come  to  his  perceiucraunce  and  vnderftanding.  Therefore,  e- 
uenas  manifoldefpeculations  &praftifes  may  be  had  with  the  circle,  his  quanciticbcingnotknowne 
in  any  kinde  of  fmalleft  certayne  meafure:  So  likewife  of  the  fphere  many  Problemes  may  be  executed 
and  his  precifequanritie,in  certaine  meafure,  not  determined,  or  kno\vne:yet,becaufe,both  one  of  the 
firll  (humane)  occafios  ofinuenting  and  Itablifhing  this  Arte, was  .neafuring  of  the  earth  (and  therforc 
called  Geometria ,  that  is ,  Earthmeafuring) ,  and  alfo  the  chiefe  and  generall  end  ( in  deede  )  is  mea¬ 
fure:  and  meafure  requireth  a  determination  ofquantitie  in  a  certayne  meafure  by  nuber  exprelfed:  It 
was  ncdefull  for  Mechanicall  earthmeafures ,  not  to  be  ignorant  of  the  meafure  and  contentsofthe 
circle ,  neither  of  the  fphere  his  meafure  and  quantities  neere  as  lenfecan  imagine  or  wilh  .And  (in 
very  decde)the  quantitieand  meafure  of  the  circle ,  being  knowpe,  maketh  not  onely.the  cone  and  cy¬ 
linder, but  alfo  the  fphere  his  quantitie  to  be  as  precifely  knowne,  and  certayne.  Therefore  feing  in  re-; 
fpedi  of  the  circles  quantitie(by  strchimedei  fpecifie*I)this  Theoreme  is  noted  vnto  you:  I  wil,by  order^ 
vpon  thatfas  afuppofition)inferre  the  conclufion  of  this  our  Theoremes. 

Suppofe  a  fphere  to  be 
fignified  by  A:  whofe  diame¬ 
ter  let  be  R  S .  To  R  S ,  let  a 
line  equall  be  taken  ,  which 
let  he  TV:  of  T  V,  by  the  46. 
of  the  firll,  deferibe  afquare. 

Let  that  fquare  be  T  Y.  With 
in  T  Y  let  a  circle  be  inferi- 
bed  :  by  the  2. of  the  fourth, 
which  circle  fuppofe  to  be 
O  Z  W  .  That  O  Z  W  is  e- 
quall  to  the  greateft  circle  in 
the  fphere  A  conteyned,itis 
euident  by  the  diameter ,  e- 
qml  to  T' V.If  vp5  the  fquare  ' 

T  Y,as;k  bafe,  be  erefted,a  pa 
rallelipipedo  redfagle ,  whofe 
heith  is  equall  to  T  V,  it  is  e- 
uident  that  that  parallelipi- 
pedonis  a  cube.  Which  let 
be  done  :  and  that  cube  pro- 
ducedjletbe  noted  by  TX. 

Likewife ,  if  vpon  the  circle 
OZ  W.asabafe, andofthe 
heith  equall  to  the  line  T  V, 
a  cylinder  be  erefted  jit  is  nia 
nifell  that  the  cylinder  hath 
his  bafe  equall  to  the  greateft 
circle  ,  in  the  fphere  A ,  con¬ 
cerned;  &  heith,  a  line  equall 
to  the  diameter  of  the  fame 
fphere  A, Which  cylinder  let 
be  produced  and  noted  by  Z- 
M  .  I  fay  n'oW  that  the  fphere 
A, is  to  the  cube  T  X,(in  ma- 
ner  )  as  thenumbern,  is  to 
the  number  s  r.  For  feing  the 
cubeTX,was  produced  of 
his  bafe, (the  fquare  T  Y), be¬ 
ing  brought  into  the  heith  of  _ 
a  line  equall  to  T  V  :  &  like- 
wife  feing  the  cylinder  ZM, 


.rtv. 


is ptedaeeSyofhis bafe(the  circle  O  Z  W)being bic>ught'int6aline,equal  to  thefaid TV:it  foWctfa, 
feing  their  heithes  isallone,thac  the  cubeT:X  fhallbe  to  the  cylinder  Z  M-ks the  bafe  of  TX,f  which  is 
the  fquareT  Y )  is  t<kthe  bafe  of  Z  Mi  that  is  thecircle  O  Z  W.  But  thefquare  TYyis  tp  the  circle  O  Z 
W»as  the  number  t4.is'to  the  nuberi  r. (in  miner),  by  Archimedes  detrioftratio :  wherfore,the  cube  T  X 
is  to  the  Cylifider  Z  M,as  thenumber  14 ,  is  to  the  number  n.fwell  nere):.  And  by  my  third  Theoreme 
(hereadded/thfe  cylinder  Z  the  Sphere  A^ri;iy^Uialtera^t6pofiSbh;;  thatis,as3.  to  2.  Where¬ 

fore  the  cybnderZ  Mihading  the  fame  ir.equalipartes  {which  he  conteyneth  in  refpe£t  of  the  cube  T- 

Xjbeing  14, of  the  fame  partes)  deuided  into  3  .equall  portions,euery  one  of  thofe  portions  is  3-  .  And 

allowing  to  the  Sphere  A,two  of  thofe  portions.:  it  is  euidentjthat  the  Sphere  A  fhall  be  7-fuch  partes 
as  are  i4.in  the  cube  TX:  and  n.in  the  cylinder  Z  M .  Wherefore  the  Sphere  A,  is  to  the  cube  TX  ,as 
7~  to  X4.The  fraction  being  reduced,  maketh“:  and  the  number  14.  being  brought  to  the  fame  nanje, 

and  denomination  of  thirds,  maketh  —.Put  away  now  theyr  common  denominator :  and  then  remay- 

■neth/or  the  Sphere  A.m .fiich  partes,as  the  cube  T  Xhath  41 .  And  thendepreffing  them ,  to  the  fmal- 
left  termes  :for  the  Sphere  A,  you  fhallhaue  n.fuch  partes  as  the  cube  T  Xconteyneth  21 .  Wherefore 
euexy  Sphere,to  the  cube  made  of  his  diameter  is^as  n.to  21.  which  was  requifite  to  be  demonftrated» 


NotC-J*  /. 

;  \  '  s  1  '  ••  '  •  1  •  J. 


Wherfore  if you  deuide  the 
one  fide  (as  T  Q_)  of  the  cube 
T  X  into  2 1 .  equall  partes,  and 
where  n.partes  do  end,recke- 
ning  from  T,  fuppofe  the  point 
P :  and  by  that  point  P  ,iniagine 
a  plaine  (paffing  parallel  to  the 
oppofite  bafes)  to  cut  the  cube 
T  X:  and  therby,the  cube  T  X, 
to  be  deuided  into  two  redtan- 
gle  parallelipipedonsj  namely, 

T  N,  and  P  X  :  It  is  manifeft, 

*  T  N ,  to  be  equall  to  the 
Sphere  A,  by  conftru&iontand  2,1. 
the  7.  of  the  fife. 


Secondly,  the  whole  quan-ur{p 
titie,of  the  Sphere  A,being  co- 
tayned  in  the  redtangie  paralle- 
lipipedon  T  N,  you  may  eafilie 
tranfforme  the  fame  quantitie, 
into  other  parallelipipedons 
redangles,  of  what  height,and 
of' what  parallelogram  me  bafe  T 
you  lift:  by  my  firil  and  fecond 
Problemesvpon  the  34.ofthis 
booke  .  And  the  like  may  you 

do, to  any  affigned  part  of  the  Sphere  A*,  by  the  like  mcanes  deuiding  the  parallelipipedon  T  N  :  as  the 
part  affigned  doth  require.As  if  a  third,  fourth,  fifth,  or  fixth,part  of  the  Sphere  A ,  were  to  be  had  in  a 
parallelipipedon,ofany  parallelogramme  bafe  affigried,or  ofany  heith affigned:  then  deuiding  TP, in¬ 
to  fo  manypartesfas  into  4,ifa  fourth  part  be?  to  be  tranfformed :  orintofiue,  if  a  fifth  part ,  be  to  be 
tranfformed  &c.)and  then  proceede,as  you  did  with  cutting  of  T  N,from  T  X.  And  that  I  fay  of  paral- 
lelipipedons,may  in  like  fortfby  my  fay  d  two  problemes,added  to  the34-of  this  booke)  be  done  in  any 
fided  columnes,pyramids,and  prifmes :  fo  that  in  pyramids  and  fome  prifmes  you  vfe  the  cautions  ne- 
ceffary,in  refped  of  their  quantities,  compared  to  the  quantities  ofbodyes  hauing  parallel,  equall,  and 
oppofite  bafes  :  whofe  partes  thofe'pyramids  or  prifmes  are :  as  before  in  their  propofttions,is  by  Eu- 
elide  demonftrated.And  finallyjfeing,  in  thefe  prefent  additions;,  you  haue  the  wayes  and  orders  how 
to  geue  to  a  Sphere,or  any  fegment  of  the  fame ,  Gones,or  Cylinders  equall,  er  in  any  proportion  be- 
twene  two  right  lines,  geuen  :  with  many  other  moft  neeefiTary-fpeculations  and  pradifes  about  the 
Sphere :  I  truft  that  I  haue  fufficiently  fraughted  yourimagination,for  your honeft  and  profitable  ftu- 
die  herein,  and  alfo  geuen  you  ready  matter,  wherewith  to  flop  the  mouthes  of  the  roalycious ,  igno- 

^  HHh.iiij.  rant, 


*  A  nRwgU 
paralletipipe - 
don  getting 
quak to  a 
Sphere  geuen; 

To  a  Sphere  ,  er 
to  any  part  of  a 
Sphere  affig- 
ved'.as  athtrd, 
fourth, fifth 
to  geue  a  paral¬ 
lelipipedon  e- 
quall. 

Sided  Columes 
Pyramids,  and 
prifmes  to  be  ge¬ 
uen  equall  to  a 
Sphere ,  or  to 
any  certayne 
partthereof. 

To  a  Sphere  or 
any  fegment,  or 
[iff or  of  the 
fame  ,  to  geue  a 
cone  or  cylinder 
equall  or  many 
proportion  af~ 
fgnsd. 


Farther  <vfc 
ofSphericall 
income  trie. 


\  V  he  ttoeim&timg 

rant,andarrogant,defpifers  of  tfiempft  excellent  difcburfesftrauayics,  and  inuemkms  mathematical!. 


r** 


ficies,to  the  earth  arall  tim  es  Tefpedipg ,  and  their  difonccs  from  the  earth ,  as  alio  the  whole  earthly 
Sphere  and  globe  it  fclfc.and  infinite  other  cafes ,  concerning  Spheres  or  globes ,  may  hereby  with  as 
much  eafe  andeertainety  be  determined  of,  as  of  the  quaotitieof  any  bowle,  bailor  bullet,  which  w<? 
may  gripe  in  our  handesfreafon,  and  experience,  being  our  witnefles) :  and  without  thefeaydes,  fuch 
thinges  ofimportance  neuer  hable  of ys, certain  ely  to  be  knowne,or  attayned  vrito. 


■  3B  ■  ■  .  lario,  n 


: iVUi)--- 

XT  sdua 


sc ,  i 


Here  ende  MJohn  Dee  his  additions  vpon 

■  b'-'-r-'n  :  '  ~  .  .  ,  if  i  ,  ,  * 


•  1 

,  - dc 2  aril  siote ml 


■ 


the  Ialipropofition  of  the  twelfth  booke. 


\:-r;  : 


^  >3 & 


**\ti  Vi**  Mtx  ax 

""'1''  ''W' 

V?*. 

•  .  .  .  &  . 

**‘\T)  *Vj  ;•* 

1 

j\  ^  -  w* 

^f\V».V  t'  •  .v 


A  proportion  added  h y  Flufas* 

-  v-1"  •"  ■  >  ob  ’  v03t  d  re  o  mb  r.  a  rc  rrtoe  tvs  f  t  vojr  7.?,  /  •  —  T  !  :  t.  ?  r.s 

4  Sphere. touched  playnejuperfi  cits :  4  right  line'  drawne from  the  center  to  the  touche ,  JhaS  he 
ereSledferpendicuUrlj  to  the  playnefitpcrfciet, 

' - ,f «•' 1  -  iUp’Jt  (AW  liiid'ff  .1;  .  SjtiastC'  ■ .  •  .  .’it  , 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  Sphere  B  C  DL  :  whofe  centre  let  be  the  poynt  A.  And  let  the  playne  fu- 
perficies  G  C I  touch  the  Spere  in  the  poynt  G ,  andextend  a  right  line  from  the  centre  A  to  the  poynt 
C.  Then  I  lay  that  the  line  A  C  is  ereded  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  playne  G I  C.Let  the  fphere 
be  cutte  by  playne  fuperficieces  palling  by  the 
right  line  LAC:  which  playnes  let  beABCD- 
L  and- A.C  EL  ,  which  let  cut  the  playne  G  Cl 
by  the  right  lines  G  C  H  and  K  C 1 !  Now  it  is 
manifeit  (  bv  the  alfumpt  put  before  the  17.  of 
this  booke  )  that  the  two  fedions  of  the  fphere 
fhall  be  circles  ,  hauingto  their  diameter  the 
line  LAC,  which  is  alfo  the  diameter  of  the 
fphere .  Wherefore  the  right  lines  G  C  H  and 
K  C I  which  are  drawne  in  the  playne  G  C  I,do 
atthepoynrC  fall  without  the  circles  BCDL 
and  E  C  L  .  Wherefore  they  touch  the  circles 
in  the  poynt  C,  by  the  fecond  definition  of  the 
third .  ’Wfherefore  the  rightline  LA  C  maketh 
rightaoggles  with  the  lines  G  C  H  and  K  C I  by 
the  i^.of  the  third.  Wherefore  by  the  4. of  the  eleuenth  the  right  line  A  C  is  ereded  perpendicularly  td 
to  the  playn,e  fuperficies  G  C I  wherein  are  drawne  the  lines  G  C  H  and  K  C I .  If  thcreforea  Sphere 
touch  a  playne  fuperficies, a  right  line  drawne  from  the  centre  to  the  touche, fhall  be  cre&ed perpendi¬ 
cularly  to  the  playne  fuperficies :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

1  '  ■  r{ '  5  k‘fo  i? 

\  t  ■ 

S^The  ende  of  the  twelfth  booke 

of  Euclides  Elementes. 


.Z^lcA?. 

-*r  V 


tli 


y  1 , 

1 »  J\0 


ha:  A 


i.J 

(,  <;  t 1  i  *  1 


*Y  WlVb'i  A 


. .  4v..'  ;  •  "  ■  '  .  TU  a.- 

’  l_  * . .  .  hi  1*-.  t . j .0 


t:,' 


t 


ou 


( 


ovv'Ay. 


v  Euclides  Elementes* 


..  ‘<X 

V  >:\j 


N  t  h  I  S  f  H  I  R  T  E  N  T  H  BOOK  E  atC  fct  forth 

certayne  moft  wonderiull  and  excellent  Jkfsionaof 
a  lyne  deuided  by  an  extreme  arid  meane  proporti¬ 
on :  a  matter  vn  doubtcdly  of  great  and  infinite  vfe  in 
Geometry, as  ye  ihallbothin  thys  bdoke,and  in  the 
other  bookes  following  moft  euidehtly  perceaue.  It 
teachcth  moreouer  the  corn  pofition  of  the  fine  re¬ 
gular  folides, and  how  to  infcribe  them  in  a  S  phere 
geueh,  and  alfo  fetteth  forth  certayne  companions 
of  the  fayd  bodye  s  both  the  one  to  the  other,  and 
^alio  to  the  Sphere, wherein  they  are  defcribed. 


A .  , 


T be  i ;  T beoreme.  The  i.  Tropofiiion . 


-V.  i 


If  a  right  line  he  deuided  hy  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  ,  and  to  the 
greater  fegment }  be  addled- the  halfe  of  the  whole  line :  thefquare  made  of 
thofe  two  lines  added,  together foalbe  quintuple  to  thefquare  made  of  the 
halfe  of  the  yohole  iytms ru 


-i  -iVi  1  si- 1 IA  j J '' 


Vppofe  that  the  right 


Xl 


n 


extreme  and  meane  pro- 
portio  in  the  point  C.And 
let  the  greater  fegment  therof  he  A  C. 
And  vnto  A  C,  adde  directly  a  ryght 
line  A  D ,  and  let  AD  he  e quail  to  the 
halfe  of  the  line  A  B .  T hen  l  fay  that 
the fquare  of  the  line  C  D  is  quintuple 
to  the  fquare  of the  line  D  A.  Defer  the 
( hy  the  46.  of  thefrf )  vpon  the  lines 
A B and D  C fquares, namely,  AE& 
D  F.  And  in  the  fquare  D  Fy defer ihe 
and  make  complete  the  figure.  And  ex¬ 
tend  the  line  F  C,  to  the  point  G.  And 
forafmuch  as  the  line  A  Bis  deuided 
hy  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion 
in  the  point  C,  therefore  that  which  is 
contayned  vnder  the  lines  < B  and 
BC  is  e quail  to  thefquare  of  the  line 
A  C.  But  that  which  is  contayned  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  of  B  and  B  C,  is  the pa- 
rallelogramme  C  E,and  the  fquare  of 


..'■yr.w^'cFx 
v  Vc 


Jli.i.  the 


The  argument 
of  the  thir- 
temh  hooves 


v  \cs\ot 

ConUthUkn* 


Demon f ra¬ 
tion^ 


This  prep  op¬ 
tion  is  the  Con¬ 
ner  fe  of  the 
former . 


Conflruttion. 

Vmonftra- 

tiott. 


u  r  The  thirtenth  Hooke 

the  lint  A  C  is  thefquare  H  F.  Wherefore  the  par  allelogramme  CE  isequallto  the  [quart 
H  F.  And f orafmuch  as  the  line  B  A ,  is  double  to  the  line  AD, by  conftrutfion:  but  the  lyne 
B  A  is  equall  to  the  line  K  A  ,and  the  line  A  D  yto  the  lyne  0-  therefore  alJo,the  lyne  KAy 
is  double  to  the  line  A  H .  But  as  the  lyne  K  A  is  to  the  line  A  H,fo  is  the  par  allelogramme  C- 
K  to  the  par  allelogramme  CH  Wherefore  the  par allelogramme  C  K  is  double  to  the par  alle¬ 
logramme  CH  .  And  the  parallelogrammes  LH  and  CH  are  double  to  the  far  allelo¬ 
gramme  C II  (for fupplementes  of parallelogrammesarepy  the  43. of thefirjl  equall  the  one 
to  the  other).  Wherefore  thc  parallelogramme  C  Kis  equallto  the  far  allelogramme  s  LH  & 
C  H.  And  it  is  froued  that  the  far  allelogramme  C  E  isequallto  thefquare  F  H .  Wherefore 
the  whole f quart  A  E  is  equallto  the  gnomon  M  X  N.  And forafnuch  as  the  line  B  A, is  dou¬ 
ble  to  the  line  therefore  the  f quart  of  the  line  B  A  is,  by  the  20. of  the fixth, quadruple 

to  thefquare  of  the  line  D  A,  that  is,  thefquare  A  E  to  the fquare  D  H.  But  the fquare  A  E 
is  equallto  thegnomo  MXN,  wherefore  thegnomoM  X  N,  is alfo  quadruple  to  the fquare 
D  H .  Wherefore,  the  whole  fquare  D  F  is  quintuple  to  thefquare  D  H.  But  the fquare  D  F, 
i  tthe fquare  the,  lineC  D,  and  thefquare  D  H  is  the] quote  of  the  line  D  A .  Wherefore 
the fquareiof the  Bne  CD  ,is  quintuple  tothe fquare  of  the  line  D  A.  Jfthereforearight  line 
he  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion,  and  to  the  greater  fegment,  be  added  the 
halfe  of  the  whole  line:  the fquare  made  of  thofe  two  lines  added  together jhalbe  quintuple  to 
the fquare  made  of  the  halfe  of  the  whole  line-:  Which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated. 


Thys  propofmenis  an  other  way  demonfiraced  after  the  fiueth  propofition  of  this  booke. 

1  04  ,  $  "s  t '  ■'  ’■  V,\  ;;  V.  V-'  ;•  •  ;Vj  Ub\lV;v» :  i ••  Vi  v  -1  A 


.0  ^v.  r  The  zfFhmme.  The  zfPrbpofition. 

If  a  right  linefhe  in  pomer  quintuple  to  a  fegment  of the  fame  line:thedou* 
hie  of  the  fay d  fegment  is  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion y 
and  the  greater Jegment  thereof is  the  other  part  of the  linegeuen  at  the  be 
ginning.  h 

Vppofe  that  the  right  line 
D  C  be  in  power  quin¬ 
tuple  to  a  Jegment  of  the 
fame  line,  namely,  to  A- 
D,  and  let  the  double  of 
thc  line  AD  be  the  line  A  B  .  Then  1 
fay  that  the  line  B  is  deuided  by  an 

extreme  and  meane  proportion ,  and 
the  greater  fegment  thereof  is  the  lyne 
A  C.Defcribe  on  either  of  the  lines  A  B 
and  C  D  fquares, namely  A  E  and  D- 
F.  And  in  the  fquare  D  F  make  per¬ 
fect  thefgure,and  extend  the  line  F  C 
to  the  point  G.  And  forafmuch  as  the 
fquare  D  Fis  quintuple  to  the  fquare 
D  H,  by  fuppo(ition,therfore  the  gno¬ 
mon  M  N  X  is  quadruple  to  the  fquare 
D  H.  Andforafmuchas  the  line  AB 
is  double  to  the  line  A  D,  therefore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  B  is  quadruple  to 
the fquare  of  the  line  AD  (by  the  20. 


of Suclides  Elementes. 


of the fixt ),  that  is,  the fquare  AEto  the fquare  BH.  And  it  is  fretted  that  the  gnomon  M-- 
N  X  is  quadruple  to  the fquare  D  II.  Wherefore  the  gnomon  M  NX  is  e quail  to  the  fquare 
A  E-  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  double  to  the  line  A  B,  but  the  line  A  B  is  e quail  to 
the  line  A  K,and  the  line  A  D  to  the  line  A II:  therefore  the  line  A  K  is  double  to  the  line  A- 
H:  wherefore  alfo  {by  the  frit  of the fxth )  the  parallel  ogramme  A  G  is  double  to  the  par  al¬ 
lelogramme  C  H.  But  the  paralielogrammes  L  H  and  C  Hare  double  to  the  parallel  ogramme 
C  H  (by  the  43.  of  the  fir si)  :  wherefore  the  par allelogramme  A.  G  is  equall  to  the  parallelo- 
grammes  L  H  and  C  H.  And  it  is proued  that  the  whole  gnomon  M  NX  is  equall  to  the  whole 
fquare  <^Al E.  Where fore  the  re fiduell  F  is  equall  to  the  par  allelogramme  C  E.  And  C  E 
is  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  C  B,for  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  line 
B  E,  and  H  F  is  the  fquare  made  of  the  line  A  C.  Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder 
the  lines  B  and  B  C,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  0/  C.  Wherfore  as  the  line  A  B 

istOthe  line  AC, fo  is  the  line  A  C  to  the  line  CB.  *  Bat  the  hue  A  B  is  greater  then  the  line  A  C,  *  An  Afitifk 
wherefore  the  line  A  C  is  greater  then  the  line  C  B, Wherefore  theline  A  B  is  deuided  by  an 
extreme  and  meanefroportion,  and  the  greater  fegment  thereof  is  the  line  A  C.  if therf ore  a 
right  line  be  in  power  quintuple  to  a  fegment  of  the fame  line, the  double  of the fayd  fegment 
is  deuided  by  an  extreame  &  meane proportion,  and  the  greater fegment  thereof  is  the  other 
part  of the  linegenen  at  the  beginning:  Which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

*  Now,  that  the  double  of  the  line  A  D  ( that  is  A  B)  is  greater  then  the  line  A  G  may  *Tbe  AjSups 
thus  be  proued.  For  if  not,  then  if  if  it  be  pofible  let  the  line  A  C  be  double  to  the  line  AD,  ptouedn 
wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C  is  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D .  Wherefore 
the fquares  of the  lines  A  C  and  A  D  are  quintuple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  D.  And  it  is 
fuppofed  that  the fquare  of  the  line  B  C  is  quintuple  to  th  e fquare  of  she  line  A  B,  wherefore 
the  fquare  of  the  line  B  C  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  C  and  A  D:  which  is  impof 
fible  ( by  the  4 .  of  the fecond) .  Wherefore  the  line  AC  is  not  double  to  the  line  AD.  In  like 
forte  alfo  may  weproue  that  the  double  of  the  line  AD  is  not  lejfe  then  the  line  A  C,for  this 
is  much  more  abfurd:  wherefore  the  double  of  the  line  A  D  is  greater  the  the  line  AC.  which 
was  required  to  be  proued. 


This  proportion  alfo  is  an  other  way  demonftrated  after  the  fiueth  propofition  of  this  booke. 


Two  Theoremes3(in  Euclides  Method  necefiary) added  by  M.  Bee, 

ATheoreme.  1 „ 

A  right  line  can  be  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion,but  in  one  onely  poyni* 

S  uppofe  a  line  diuided  by  extreame  and  meane  proportion  ,to  be  A  B  .Arid  let  the  greater  ferment 
be  A  C.I  fay,that  AB  can  not  be  deuided  by  the  fayd  proportion, in  any  other  point  theninthe°point 
C  .  If  an  aduerfary  woulde  contend  that  it  may,  in  like  fort,  be  deuided  in  an  other  point:  let  his 
other  point,  be  fuppofed  to  beD:  making  AD,  the  greater  fegment  of  his  imagined  diuifion.  Which 
AD,  alfo,  let  be  lefle  then  our  A  C  :  for  the  firit  difeourfe  ;  Now,  forafmuch  as  by  our  aduerfaries 
opinion,  A  D,is  the  greater  fegment,  of  his  diuided  line:  the  parallelograname  conteyned  vnder  A  B, 
and  D  B,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  A  D,by  the  third  definition  and  ty.propofition  of  the  fixth  Booked 
And  by  the  lame  definition  and  proportion,  the  parallelogram  me  vriderAB  ,  and  CB,  conteyned^ 
is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  our  greater  fegment  A  C.  Wherefore, as  the  parallclogramme,  vnder  A  b' 
and  D  B,  is  to  the  fquare  of  A  D  :  lo  is  the  parallelograname,  vnder  A  B,and  C  B,to  the  fquare  of  A  C 
For  proportion  of  equality,  is  con-  * 

dueled  in  them  both  .  But ,  foraf¬ 
much  as  D  B ,  is  (  by  Tuppofitiori) 
greater  the  C  B,  the  parallelogram e 
vnder  A  B,and  D  B ,  is  greater  then 
the  parallel  ogramme  vnder  A  C, 


r— 


B 


z> 


Jli-ij* 


and 


*  Xeeaufe  A  C 
is fuppofed greet, 
ter  then  ADi 
therefore  hit 
ref  due  is  lejfe, 
then  the  ref  duo 
of  A  Djj  the 
common  fen * 
fence. IV here-, 
fore, by  the  ftp. 
poftiomD  S  is 
greater  the# 
SG. 


and  C  B  :by  the  firft  of  the  fixth  (for 
A  B  is  their  equall  heith  . )  Where¬ 
fore,  the  fquare  of  A  D,  lhalbe  grea-  > 

ter  then  the  fquare  of  A  C  :  by  the  .  _  •  /**,  & 

14.  of  the  fifth .  But  the  line  AD,  "  -n  "  *  ' "  ’ 

is  leffe  then  the  line  AC, by  fupoofi-  ® 

tion :  wherefore  the  fquare  of  A  D 

islefife  then  the  fquare  ofAC  .  And  it  is  concluded  alfo  to  be  greater  then  the  fquare  of  A  C:  Where¬ 
fore  the  fquare  of  A  D,  is  both  greater,then  the  fquare  of A  C  :  and  alfo  leffe .  Which  is  a  thing  impof- 
fible.The  fquare  therefore  ofAD,is  not  equall  to  the  parallelogram  me  vnderAB,  and  D  B.  And  there¬ 
fore  by  the  third  d  efinition  of  the  fixth  ,  A  B  is  not  deuided  by  an  excreame  and  meane  proportion ,  in 
the  point  D :  as  our  aduerfary  imagined .  And  ( Secondly  )  in  like  fort  will  the  inconueniency  fall  out: 
if  we  aifigne  A  D,our  aduerfaries  greater  fegment ,  to  be  greater  then  our  A  C-  Therefore  feing  neither 
on  the  one  fide  of  our  point  C  :  neither  on  the  other  fide  of  the  fame  point  C,any  point  can  be  had,  at 
which  the  line  A  Bean  be  deuided  by  an  extreameand  meane  proportion,  it  followeth  ofneceffitie, 
that  A  B  can  be  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  C,onely  .Therefore, a  right 
line  can  be  deuided  by  an  extreameand  meane  proportion ,  but  in  one ,  onely  point:  which  was  requi¬ 
site  to  be  demonftrated. 


ATheoreme.  2 . 


What  right  line fo  euer, being  deuided  into  two  partes,  hath  thofe  his  two  partes,  proportional 1 ,  to 
the  two  fegmentes  of  a  line  deuided  by  extreame  and  meane  proportion's  alfo  it felfe  deuided  by  an  ex - 
treame  and  meane  proportion  :and  thofe  his  two  partes  tare  his  two  figments, of  the fay  d  proportion. 


Suppofe,A  B,to  be  a  line  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  C, and  A  C 
to  be  the  greater  fegment.Suppofealfo  the  right  line  D  E,  to  be  deuided  into  two  partes ,  in  the  point 
F : and  that  the  part  D  F,  is  to  F  E,as  the  fegment  A  C,  is  to  C  B :  or  D  F,  to  be,  to  A  C,as  F  E  is  to  C  B. 
For  fo  thefe  partes  are  proportionall ,  to  the  fayd  fegmentes  .  I  fay  now,  that  D  E  is  alfo  deuided  by  an 
extreame  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  F .  And  that  D  F,  F  E,  are  his  fegmentes  of  the  fayd  pro¬ 
portion. For,  feing,as  A  C,is  to  C  B  :fo  is  D  F,to  F  E:  (by  fuppofition).Therfore,as  A  C,and  C  B(which 
is  A  B)are  to  C  B :  fo  is  D  F,and  F  E,(which  is  D  EJto  F  E :  by  the  xS.of  the  fifth.  Wherefore(alternatc- 
ly)asAB  isto DE:  fo isCB , toF E .  And  . 

therefore,the  refidue  A  C ,  is  to  the  rcfiduc  _ jE _ ? 

D  F,as  A  B  is  to  D  E,by  the  fifth  of  the  fift. 

Andthcnalternately,ACisto  AB,asDE,  ' -p  p  E 

is  to  D  F.  Now  therefore  backward ,  A  B  is  t— — - ; — - — - —————— — « 

ro  AC,asDEis  toDF.  But  as  A  Bis  to  A- 
C,  fo  is  A  C  to  C  B  :  by  the  third  definition 

of  the  fixth  booke.WhereforeDE  is  toDF,  as  ACistoCB  :  by  the  n.ofthe fifth. And  by  fuppofiti- 
on ,as  A  C  is  to  C  B,fo  is  D  F  to  F  E :  wherefore  by  the  1 1  .of  the  fifth  ,  as  D  E  is  to  D  F:  fo  is  D  F  to  F  E. 
Wherefore  by  the  3  .definition  of  the  fixth  ,  D  E  is  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion ,  in 
the  point  F.  Wherefore  D  F,and  F  E  are  the  fegmentes  of  the  fayd  proportion  .  Therefore ,  what  right 
line  fo  euer ,  being  deuided  into  two  partes ,  hath  thofe  hi*  two  partes,  proportionall  to  the  two  feg¬ 
mentes  of  a  line  deuided  by  extreame  and  meane  proportion's  alfo  it  felfe  deuided  by  an  extreme  and 
meane  proportion,  and  thofe  his  two  partes  are  his  two  fegmcntes,of  the  %d  proportion ;  which  was 
requilite  to  be  demonftrated. 


T'iote. 


Many  wayes,thefe  two  Theoremes,may  be  demonftrated :  which  I  leaue  to  the  exercife  ofyoung 
ftuden tes .But  vttcrly  to  want  thefe  two  Theorem es,and  their  demonftrations :  in  fo  principall  a  line,or 
Theehiefe  line  rather  the  chiefe  piller  of  Eucltdes  Geometricall  pallace,was  hetherto,  (and  fo  would  remayne)  a  great 
in  all  EucUdes  difgrace.  Alfo  I  thinke  it  good  to  note  vnto  you,what  we  meane,Jy  one  ontly poynt .  We  meane ,  that 

Ceametrie.  the  quantities  of  the  two  fegmentes,can  not  be  altered,the  whole  line  being  once  geuen.And  though. 

What  is  mens  from  either  end  of  the  whole  line,the  greater  fegment  may  begin  :  And  fo  as  it  were  the  point  offedi- 

here  by, a  [oils-  on  may  feeme  to  be  altered  :  yet  with  vs ,  that  is  no  alteration  :  forafmuch  as  the  quantities  of  the  feg- 
en  in  me  snely  mentes,remayne  all  one.I  meane,the  quantitie  ©f  the  greater  fegment, is  all  one  :  at  which  end  fo  euer 

print.  it  be  taken :  And  therefore,likewife  the  quantitie  of  the  lefle  fegment  is  all  one.&c.  The  like  conlidcra- 

tion  may  be  had  in  Eudidts  tenth  booke,in  the  Binomiall  lines, &c. 


lobn Dee.  J $6 9. Decemb.  18 . 


The  3. 


Fot.tyi. 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 

The  3,  Theoreme.  The  3-  ^ropoftion. 

If  a  right  line  bedeuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,  and  to  the 
lefe ferment  be  added  the  halfe  of  the  gerater fegment:  the  fquare  made 
of thofe  two  lines  added  together, is  quintuple  to  the  fquare  made  of the  half 
line  of the  greater figment . 


Here  folo  weth  M.Dee^his  additions. 


c/iT  heoreme.  x. 

If  aright  linegeunfe  quintuple  in  power  ,to  the  pome  of  a  figment  ofhim  filfthe  double  of  that 

IIi'iij»  figment 


Tbhpropoft- 

tionpithe 
t'owterfe  of 
the  former. 


&  As  'tee  bate 
noted  t  he 
place  of  the 
pecuUer  profs 
there -fin  the 
demoftration 
of  the }, 


f  egment 3and  t he  other  part  nmayning ,  of  the  firfigetten  line ,  make  a  line ,  divided  by  extreme  and 
meane  proportion;  and  that  doable  of  the  fegment  ys  the  greater  part  thereof, 

Forafmuch  as,this,is  the  conuerfe  of  Eudides  third  propofition :  we  will  vie  the  fame  fuppofitions 
and  conftruChcns  there  fpecified:fo  farre,as  they  fhallferue  our  purpofe  .  Beginning  therefore  at  the 
conclufion,  we  muft  infer  the  part  of  the  propofition,  before  graunted.  It  was  concluded,  thatthe 
fquare  of  theline  D  B,  is  quintuple,  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  DC,  his  o'wne  fegment.  Therefore 
D  N(thefquare  ofDB)is quintuple,  to  G  F,(the  fquare  of  DC)  .  But  the  fquare  of  AG  ( thedou- 
ble  of  DC)  which  is  RS,  is  quadruple  to  G  F>  (by  the  fecond  Corollary  of  the  20.  of  the  fixth):  and 
therefore  R'S,with  G  F,are  quintuple  to  G  F:andfo  it  is  euident,that  the  fquare  D  N  ,  isequall  to  the 
fquare  R*S, together  with  the  fquare  G  F. Wherefore, from  thofe  two'equalles ,  taking,  the  fquare  G  F, 
(common  to  them  both):rcmaynech  the  fquare  R  S  ,  equall  to  the  Gnomon  X  O  P.  But  to  the  Gno¬ 
mon  X  O  P,the  parallelogram  me  *  C  E,is  equall :  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  AC,  which  is  R  S, 
is  equall  to  the  parallelograme  C  E. Which  paralldogamme  is  cotained  vndcr  B  E,(equall  to  AB  :)and 
C  B,  the  part  pemayning  of  the  fmftline  geuen  which  was  D  B.  And  the  line  AB,is  made  of  the  double 
of  the  fegment  D  C,and  of  C  B.thoother  part  of  the  line  D  B,firfl:geuen.  Wherefore  the  doubleof  the 
fegment  DC,with  C  B, the  part  remayning  (which  altogether,  is  the  whole  line  A  B)  is  to  AC  ,  ( the 
double  of  the  fegment  D  C^las  that  fame., A  C,is  to  CB:by  the  fecond  part  of  the  ns.ofche'fixth.  Ther- 
fore  by  the  3  .definit-io  of  the  fixth  booice,  the  whole  line  A  B,is  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  pro¬ 
portion,  &  A  C/the  double  of  the  fegmet  D  O)  being  middell  proportionally  the  greater  parttheraf. 
Wherefore,ifa  rightline,be  quintuple  in  power,  &c.,(asin  the  propofiiion  }  which  was  to  be  demon- 
ftrated. 


Or5thus  hr  maybe  demonftrated. 


TorafmUch  as  the  lqifare,DN  is  quintuple  to  the  fqffare  GF,(I  meane  the  fquare  of DB  theline  geee, 
io  the  fquare  ofD  C  the  fegmet) :  And  the  fame  fquare  D  N,is  equall  to  the  parallelograme  vnder  AB, 
C  B,with  the  fquare  made  oftheHineD  C:  by  the  fixth  of  the  fecond:  (  for  vnto  the  line  A  C  ,  equally 
deuided :  the  line,C  B,is,as  it  were  adioyned)  .Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  vnder  A  B,  C  B ,  toge- 


Ifa  right  lineadenidedby  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion ,  begeuen ,  andto  the  great  fegment 
there f  be  direElly  adjoined  a  line  ecjual  to  the  Whole  line  getten, that  adioyned  line3and  the faid greater 
fegment , do  make  a  line  dittided  by  extreme  and  meane  proportion ,  Vehoje  greater  fegment  is  the  line 
adioyned. 


Suppofe  the  line  geuen  ,  deuided  by  extreartie  and  meane  proportion  ,  tobeAB  deuided  in  the 
point  C,a.nd  his  greater  fegment,let  be  A  C :  vnto  A  C  dire&ly  adioyne  a  line  equall  to  A  B ;  let  that  be 
A  D :  I  fay,that  A  D,  together  with  A  G,(that  is  DC)is  a  deuided  by  extreme  and  middel  proportion, 
whofe  greater  fegment  is  A  D,  the  line  adioyned  .  Deuide  AD,  equally  in  the  point  E.  Now,foraf- 
much  as  A  E,  is  the  halfeof  A  D,(byconfhru6tion  ,)itis  alfo ,  the  halfeof  A  B  (equall,  to  AD,by  con- 
4lm6tion) :  Wherfore  by  the  i.pf  the  thirtenth,the  fquare  of  the  line  compofed  of  A  C  and  A  E(which 
ine  is  £C)is  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  AE.  Wherefore  the  double  of  A  E,  and  the  line  AC 

compofed 


o/Euclides  Elementes 

eompofed,  (as  in  one  right  line)  is  a  line  de¬ 
luded  by  extreme  and  meane  proportion, by 
the  conuerfe  of  this  thirdfby  me  demonilra-  -p 

ted  )  t  and  the  double  of  A  E ,  is  the  greater  r 
fegmetrt .  But  D  C  is  the  line  compofed  of  p 

the  double  of  A  E,  &  the  line  A  C :  and  with  ^ 

all  3  A  D  is  the  double  of  A  E.  Wherfore,D  C, 
is  aline  deuided  by  extreme  aricfmeahe pro¬ 
portion, and  A  D,is  his  greater  fegment. If  a  fight  line,therefore ,  deuided  by  extreme  and  meane  pro¬ 
portion,  be  geuen,and  to  the  greater  fegment  thereof,  be  diredtly  adioyned  a  line  equall  to  the  whole 
line  geuen, that  adioyned  line,  and  the  fayd  greater  fegment ,  do  makealinediuided  byextreameand 
meane  proportion ,  whofe  greater  fegment, is  the  lineadioyned  ••  Which  was  required  to  be  demon- 
llrated. 

T wo  other  brief e  demonfl rations  of  the fame . 

Forafmuch  as,A  d  is  to  a  c.-as  a  b  ,is  to  a  cfbecaufe  a  r>  is  equall  to  a  B,by  conftru&ion  )  :  but  as 
a  b  is  to  a  c,foisA  c  to  c  e  ; by  fuppofition. Therefore  by  the  1 1  .of the  fifth  ,  as  a  c,isto  c  b  ,  fo  is  a  d 
to  a  c.*  Wherefore ,  as  a  c  ,and  c  b, (which  is  a  s)is  to  c  b  :fois  a  n,and  a  c  (  which  is  r>  c)to  a  c. 
Therefore,  euerfedly,ab  a  b  ,is  to  a  c  :  fo  is  dcioad.  And  it  is  proued,  a  d,  to  be  to  a  c  :  as  a  c  is  to 
c  b .Wherefore as  a  b  is  to  a  c,and  a  r,to  c  b  :fo  is  d  c,  to  a  o,and  a  d,  to  a  c.  But  a  b  ,  a  c,  and  c  b 
are  in  continuall  proportion,by  fuppofition :  Wherfore  d  c,a  D,and  a  c,  are  in  continuall  proportion. 
Wherefore,by  the  3. definition  ofthefixth  booke,D  c,is  deuided  by  extreme  and  middell  proportion, 
and  his  greateft  fegment, is  a  i»  .Which  was  to  be  demonilrated.Note  from  the  marke  *,how  this  hath 
two  demonftrations.One  I  haue  fee  in  the  margent  by. 

Cj"  A  Corollary.  1. 

Upon  Euc  licks  third  propoftion  demonftratedft  is  made  euident:  that, of  a  line  deuided  by  ex- 
treame  and  meane  proportion^ you  produce  the  leffe fegment  equally  to  the  length  of  the  greater  :  the 
Ime  t  her  by  adioyned, together  Xvith  the  fayd  leffe  fegment, make  anew  line  deuided  by  extreame  and 
middle  proportiontWbofe  leffe  figment  ,is  the  line  adioyned. 

For, if  A  B,be  deuided  by  extreme  and  middell  proportion  in  the  point  C,A  C,  being  the  greater 
fegment,and  C  B  be  produced, from  the  poynt  B  ,makinga  line,  with  C  B,  equall  to  A  C ,  which  let  be 
C  Qjand  the  line  thereby  adioyned, let  be  B  Q^I  fay  that  C  Q^,  is  a  line  alio  deuided  by  an  extreame 
and  meane  proportion, in  the  point  B:and  thatB  (the  line  adioyned)is  the  leffe  legment.For  by  the 

thirde,it  is  proued,  that  halfe  A  C,(which,let  be,C  D)with  C  B,as  oneline,compofed,hathhispowre 
or  fquare,  quintuple  to  the  powre  of  the 
fegmciltC  Di  Wherfore,  by  thefecond  , 

of  this  booke,  the  double  of  C  D,  is  de-  f*  t  C  _ % 

uided  by  extreme  and  middell  propor-  '  "  1  “  ’  “ - * 

tion  •  and  the  greater  fegment  thereof, 
fhalbe C  B. But, by  conlhuitlon,  C  Qjs 

the  double  of  C  D,for  it  is  equall  to  A  C .  Wherefore  C  Qjs  deuided  by  extreme  and  middle  proper- 
tion,in  the  pointB  :and  the  greater  fegment  thereof  fhalbe,C  B.  Wherefore B  Q,  is  the  leffe  fegment, 
which  is  the  line  adioyned.Therefore,a  line  being  deuided,  by  extreme  and  middell  proportion, if  the 
leffe  fegment,be  produced  equally  to  the  length  of  the  greater  fegment,the  line  thereby  adioyned  to¬ 
gether  with  the  fayd  leffe  fegment,make  a  new  line  deuided,  by  extreme  &  meane  proportion,  whofe 
leffe  icgmeut,is  the  line  adioyned .  Which  was  to  be  demonllrated. 

«[  0/  Corollary.  2. 

If  from  the  greater fegment, of  a  line  diuided,by  extreme  and  middle  proportion,  a  line, equall  to 
the  leffe  fegment  be  cut  of :the greater  fegment, thereby, is  alfo  deuided  by  extreme  and  meane propor¬ 
tion, whofe greater fegment  Jhall  be  now  that  part  of  it, which  is  cut  of. 

Forsaking  from  A  C,  a  line  equall  to  C  B  :  let  A  Rremayne.I  fay  ,  that  A  C,  is  deuided  by  an  ex¬ 
treme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  R:  and  that  C  R,the  line  cut  of,is  the  greater  fegment.  For  it 
is  proued  in  the  former  Corollary  that  C  Qjs  deuided  by  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point 
B.But  A  C,is  equall  to  C  Q^by  conftrudtion  :and  C  R  is  equall  to  C  B  by  conllru&ion  :  Wherefore  the 

Hi  iiijs  relidue. 


*  Therefore, by 
myfecoiid  The * 
or  erne  added  9- 
pon  thefecond 
proportion,  D  C 
is  deutded  by  ex 
treame  and 
meane  proporti¬ 
on  tn  the  potnt 
A .  And  becassfi 
A  C  is  btgger 
then  C  8:  ther - 
fore  D  A  is 
greater  then  A- 
C;  wherefore  tf 
a  right  line  £fe. 
as  m  the  propo - 
fit  sort.  Which 
was  to  be  de - 
monf rated. 


Tt 


jrefitfue,A  R  is  equall  to  B  Qjhe  refidue.Seing  therfore  the  whole  A  C  is  equall  to  the  whole  C  Q:  and 
the  greater  part  of  AC,  which  is  C- 

R  is  equal  to  C  B  the  greater  part  of  _  .  ;i-  .  .  ’ 

C  Qjand  the Idfefegmetalfo  equall  -A  C  B 

tothe  lefle-.and  withall  feing  G  Qjs  ,J”  jr  ’  _ ;  _  •  ■ .  ’ 
proued  to  be  diuided  by  extreme  Se  A  IS'  ,  . 

meane  proportion  in.thepointB ,  it  ,  .'i  (i 

foloweth  of  neceflityiihatjA  C,is  diuided  by  extreme  and  meane proportion  in  the  point  R.And  feing 
C  Bjis  the  greater  fegment  of  C.  Qj  C  Rlhall  be  the  greater  fegment  of  A  C  .  Which  was  to  be  de- 
monilrated ,  .  ■  '  ■  j 1  r i  ^  fT1  ^*'1  asjeen1  ■  j  ■ 


CLj 

I  1  * h  A  dn  ftlf'r- 

r  w  it  JO  \J1i1S 


, jssijj  byfii  adj  bns  e  e 

**£ ACoroMdrp ' 


extreme  and meane  proportionipohofe  leffe fegment  ,  is  the fay d line  ofexeeejfe  ,  0/  difference  hemene 
the  fegment  A  01  1  ■  *t  ■■  5  1  os?i  ;  *  /•  ■■  .> .  :a  ::  .---■■"T 

:  .  ,11  eflj 


::  rtairivr  ) 

O  A  03  OCl  . 


-  ■  :  >  Wiilf  >  feUiojx!w)eii 

A  -I .  .:;h.  .lQnnD,ce. 


A  03  f 


22  .  -J3 


:  •  -vN.  V- 

is  is 

i  .  Lt  v> 

n  V-  Cl 

-N.  rA»\\ AL\w-s 

O’ 

V  i  :'si 

•  J  ^  ^  ASVt  Jo  '  tA 

vCi  SV. 


J’iOCjC 
,  aids  v/od 


S3! 


Alt 


,gp,  yajciftbWuhe  any  ri 
report  ion: 


me  mien 

’  V< 


-  *  •  rrt  »ii  - 


an  extreme 

Bee. 

C  •  £. uOj  Jl»  1 ' - 1  j  ’ 1 


‘V 


K^dPrchleme. 

.'.Of  ''3 


TV  deiiide  by  an,  extreme  and  meitne  proportion,  a;ny  right  linegeumfin  length  and pofh 

.......  .  '  >  •  •••••■.  ' 


te. 


*7%zug&  I  fay, 
pepfidtefsiar; 
yetjQ&m&y 
geriaze  hew  At- 
fmtt  other  po- 
fissos  will feme; 
fi  lhat  D  /  and 
A  J>  an 
angle  fir  a  tri- 
anglet-t  haue 
AujSdet prapor- 
tvmaM'fc&t. 

&e. 


mm 


031 


drawen  ^perpendicular:  by  the  1 1 .  of  the  firii,  which  let  beDF:  (of  what  length  you  will).  From  D  F 


and  at  the  point;©,  cat  ofthe  fixth parte  of 
D  F:  by  the  9 .  ofthe  fixth.  And  let  that  fixth. 
part,  be  the  line  ©  G.  Vppon  D  F ,as  a  diame-  ^ 

•ter,  deferibea  ferrucirde-:  which  letbe  D  H- 
.F.  From  the  point  G,  rere  a  line  perpendicu¬ 
lar  to©  F,which  fuppofe  to  be  G  H  :  and  let 
it  come  to  the  circumference  of©  HF,  in  the 
point  H.Draw  right  lines,  HD, and  H  F.Pro-  C 
dace  DH,  from  the  point  H,  fo  long, till  a 
line  adioyned  with  D  H,  be  equall  to  H  F, 
which  let  beDI,  equall  to  H  F  .  From  the 
point  H,  to  the  point  B,f the  one  ende  ofour  ^ 
line  gejiien)  let  a  right  line  be  dravyen  as-H-  ■ 

B.  From  the  point  I, .let  a  line  be  draWyn,  to 
thelineAB:  fo  thatitbealfo  parallel  to  the  (  ( 

line  H 1©  Which  parallel  line  fuppofe  to  be  l-  //  q 
K:  cutting  thedine  AB,  at  the  point  K.‘ I  fay  D 
that  A  B,fis  deuided  by  an  extreme  &  nieane 


K. 

it  • 

/  l 

~ — i 

/  -«r» 

H 

/  /  l  ' 

l /  . 

S^q©, 

r . ’  A  fjS 

/  /  ’ 

r1- r'r;3*]  TV 

,UVi 


proportion,  in  the  point  K.  For  the  triangle  D  K  I,  hauing  H  B,  parallel  to  I K,  hath  his  fidesD  K  and  D 
1,  cut  proportionally, by  the  z .  of  the  fix-th .  Wherefore  as  1  His  to  H  D :  fo  is  K  B,to  B  D.  And  therfore 
compoundingly,  (by  the  i3 .  of  the  fiueth )  as  D  I,  is  to  D  H:  fo  is  D  K  to  D  B.  But  by  conftru&ion  D I 
is  equall  to  H Ft.  wherefore  by  the  7.  of  the  fifth,  D I  is  to  D  H,as  H  F  is  to  D  H.  Wherefore  by  the  ix„ 
of  the  fifth,  D  K  is  to  D  B,as  H  F  is  to  D  H.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  D  K  is  to  the  fquare  of  ©  B,  as  the 
fquaredfHFfis  to  the  fquare  of©  H:  by  the  zz. of  the  fixth.  But  the  fquare  of  HF,  is  to  the  fquare  of 
DH:  as  the  line  GF  is  to  the  line  GD4  by  my  corrollary  vpon  the  ^probleme  of  my  additions  to  the 
fecond  propofition  ofthe  twelfth.  Wherefore  by  the  n.  of  the  fifth,  the  fquare  of  DK  is  to  the  fquare 
-of©  B,  as  the  line  G  F  is  to  the  line  G  D.  But  by  eonfiru&ion,  G  F  is  quintuple  to  G  D.  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of©  K  is  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of©  B :  and  therefore,  the  double  of  D  B,  is  deuided  by  an  ex- 
iremeand  nieane  propordo,  and  B  K  is  the  greater  fegment  therof,  by  the  z.  of  this  thirtenth.Where- 
fore  feing  A  Bisthe  double  ofDB  by  cofiftrudion:  the  line  A  Bis  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane 

l  FI  ‘  p  roportion : 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


proportion:  and  his  greater  fegment,is  the  line  B  K,  "Wherefore  AB  is  deuided  by  an  extreme  and 
mcane  proportion,  in  the  point  K.  We  haue  therefore  deuided  by  extreme  and  meane  proportion  any 
line  gcuen  in  length  and  pofition.  Which  was  requifite  to  be  done. 

/■  .  * 

The  fecond  way  to  execute  this  problem?. 

Suppofe  the  line  geuen  to  be  A  .B.Deuide  A  S  into  two  equall  parts :  as  fuppofe  it  to  be  done  in  the 
point  C.  Produce  A  B  from  the  point -B:  adioyning  a  line  equall  to  B  C,  which  let  be  B  D .  To  th;  right 
line^  D,  and  at  thepoint  D,  eredt  a  perpendicular  line  equall  to  £  D,  let  that  be  D  E.  Produce  £  o  fro 
the  point  D  to  the  point  F:  making  DF  to  contayne  fine  fuefi  equall  partes,as£>  E  is  one  v  Now  vpori 
£  5  as  a  diameter,aefcribe  afemicircle  which  let  b c£  and  let  the 

point  where  the  circumference  of  E  I(.F,  doth  cut  the  line  A  B,bc  the 
point  /(..I  fay  that  AB,  is  deuided  in  the  point. /C,  by  an  extreme  and 
meane  proportion.  For  by  the  13  .of  the  fixth  E  D,D  &  D  B,are  three 

lines  in  continuall  proportion,  ( D  /C being  the  middle  proportionall). 

Wherefore  by  the  corollary  of  the  10.  of  the  fixth,  is  ED  is  to  D  F,  lb  is 
the  fquare  of  E  D, to  the  fquare  of  D  /(.,  but  by  confirudlion,  E  D, is  fub- 
quintuple  to  D  F,  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  £  D,  is  fubquirituple  to  the 
fquare  of  D  /(, .  And  therefore  the  fquare  of  D  /(_ ,  is  quintuple  to  the 
fquare  of  ED.  And  S  D  is  equall  to ED,  by  confirudiion,  therefore  the 
fqqareofo  X.,  is  quintuple  to  the  fquai'c  of#  D .  Wherefore  the  dou¬ 
ble  of B  D,  i$  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion:  whole 
greater  fegment'is  B  i<_  •  by  the  fecond  of  this  thirtenth  .  Butbycon- 
ftrudlion,  AB,  is  the  double  of  B  D  :  Wherefore  A  B,  is  diuided  by  ex¬ 
treme  and  meane  proportion,  and  his  greater  fegment,  is  £./<,:  and 
thereby,/^,  the  point  pf  the  diuifion.  We  haue  therefore  deuided  bv 
extreme  and  meane  proportion,any  rightline  geuen ,in  length  and  po¬ 
fition.  Which  was  to  be  done. 


1^' 


.  m  V.  1  V 


Ech  of thefe  wayes,may  well  be  executed:  Butin  the firft,you  haue  this  auantage:  that  the  diame¬ 
ter  is  taken  at  pleafure.  Which  in  the  fecond  way, is  euer  iullthrife  fo  long,  as  the  line  geuen  to  be  de¬ 
uided.  ‘ 


V 


AV 


be  4-  i  beoreme. 

...  - _ ..  ..  ,  t  .  '•  ' 


, ,  .  #  lohnD.ee. 

i  j  i  /.  j  *1.,*  '  '•>  r  •  ■-w  V  .  * 

Tbi 


l  be  4. 


0  ttton. 


If  a  right  line  he  deuided  by m  extreme  and  meane  proportion:  thefquares 
made  of  the  yohole  line  and  oftheleffe j'egmet \  are  treble  to  the  fquare  made 
oftht&edte'rfement; 

■  '  J  J  ^  \m%l%  .  :  ,  ...... 


by  ah  extreame  crmeane proportion 
_ jin  the point  C.  <^A nd  let  the  greater feg¬ 
ment  thereof  he  A  C.T hen  1 fay  r that  the  fquares 
wade  of  the  lines  A  B ,  and  B  C,  are  treble  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  C.Defcribe  (  by  the  4.6. of the 
first )vpon  the  line  A  B,a  fquare  A  D  E  BriAnd  H 
make  perfeff  the  figure .  Noivforafrnuch  as  the 
line  A  B ,  is  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane 
■proportion, in  thepoint  C:and  the  greater  fegmet 
thereof,  is  the  line  ^A C ,  therefore  that  which  is 
contayned'vnder  the  lines  ^AB  and  B  C  is  equall 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  l A  C .  But  that  which  is 
emtayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  CB  is  the  pa- 

KKk.j.  rallelo  - 


1\ 


Demonflra* 

tilrfJi 


I.Dee. 

This  is  mag  etti 
dent  of  mj  fe- 
condTheoreme, 
added  to  the 
third propojitie . 
lor  to  addetoa 
whole  hne ,  a 
line  squall  to 
the  greater  feg- 
metl  &  to  aide 
to  the  greater 
fegment  a  hne 
equal!  to  the 
whole  line, is  all 
one  thing  yin  / 
the  line  produ¬ 
ced.  Bj  the 
whole  hne, I 
meane  the  hne 
diuided  hj  ex¬ 
treme  and 
meane  propor¬ 
tion. 


rdkhgrmrm  A  K,md  the [quart  of  the  line  A 
C  is  the  fquare  F  D .  Wherefore  the  paralldo- 
grmime  Cm  K  is  eqmll  to  the  fquare  F  D .  And 
the  parallckgramme  A  F  is  e quail  to  the  pa¬ 
rallelogramme  F  E ,  put  the fquare  C  I<  common 
to  them  both  :wher fore  the  whole  parallelogramt 
A  K  is  equal!  to  the  whole  parallelogramme  C- 
E.  Wherefore  the  parallclogrammes  C  E  and  A- 
K  are  double  to  the  parallelogramme  K .  But 
the  pardklogrammes  A  K  and  C  E,  are  the  gno¬ 
mon  L  M  N,  and  the  fquare  €  K .  Wherefore  the 
gnomon  L  M  M  and  thefquareC  K,are  double  to 
the  parallelogramme  AK.Butit  isproued  that  the 
parallelogramme  A  K  is  equal  to  the  fquare  D  F. 

Wherefore  the  gnomon  L  M  N  and  the fquare  C FC  are  double  to  the [quart  IS  F.  v . , 

the  gnomon  LMN  and  the fquares  C  K  and  D  F^tre  treble  to  the  fquare  D  F.But  the  gno¬ 
mon  LMN  and  the  fquares  C  K  and  D  F,  are  the  whole  [quart  A  E  together  with  the 
fquare  C  K ,  which  are  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B and  B  C.Cr£nd  D  F  is  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  C. Wherefore  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C  ,are  treble  to  the  fquare  of  the  lint 
A  C .  if  therefore  a  right  line  be  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportimsthe fquares 
made  of  the  whole  line  and  ofthekfe  fegment,  are  treble  to  the fquare  made  of  the  greater 
fegment:  which  was  required  to  be proued.  ■  -u  c-.  c 

Loofcc  for  an  other  demonftration  of  this  propofition  after  the  fifth  propofition 
of  this  books. 


ft?: 


f  The  s.  Theorem.  :  Tire  s. Propofition. 


1 10  ilJJ. 
r.  A>:  ;••} 

Ai/ia 


mnt  A :  4?M  the  greater 

:a  .v 


If  a  tight  line  he  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion 7  andvnto 
it  be  added  a  right  line  squall  to  the  greater fegment  y  tbefohole  right  line 
is  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion  9  and  the  greater  fegment 
thereof  Js  the  right  linegeuen  at  the  beginning*  *”  n  *. \\ 

.  ...  V; '1  '1  V'  gfibSAX 

Fppofe  that  the  right  line  ABbe  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  mearte  proporti¬ 
on  in  the  point  Cyand  let  the  greater fegment  thereof be  AC.  And  *vnto  the  line 
A  B,adde  the  line  A  D  e quail  to  the  line  A  C.  Then  I  fay  that  the  line  D  B  js 
_  deuided  by  an  extrean. 
fegment  thereof ,  is  the  right  line 
put  at  the  beginning,mmely ,  A  B. 

Defcribe(  by  the  46. of  the frfi)vp- 
on  the  line  A  B  a  fquare  A  E,and 
make  perfect  the  figure.  Andforaf- 
much  as  the  line  A  B,  is  deuided  by 
an  extreame  and  meane  proportion 
in  the  point  C, therefore  that  which 
is  contained  under  the  lines  A  B 
and  B  C  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  A  C.  But  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  under  the  lines  A  B  and  B- 

Cis 


1.  * 

V  ' %v.a\  v.j  V’ 

’j'z  ■.  1  :v 

’ 

N.  ' 

•iV.  A'ixV?  \  i  i’ll! 

*.  •'  '  W  ' 

*  ,  v  n 

•  ■  .  •'  ■  -  V.v. 

-  - 

»  V.  - 

\  *  • 

■  •  ■  •.•--\nuw  ••  ♦ 

■  *  •  .  > 

1 

t  \- 

rr\ 

X 

L  A 

a 

■  hWs  ■ 

V 

0  •  _  * 

, 

-  - 1 

v\ 


K 


ofEttclitles  Element::. 


Fol.y)% 


C  is  the  parallelogramme  C  E ,  and  the fquare  of  the  line  AC  is  the fquare  C  II .  Wherefore 
the  parallelogramme  C  E  is  e quail  to  the  fquare  C  H .  But  vnto  the  fquare  CH  is  equall 
the fquare  D II,  by  the  first  of  the  (ixth:and  vnto  the  parallelogramme  C  Ejs  equall  the  pa* 
rallelogramme  H  E.  Wherefore  the  parallelogramme  D  His  equall  to  the  parallelogramme 
H  E.Adde  the  parallelogramme  H  B, common  to  them  both .  Wherefore  the  whole  par allelo* 
gramme  D  K  is  equall  to  the  whole  fquare  A  E .  And  the  parallelogramme  D  I< ,  is 
that  which  is  contained  'under  the  lines  B  D  and  D  A ,  for  the  line  AD  is  equall  to 
the  tine  D  L,&  the fquare  A  E  is  the fquare  of  the  line  A  B .  Wherfore  that  which  is  contay- 
ned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  D  B  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B .  Wherefore  as  the 
line  D  B  is  to  the  line  B  A  ,fo  is  the  line  B  A  to  the  line  A  D,hy  the  ij.  of  the fixth .  Butthe 
line  D  B  is  greater  then  the  line  B  A  .  Wherefore  the  line  B  A  is  greater  then  the  line  A  D . 
Wherefore  the  line  B  D  is  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane proportion  in  the  point  A,and 
his  greater fegment  is  the  line  A  B .  if  therefore  a  right  line  be  deuided  by  an  extreame  and 
meane  proportion, and  vnto  it  be  added  a  right  line, equall  to  the  greater fegment :  the  whole 
right  line  is  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane proportion, and  the  greater fegment  therof, 
is  the  right  line  geuen  at  the  beginningtwhich  was  required  to  be  demon f rated. 

This  propofitlon  is  agayne  afterward  demonftrated. 

A  Corollary  added  by  Campane. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft  that  if  from  the  greater  fegment  of  a  line  deuided  by  an  extreame  &  meane 
proportion  }be  t  aken  away  the  Icffcfcgment  \  the fayd.gr  eater  fegment  jha/l  be  deuided  by  an  extreame 
Ofid  meane  proportion, and  thegr eater  fegment  thereof fbali  be  the  line  taken  away, 

rmWhv.  V.w.,  .•  v  .  2'V ",.\V  2 


—A 


As  let  the  line  a  b  ,  be  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane 
proportion-da  the  point  c  .  And  let  the  greater  fegment ,  be  the 
Jifte  a  <p.fFjx>tn  a  ctake  c  b  :  making  the  refidue  a  d  .  Hay  thick- A  2)  (p 

c  is alfodpuibed  by an  extreame  .and  meane  proportion  in  the  r  ~  ’  ''<  ■■  i 

point  d, and  that  his  greater  portion  is  d  c .  For,  by  the  definiti- 
no(of  a  line  fo  deuided)  a  b  ,is  to  a  c ,as  a  c  is  to  c  b  .  But  as  a  c 

is  to  c  b  ,fo  is  a  c  to  d  e,by  the  7. of  the  fjfdi(for  d  c,by  conftru&ion  is  equall  to  c  n)wherefore,by  the 
1 1. of  the  fifth  ..as  a  e  is  to  a  c,fois  a  c  to  c  brand  therefore  by  the  ip.ofthe  fifth,  as  a  b  is  to  a  c,fois 
^he  refidue c  Boothe  refidue  a  d  .But  c  b  is  to  a  d  ,as  d  cisto  ad  (  by  the  7 .  of  the  fifth)  for  d  cisby 
cbnftrubtidn  equall  to  c  b  .Wherefore,  a  c  is  ton  c,as  d  c  is  to  a  D,and  fo,by  the  definition  of  a  line  de 
ttided  by  an  extreime  and, meane  proportion,#  appeared^  c  in, the  point  D ,  to  be  deuided ,  by  an  ex¬ 
treame  and  meane  proportion  rwhfch  was  toTe  proued. 

T  m  Corollaries^  added  by  M.i)ee)foll&wi?i<g  chief ely  Topon  thef>eritie ? 


This  is  before 
demonflrated 
mod  euidently 
and  briefly  by 
M,  Dee,4fter 
tbe$,  propofl* 


tton • 


v  \,V- 

h*  \)'S  'ClV.Z* 

.  ■  ■>.!  «S!Sw4 

V  *-  X 


rs 


A  Corollary.  1. 

new.  1  \\Y  ‘v a  i  !  •.* 


A  s'Up'.Vi  '  A  ... 

As  any  lira  being  deuided  by  an  extreame  and  middle  proportion ,  doth  gene  vs  three  right  lines, 
'in  cehtinti'dltfybpmiM  :  So, either  by  adtoynitig  dire ft ty  to  the  greater fegment, a  line  equall  to  the fir  It 
whole  dnettikCSvcondly  )by  producing  the  lefjefegment ,  equally  to  the  length  of  the  greater  fegment: 

■i&ufytdupfiy  line  equad  to  the fartifegrUenttit  is  maniftflpthat  in  entry  of 

thefe fewer  faafesffae  hauetm  line's  decided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion:  ( it  is  to  faeete,orie 
geuen,andthe  ot her  made )and  "faith  all,tn  euery  way, we  haue power  lines  in  continual proportion, 

d _ ...  2 _  \  _ _  « f  '■  '■  '  ■ 

Of  thefe  two  lines,  (by  extreame  arid  meane  proportiondeuided,)  their  demonfirations ,  are  after 
Euclides  3, proportion  added  rand  here  in  this  fifth  by  Euctide  proucd.But  of  the  fower  lines  in -continu¬ 
al!  progqrtion  ,feing,the  demonfiration  is  moft  ealy  for  any  man  to  frame.I  will  here, but  note  the  lines 

KKk.ij.  v  nto 


*« 


Note* 


Mate  4.  2. 


t. 

3* 

4* 

N 0 tt  1 . 

tvomid-  1. 
die  proper-  3 . 
tttnalt.  4. 


The  thirtenth  Booke 


vnto  you:  as  in  euery  of  the  fower  places, the  conftru&ions  haue  them  lettredanddpecified.  As  in  my 
way  added  after  the  third  propolition,D  C,A  D,A  C,and  CBtarefower  lines  in  continual!  propor¬ 


tion.  And  in  the  fecond  way,  A  B,C  Q_(equall  to  A  C)C  B,and  B  Quire  fower  lines  in  continuall  pro¬ 
portion  ,And  in  the  third  way  ,A  B,AC,C  R, (equall  to  C  B  )  and  A  R,  are  the  fower  lines  in  continuall 
proportion. And  in  the  fourth  way(by  Euclide  declared)D  B,  A  B,A  C( equall  to  A  D Jand  CB,are  low¬ 
er  lines  in  continuall  proportion. So, that  in  the  firll  way  you  haue  A  D,and  A  C,middle  proportionals 
betwene  D  C,and  C  B  .In  the  fecond  way,you  hau  e  C  Q^,  and  C  B, betwene  A  B,and  B  QJn  the  third 
way, you  haue  A  C,C  R, betwene  A  B  and  A  R;and  in  the  fourth  way, you  haue  A  B,and  A  C,betwene 
P  B,and  C  B,  -1'  . 


A  Corollary.  2. 

It  is  dip)  manifeftjhatyou  may  by  any  of  the  power  way  es, here fccified, proceed?  infinitely ,  in  the 


^falincdtuidfd  continually  the  quantities  of  the fiyd  Whole  lines,  made  ( and  thereby  their fegmentes )  .  zA ndyet,ne 
*{3  extreme* *nd  uerthelejfe  reteyning  in  euery  line  made  (  by  any  oft  he  Wayes )  and,  in  hisf?gmcnts,aU ,  and  the  fame 
middle prefer-  properties, which  thefirft  line, and  his fegmentes  haue.  After  Which  rateofTrogreJJion  ,  as  the  termes 
tien,  in  continuall  proportion  do  encrcafe^md  are  wee  in  number:  So,  tikgwife,  do  the  middle  proportionalls » 

(accordingly)becoms  moe'.But  euer fewer  in  number, by  ifpo,then  the  termes  of  the  PregreJJkn  are. 


.{idle  3  AO;  £i 


batWelolution  is. 


a  icA 


:'d.a 


■'  oh  a  3  c.  2. 

Mfinsrftfo.u 

_ _ the  affutnption  or  taking  of the  thing  which  is  to  be  proued,  asgraunted. 

What  reflation  thinzes  which  neceffarily  follow  it, to  pafe  vntofome  truth  graunted. 

and  compcfition  J  £>  jjj  .  •  *.3  otx.. .  .Urn,,.:-.-  - .  .  r.. . uas:  ■- 

is, hath  before  .  —  ~  . 

bene  taught  in  f  What  C  OmfiOjUlOYl  IS.  U  .  - 

the  beginning  of  *■  .  V  -  . 

thejn-ji  books.  Compofitionjs  an  afurnption  or  taking  of a  thing  graunted,  and  by  thinges  which  of 

neceffity follow  it, to  pajfe  vnto  the  finding  out  of  the  thing  fought  or  to  beproued. 

(ftffolution  of the frjl  T heoreme. 

r.wttQMtq  iAV'.V 


,3 


the  poiitv  ...»  w.-'r-  1/ -  j  :  .  .  *  r  r 

of  the  line  A  B  ,and  let  that  line  be  AD. T hen  1 fay' that  thefquare  of  the  line  C  D  ts  quin¬ 
tuple  to  thefquare  of  A  D .  Forforafmuch  as  thefquare  of  the  line  C  D  is  quintuple  to  the 
fquare  of  A  Debut  the  fquare  of  the  line 

C  Dis(by  the  4. of the fecond)  equall  to D  A  c  3 

that  which  is  compofed  of  t he  f quarts  of "  ""  "  "  •*—  ^V: 

the  lines  C  A, &  AD, together  tilth  tbit  „hich 


’ementes.  V  Foh^gd* 

winch  is  ZMttyjied't/kder'thi' lines  C  A, and  AD  twife.  Wherfore  that  which  is  compofed  of 
the fqmres'ofthe  lines  G  A,&  AD  together  with  that  which  is  cotained  vnder  the  lines  C- 
A,&  A  D  twife  is  quintuple  to  the [quart  of  the  line  A  D  Wherfore, that  which  is  compofed 
bfthefqmr^i^hedin^€-A-t0gether  with  that, which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  A ,  and 
K.A D  twife  f'tftiad/uplt  to  the fjmre  ofthelinexA  D.But  vnto'that,  which  is  contained 
vnder  ibetifetsC'Ai  and  A  D  >  twife  fei  equall  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  A , 
and  A  Bfor  the  line  A  B  is  double  to  the  line  A  D  .  And  vnto  the  fquare  of  the.  line  A- 
C,  is  e quail  that  which  is  cotayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B(fe  B  Cfor  the  line  A  B,  is  by fuppofi- 
tion  diuided  by  an  extreme  and wemepropMtionjn  the  point  C)  Wherefore ,  that,  which  is 
contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B,  and  A  C,  together  with  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
linefrl  B„, 
b\ 


Compofition  of  the firft  T heofeme. 

I  fora  Jmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the, line.  A  Bis  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 


AD, 


is 


'contay  ned  vnder  the  lines  B  A, and  o<f  Q,  together  with  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  B  A, and  &  C  is  quadruple  ip  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D  .  But  that  which  is  contayned 
render  the  lines  B  A, and  ‘  A  C,is  equall  to  lhat  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  A ,  and 
ACtwifetfy  the  i.ofthefxth),and  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B,and  BC  is 
equall  t'othefquare  of  the  line  At,  fey  the  defnition  of  a  line  diuided  by  extreme  and 
meane  proportion  feVheref ore  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C, together  with  that,  which  iscbnidy- 
feed,  vnder  the  lines  D  A, and  A  C  twife, is  quadupk  to  the fquare  of the  line  D  A  Wherfore 
fhqt.  which  is  compofed  of thefquares  of fee  lines  D  A, and  A  C, together  with  that  which  is 
fefentay^cdvndfethe  lines  DA, and  AG, twife  js  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of the  line  DA. But 
that  which  is  compofed  of  tfeefquare's  ofthe  lines  D  A,  and  A  C ,  together  with  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  A, and  A  C  twife  js  equall  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  CD  (  by 
the  4. of  the fecond)  Wherefore  the  fquare  ofthe  line  CD  is  quintuple  to  the fquare  of  the 
line  A  D :  which  was  required  to  be  demonjlrated. 

--  fyfolki;ibn  tifthe‘2.  T htoreme, 

Y'»  aA*  W:  IMk  r\  '  _ '  *  v  V  -y\  »  V  \  .  .  .  '  .  >  \  ■  , 

ne  right  line,C  D,  be  quintuple  to  a  fegmet  ofthe  fame  line, namely, 
le  of the  lint  DA,be  AB.T  he  I fay  that  the  line  A  Bis  diuided  by  an 
Ft*  wvuwpr  uporti&n  inthe  point  C.and  the  greater fegmet  t her  of  is  A  C,  which  is 
-wry-  vj  the  right  line  pat  at  the  begmning.For forafmucb  as  the  line  A  Bis  diuided  by  an 
extreame  and  meane  proportion  in  the  foynt  C  ,andthe  greater fegment  thereof  is  the  line 
A  C  therefore  that  which  is  contained  tinder  the  lines  A  B,and  B  C,is  equall  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  AC  .But  that  which  is  contay¬ 
ned  vnder  the  lines  B  A,  and  A  C ,  is  C-  ?  _ A  c  $ 

qual  to  that  which  is  contayned  vn-  ", ■" :  '■  -  •.  1 

■derthdinesD  A,and  AC  twife:  for the  line  B  A,  is  double  to  the  line  AD  .  Wherefore  that 

which  is  contayned  Vnder  the  lines  A  B, and  B  C  together  with  that  which  is  citayned  vnder 
the  iinesB  A}tind  A  C, which  is  the  fquare  ofthe  line  A  B(by  the  2. of  the  fecond)  is  equall  to 

Ktfk.iif  that 


thatwhichts  contayned  vnder $  lines  D  A, &  AC,  twrfe  together  with  the [quart  ofthe  line 
A  C.But  the fquare  of the  line  AB,is  quadruple  to  thefquare  ofthe  line,  D  A.Wherfore  that 
which  is  contained  voider  the  lines  D  A,  and  AC,  tmfejogether  with  thefquqreof  the  line, 
A  C,is  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of theline  A  D  .Wherefore  the  fquares  ofthe  lim  4$d> 

A  C,  together  with  that  whiihis  conUyned  vnderthe  tines  D  A, and  A  Q,  imfi^kiefis  the 
fquare  of the  line  D  Cjon^tufkiishefqmre^ih^tiite.  D  A, And f*4K*dk&M 
byfuppofition.  J  v\\  s*  ■s&staafo -.A  \\  K  v/,\\  vAV%\'dKki 

a  a  v  •.  ;•  v\x  -v&v .v?  u  (v^<k  « tt> 

C'omfojitioyi ‘ofth^jfMheormt.  sm.  v^\t 

7  •  's  ?«  -v.  t0 k  W>  <3  K TiW«r Wv*  s-Awft 

nowforafmuch  as  the  fquare  offbphne  £  tysMWMltio  ^%WM$w24 

togethenwithAtat  which  is  cotaimd^nderJMtfA^^^'Ai^^^^^^^M^W^ 

efthelineD 

twife^are  quintuple  to  thefquare  of the  line  D  A.Wherfore ,by  dmfio}that  which  is  cotamed 
'under  the  lines  D  A  , and  4APZ, twife  together ppfhjf  efqttapeAf  *he  line  C  A, is  quadruple 

^  r  1  f  .  ...  /  J.  /  .  f  !  .  -  f\  !  1  A.*.  a  i  n  /-  /■  L/  «  A  ^  A  > /^  /•  I  W  itA 


/&,  B  A  And  A  C, the  refidtte, namely, that  which  is  contayned ,fjf^At%iflhelA:W, 

B  C  isequallto  the fquare  ofthe  line  A  C.  Wherefore  as  the  line  B  Aits  to  theline  A  Cfh 
is  the  line  A  C  to  the  line  C  B  .B  ut  the  line  B  A  is  greater  then  the  lint  A  C ,  where**** 


r* ; - J  J 

A  C, which  was  required  to  be  demonjln 

'■  ■  ' ,  ' 

V  .  \  -  '  .  .  .'.  '  <3 

W^efolutlon  of the  3  •Theorems 


■  ‘vl:. 

n-T.  'Nkw^  vh  * 

A’Vx'i^w'.'Sf.d  k  y. 


Suppofe  that  a  certayne  right  UneA  B, be.  divided  by  an  extreame ,  and  meane propor¬ 
tion  in  the  point  C  .•  and  let  the  greater fegment  thereof  be  the  line  A  C ,  and  let  the  halfe  of 
the  line  A  C ,  be  the  lint  C  D.  Then  I  fay  that  the  fquare  of  the  BD  is  quintuple  to  the 
fquare  ofthe  line  CD .  Forforafmuchas  the  fquare  ofthe  tine  BD,/f  quintuple  to  the  fquare 
of theline  CD.  But  the  fquare  ofthe  line  D.  B,  is  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
A  B,and  B  C, together  With  the fquare  ofthelmelD  C(by  the  ti.ofthe  fecond). \ Wherefore 
that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lihes  A  B,and B  C,  ^  r  > 

together with  the  fquare  ofthe  lineD  C ,  isquintuple  V-. 

to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  D  C .  Wherefore, that  which  is  ^  “P  •■■  ’••■■  c  .  s 

contayned 1 under  the  lines  A  B,and  B  C  ,  is  quadruple  -  ", 

to  the fquare  ofthe  lineD  C  .  But  vnto  that  which  is 

contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  ¥>,andB  C,  is  equall  the  fquare  of  theline  A  C :  for  theline 
A  B,is  diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meant  proportion  in  the  point  C.  Wherefore  the fquare 
of theline  AC  is  quadruple  to  the  fquare  ofthe  lim  D  C  :andfo  is  it  in  deede  ,f or  theline 
AC  is  double  to  the  line  D  C. 


Com* 


ofcuclides  Elementesf  FoLtyJ* 

Compojltion  of  the  3. Theorem?. 

Forafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  is  double  to  the  line  D  C  >  therefore  the fquare  of  the  line 
ACis  quadruple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  C(  by  the  20,  of the fixth ) . But  vnto  the fquare 
of  the  line  A  Q,is  e  quail  that  which  is  contained  vnderthe  lines  A  B,andB  C>*  by  fupp  op¬ 
tion  .-wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  AB ,  and  B  'O ,  is  quadruple  to 
the fquare  of the  line  C  D  .  Wherefore, that  which  is  contayned  vnder  A  B,  andB  Q,to - 
therwith  the  fquare  the  /kDC,  which is  the fquare  of the  lineT>B  (by  the  6 .  of  the fe - 
cond )is  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  C  ■  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

>  '  *  ,  ..  .  .  -  ‘  '  ‘  -,V  ■  <  •  •  , .  1  \  'S  .  '  -v .  ,  ..t,  -V 

O^efolution  of the  i.Theoreme. 

Suppofe  that  a  cert  ay  ne  right  line  A  B  ,  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion 
in  the  point C.dnd  let  the  greater  fegment  thereof  be  A  C.  Then  I fay  that  the  fquares  of 
the  lines  A  B,and  B  C,are  treble  to  the fquare  of the  line  A  C.  For  forafmuch  as  the fquares 
of  the  lines  AB,  and  B  C,  are  treble  to  yhe fquare  of  the  line  AC,  but  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  A  B,and  B  C,are  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  A  B ,  and  B  C, twife  together  with  the. 
fquare  of  the  line  AC  (by  the  7 .  of the fecond )  Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  A  B,and  B  C,  twife,  together  with  the  fquare 

of  the  line  A  C,is  treble  to  the fquare  of  the  line  , _ _  ) 

A  C.  Wherefore,  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  ^  c  3 

the  lines  AB,^r  B  C, twife, is  double  to  the  fquare 

of  the  line  A  C .  Wherefore  th'M  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B,  and  B  C ,  once,  is 
equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C.  Andfo  it  is  in  deede .  For  theline  A  B  is  diuided  by  an 
extreme, and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  C. 

*  Compojltion  of  the  ^.Theoreme. 

Fohafnuch 'therefore  as the  line  AB ,  is  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meant  proportion 
in  the  p  oy  ritC,  and  the greater  fegment  thereof  is  the  line  A  C,therfore  that  which  is  contay - 
nedynder  the  lines  A  B, and  EC  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C.Wherfore  that  which 
is  cotaymd  vnderthe  lines  A  B,and  B  C  twife  is  double  to  the  fquare  of  A  C.Wherfore  that 
which  is  contayned  vnderthe  lines  A  B,and  B  C ,  twife,  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  line 
AC,.isjrehh  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C. But  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A- 
B,and  B  C, twife, together  with  the fquare  of the  line  A  C,is  the fquares  of  the  lines  A  B,and 
BC(  by  they  .of the fecond)  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  B,and  B  C,  are  treble  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  C:  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

~  j\  _■ 

(ppjolution  of  the  s.  Theoreme. 

S  tippofi  that  a  cert  dine  tight  line  AB ,  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion 
in  the  point  C .  And  let  the  greater  fegment  therof  be  the  line  A  C.  And  vnto  the  line  A  B, 
addea  line  equallto  the  line  C ,  and let the  fame  be  AD  .Then  Jfiy  that  the  line  D- 
B,is  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  A.  And  the  greater  fegment 
therof  is  the  line  A  B.  For  forafmuch  as  the  line  DB  is  diuided  by  an  extreme  &  meane  pro* 
portion  in  the  point  A, and  the  greater  jegment  thereof  is  the  line  A  B ,  therfore  as  the  line 
D  B,is  to  the  line  B  A,fo  is  the  kne  B- 

A,to  the  line  Ot D:  but  the  line  A  D  >  p  •  *  » '  "  -  'a  '  c  3 

is  equall  to  the  line  AC:  wherefore  as 


the 


the  line  D  B,is  to  the  line  B  Af&  is  the  line  B  A  to  the  line  A  C.Wherfore  by  conuerfo  a  f  the 
line  B  D  is  to  the  line  D  Afo  is  the  line  A  B  to  the  line  BC  (by  the  corollary  of  the  19.  of  the 
ffthfwherfore  by  dinifwnfy  the  1 7  .of the fifth  ,as  the  line  B  A, is  to  the  line  A  D  ,fo  is  the 
line  A  C,to  the  line  C  B. But  the  line  A  D  is  equal l  to  the  line  A  C.Wherfore  as  the  line  B  A, 
is  to  the  line  A  Cfo  is  the  line  AC  to  the  line  G  B.Andfo  it  is  indeedef'or  the  line  A  B  is,  by 
fuppofition,dimded  by  an  extreme  and  meane proportion  in  the  point  C. 

Cwipofkim  of  tlx  f.Theonme. 

Now for afmuch  as  the  line  A  B  ,  is  diuided  by  art  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the 
point  C:  therefore  as  the  line  B  A  is  to,  the  line  A  Cfo  is  the  line  AC  to  the  line  C  B:  but  the 
line  AC  tscqnallto  the  line  A  D  .Wherefore  as  the  line  B  A  is  to  the  line  AD  ,  foisthe  line 
AC  to  the  line  C  BWhcrfore  by  compofition  (by  the  tS.of the ffth  )as  the  line  B  D  ts  to  the 
line D  zjffo  is  the  line  A  B  to  the  tine  B  C.  Wherefore  by  comer fion  ( by  the  corollary  of  the 
1 9.  of thefueth )  as  the  line  D  B  is  to  the  line  B  ifd, fo  is  the  line  B  A  to  the  line  AC:  but  the 
line  C  is  equal!  to  the  line  A  D  .Wherefore  as  the  line  D  Bis  to  the  line  B  Afo  is  the  line 
B  A  to  the  line  AC.  Wherfore  thelint  D  B,  is  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion 
in  the  point  A  :  and  his  greater  fegment  is  the  line  AB  :  which  ms  required  to  be  demon* 
fi rated.  - 

yfn  AduifefylohntDeeyadded; 

CEmgjit  is  doubtelesjthat  this  parcel  of  Refolution  anil Compo/irkn,is'nbzol  Euclida  doyirg:  it  can  not 
^iuilly  be  imputed  to  £«c//^,that  he  hath,theihy  ,eyther  fuperfluicieorany  part  difproportioned  in 

, though  for  one  thing ,  one  good  demonlbation  well  fuffifeth: 
Corhablifhingof-thcvefitie:  yet, of  one  thing  diuerfly  demonftrated  :  to  the  diligent  examiner  of  the 
diuerfe  m'eanes,  By  which,  that  varietie  arifdth,  doth  grow  good  occafions  of  inuencing  demon- 
ftrations,  where  matter  is  more  llraunge,  harde,  and  barren  .Alfo, though  refolution  were  not  in  all 
Euclide  before  vfed :  yet  thankes  are  to  be  geuen  to  the  Greke  Scholie  writter,  who  did  leaue  both 
the  definition,  and  alfo,  fo  fliort  and  eafy  examplesof  a  Method,  foauncient,  and  fo  profitable. 


*  Proclusitt 
tb  t  Greece: 
in  the  58, 


j  > 


yy 


hauing  fpohen  of  fome  bv  nature,  excellent  in  inuenting  demonfirations ,  pithy  and  breiffayeth  :  Yet 
are  there  Methods  geuen  [for  that  purpdfe]  .Andin  dede,that,the  beft,which,by  Refolution,reduceth 
the  thin* inquired  ofjtOiSft’mdoubted  principle.WhkhMethod, Plato,  taught  Leodamas^asisn:* 
ported)&nd  heis  regilh  2d,  thereby, to  hauc  bene  the  inuenrer  of  many  things  in  Geometry. 

And,verely  jin  Problemes ,  ids  the  chief  ayde  for  winning  and  ordring  ademonftration  :  firftby 
S uppofi tion ,o]Tde  thing  inquired  of,  to  be  done  •  by  due  and  orderly  Refolution  to  bringitto  alb y; 
at  an  vndoubted  Wrkie .  Tn  whichpdim  of  Art  great  abundance  of  examples ,  are  to  be  feen  ,  in  that 
excellent  and.  mighty  M^hcmaticieniArchimedes  :  &in  his  expofitor,Hutocius,  in  Menschm  us  like- 
wile  ;and  in  Diocles  booke,de  Pytijs land  in  many  other.  And  now.  For  as  much  as,  onv  Euc/tde  in  the 
fall  fix  Propofitions  of  this  thirtenthbooke  propounded  ,  and  concluded  thofe  Problemes ,  which, 
were  the  ende,Scope,  and  principall  purpofe,to  which  all  the  premifies  of  the  11.  bookes,and  the  reft 
of  this  thirtenth,  are  direded  and  ordered; :  It  ftali  be  artificially  dope,and  to  a  great  commoduy,by 
Refolution  ,  backward  ,  from  thefeh.'Problemes ,  to  returne  fo  the  firlt  definition  of  the  firft  booketl 
meane3to  the  definition  of  a  point.  Which3is  nothing  hard  to  do. And  I  do  couniaile  ail  fuch3as  defire 
to  atteine  >  to  the  profound  knowledge  of  Geometric ,  Arithmcticke,  or  ariy  braunche  of  the  fcicaces 
Maihema'ucall ,  fo  by  Refolution ,  (difcreatlyand  aduifedly)  to  refoIue,vnlofe,  vnioyntand  difteauer 
euery  part  ofany  worke  Mathematicall,  that,  therby,  afwell,  the  due  placing  of  euery  venty ,  and  his 
proofe.-as  dlio,What  is  either  fuperfltious,6r  wanting,may  evidently appeare.For  fo  to  inuent,&  there 
with  to  ord'er  their  writings,  was  the  cuftome  of  them  3  who  in  the  old  time^were  nioii  excellent.  And 
I fformyoartlin  writingany  Mathematicall  conclufion,  which  required  great difeourfe,  atlength 
hauc  found,  (by  experience)  tire  commoditieofit/uch :  that  to  do  other  Wayes,were  to  mea  confu- 
kiln*  an  yndctllodicall  heaping  of  matter  together :  befides  the  difficulty  of  inuen  tihg  thedatter 
to  be  difpofed  and ordred.I  haue  occafion,thus  to  geue  you fnendely  aduife,for  your  behofe.-becaulc 
fome, oflate, hauc  inueyed  againft  Eucltdf, or  The«»  in  this  place,  otherwife  than  I  would  wim  they 

hade  •:>,  -v'  r~rrt  1 

•  ■  -  »•  ■  '  frut 


ofEuclides  Elementes. 

Theti.Tbeomne.  Tbeti.TropoJttion 

If  a  ration  all  right  line  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  means  proportion £ 
eyther  of  the  figments  ^  is  an  irrationall  line  of  that  kinds  pmhich  is  called 
a  refiduall  line . 


\ 


B 

— i 


Vppofe  that  AB ,  btyng  a  rationall  line  be  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meant 
proportion  in  the  point  C,and  lei  the  greater  fegment  thereof  be  A  C.  Then  1 
fay  that  eyther  of  the  lines  A  C  >  and  CB  ,is  an  irrationall  line  ofthatkinde, 
xmich  is  called  a  refiduall. Extend  the  line  A  B,to  the  point  D :  and  let  the  line 
A I), be  equall  to  halfe  of  the  line  A  B. 

Now for  as  much  as  the  right  line  A  B,is  D  ^  c 

diuided  by  an  extreme  dr  meane  proper- '  1  — ' —  "  — 1 — — ‘ - - 

tion  in  the  point  C,and  vnto  the  greater 
fegmet  AC  is  added  a  line  A  D, equall  to  the  halfe  of the  right  line  A  B:therfore(  by  the  i  .of 
thethirtenth)the  fquare  of  the  lineC  D,  is  quintuple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  D.  Where¬ 
fore  the fquare  of  the  line  C  D  ,hath  to  the fquare  of the  line  A  D ,  that  proportion  that  nuber 
hath  to  nuber  .Wherf ore  the fquare  of  the  line  C  D  is  comme fur  able  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
A  D  .But  the fquare  of  the  line  D  A  is  rational l,  for  the  line  D  A  is  rationall, forasmuch  as 
it  is  the  halfe  of  the  rationall  line  A  B .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  D,is  rationall. 
Wherefore  alfo  the  line  C  D,is  rationall  . And forafmuch  as  the fquare  of  the  line  C  D,hath 
not  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D  ,  that  proportion  that  a  fquare  number  hath  to  a  fquare 
number,  th  erf  ore  ( by  the  9  .of the  tenth )  the  line  C  D  ,is  incommen fur  able  in  length ,  to  the 
line  A  D .  Wherefore  the  lines  C  D ,  and  D  A  are  rationall  commenfurable  in  power  only » 
Wherfore  the  line  AC  is  a  refiduall  line,  by  the  7  3.  of  thetenth.  Againe ,  forafmuch  as  the 
line  A  B,is  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion, and  the  greater  fegment  thereof  is 
A  C,therfore  that  which  is  cotayned  vnder  the  lines  AB,&.BC,is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  C  .Wherefore  the  fquare  of the  line  A  C, apply  ed  to  the  rationall  line  A  B,  maketh  the 
bredth  B  C.  But  the  fquare  of  a  refiduall  line,  applyed  to  a  rationall  line  maketh  the  bredth 
afrtt  refiduall  line(by  the  97.  of  the  tenth)  .  Wherefore  the  line  C  B,  is  a  firft  refiduall 
line.  And  it  is  prouedthat  the  line  A  C,  is  alfo  a  ref  duall  line.  If  therefore  a  rationall  right 
line  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  py  oportion,either  of  the  ferments, is  an  irrationall 
line  of  that  kinds, which  is  called  a  refiduall  line, which  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 

A  Corollary  added  by  Campane. 

Hereby  it  is  manifefl ,  that  if  the  greater  fegment  be  a  rationall  line :  the  lefle  fegment  flialbe  a  reft- 
duall  line. 

For  if  the  greater  fegment  A  C,of  the  fight  line  A  C  B  be  diuided  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point 
Djthe  fquare  of  the  line  D  B,  fhalbe  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  C,  (by  the  3 .  of  this  booke.) 
And  forafmuch  as  the  line  C  D ,  (beyng  the  halfe  of  the 
rational!  line  fuppofed  A  C)  is  rationall  by  the  6.  defini¬ 
tion  of  the  tenth  r  And  vnto  the  fquare  of  the  lineDC,  A  t) 
the  fquare  of  the  line  D  B  is  commenfurable ,  (  for  it  is  *  "  — — — •* — 1 — •  ■■ 

quintuple  vnto  it )  wherfore  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  B; 
is  rationall.Wherfore  alfo  the  line  D  B  is  rationall.  And 

forafmuch  as  the  fquares  of  the  lines  D  B  &  D  C,are  not  in  proportion  as  a  fquare  nuber  is  to  a  fquare 
number :  therefore  the  lines  D  B  and  D  C  are  incommenfurable  in  length  (  by  the  9.  of  the  tenth.) 
Wherefore  they  are  commenfurable  in  power  only  i  Wherefore  by  the  73 .  of  the  tenth3  the  line  B  C} 
which  is  the  leffe  fegment.is  a  refiduall  line. 

T  he  7 .T  heoreme.  The  7  fPropofltion * 

If  an  equilater  Tetagon  ham  three  of  his  angles  whether  they follow  in  or * 

LLl.i.  der, 


B 

—t 


CofitfrttSlioKt 

Vemonftra * 
tion • 

y 


Two  cafe sin ' 
this  prepofi- 
tiau» 

Conttruftwu 
The  fir  ft  ea fe. 
Demonstra¬ 
tion* 


ThefeconS. 

cafe* 


The  thirtenth  Hooke 

der}  or  not  in  order ?  e  quail  the  one  to  the  other :  that  Pentagon jhalbe  equi* 
angle.  ‘  •■> 

Vppofe  that  A  B  C  D  E ,  be  an  equilater  pentagon .  ^And  let  the  angles  of  the 
fiayd  Pentagon ,  namely  ,frjl ,  three  angles  flowing  in  order,  which  are  at  the 
points  A,B,C,be  equal  the  one  to  the  other. Then  I fay  that  the  Pentagon  ABC - 
D  E  is  equiangle.Draw  thefe  right  lines  A  C,B  E,  and  F  D.  Now  forafmuch  as 
thefe  two  lines  C  B,  and  B  A,  are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  B  A, and  A  E,  the  one  to  the  other , 
and  the  angle  C  B  Ais  equalltoth'e  angle  B  AE  .-therefore  (by  the  4.  ofthefrf )  the  bafe  A- 
C  is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  E,and  the  triangle  A  B  C  is  equall  to  the  triangle  A  B  E,and  the  ref 
of  the  angles  are  equal  to  the  ref  of  the  angles,  <vnder 
which  are fnbtended  equall fides.  Wherefore  the  an¬ 
gle  BC  Ais  equall  to  the  angle  BE  A,  and  the  angle 
A  B  E  to  the  angle  CAB.  Wherefore  alfo  the  fide  A- 
F,is  equall  to  the fide  B  F  ( by  the  6.  ofthefrf) .  And 
it  was  proued  that  the  whole  line  A  C  is  equal  to  the 
whole  line  BE  Wherefore  the  rcfidue  C  F  is  equall  to 
the  refidue  FE.And  the  line  CD, is  eqmall  to  the  line 
D  E.  Wherefore  thefe  two  lines  F  C,  and  C  D  are  e- 
quall  to  hefe  two  lines  F  E,and  ED, and  the  bafe  F- 
Djis  common  to  them  both.  Wherefore  the  angle  F- 
C  D,  is  equall  to  the  angle  FED  (by  the  8.  of  the 
fir ji)  .  And  it  is  proued  that  the  angle  h  C  A, is  equal 
to  the  angle  A  E  B.  Wherefore  the  whole  angle  BC  D  is  equall  to  the  whole  angle  A  E  D.  But 
the  angle  B  C  D ,  is  fnppo fed  to  be  equall  to  the  angles  A ,  and  B.  Wherefore  the  angle  A  E- 
D,  is  equall  to  the  angles  A  and  B.  In  like fort  alfo  may  we  proue  that  the  angle  CD  E ,  is 
equall  to  the  angles  A^and  B  Wherefore  the  Pentagon  ABCDEis  equiangle. 

But  now  fuppofe  that  three  angles ,  which  folow  not  in  order ,  be  equall  the  one  to  the  0 - 
ther, namely, let  the  angles  A,< C,D, be  equall.  Then  I  fay  that  in  this  cafe  alfo  the  Pentagon 
ABCDEis  equiangle.Draw  a  right  line from  the  point  B,to  the  point  D  .Now forafmuch 
as  thefe  two  lines  B  A, and  A  E,are  equall  to  thefe  two  lines  BC,  and  C  D,  and  they  compre- 
bende  equall  angles, therefore  (by  the  4.ofthe firPt  )  the  bafe  BE ,  is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  D. 
And  the  triangle  A  BE,  is  equall  to  the  triangle  B  D  C,and  the  reft  of  the  angles  are  equall 
to  the  ref  of the  angle  sender  which  are fubt  ended  equall fdes :  wherefore  the  angle  A  E  B, 
is  equalltothe  angle  CDB. And  the  angle  BE  D , is  equall  to  the  angle  B  D  E,  (by  the  s -of 
the  fir f) for  the fide  BE, is  equall  to  the  fide  B  D  Wherefore  the  whole  angle  A  ED,  is  equal 
to  the  whole  angle  C  D  E.But  the  angle  C  D  E ,  is  fuppofed  to  be  equall  to  the  angles  A ,  and 
C.  Wherefore  the  A  ED, is  equall  to  the  angles  A, and  C.And  by  the  fame  reafon  alfo  the  an¬ 
gle  A  BC,is  equall  to  the  angles  A,  C,and  D  .Wherefore  the  Pentagon  ABCDEis  equian- 
gle  .If therefore  an  equilater  Pentagon  haue  three  of  his  angles, whither  they follow  in  order , 
or  not  in  order ,  equall  the  one  to  the  other :  that  Pentagon  jhalbe  equiangle :  which  was  re- 

\ 

The  8.  Trobleme.  The  8.  Tropo/ition. 

If  in  an  equilater  W  equiangle  fetagon  two  right  lines  do  fuhtend  two  of 
the  angles  following  in  order:thofe  lines  doo  diuide  the  one  the  other  by  an 
extreme  and  meane  proportiomand  the  greater  fegments  of thofe  lines  are 
ech  equall  to  the  fide  of  the  Pentagon. 

Suppofe 


quired  to  be  proued . 


A 


of Euclides  Elemmtes. 


Folqpp. 


]  FpPofe  that  AB  C  D  E  bean  equilater  and  equ  tangle  Pentagon .  And  let  two 
right  lines  A  C,and  B  Efubtend  the  two  angles  A, and  B, which  follow  in  order. 

MhXg  \4ftd  let  them  cut  the  one  the  other  in  the  point  H .  T  hen  1  fay  that  either  of 
-N  thofe  lines  is  di  aided  by  an  extreme  &  meane proport  io  in  the  point  H:  And  that 
eche  of the  greater  fegments  of  thofe  lines  are  equal  to  the  fide  cf the  Pentagon .  Circumfcribe 
(by  the  i4.ofthefourth)about  the  Pentago  A  B  C  D  E,a  circle  A  B  C  D  E.Andforafmuch  CorflrnEion* 
as  thefe  two  right  lines  E  A, and  A  Byre  equallto  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  ,  andB  C  ,  and  Bemonflra* 
they  contayne  e quail  angles:  therefore  (by  the  4.  of  tton' 

the  frfc)the  bafe  B  E,is  1  qual  to  the  bafe  A  C.  and  the 
triangle  A  B  Efts  e quail  to  the  triangle  A  B  Gywd  the 
angles  remay ning ,  are  equal l  to  the  angles  remay - 
»yng ,  the  one  to  the  ether ,  render  which  are  fab - 
tended equall fides .  Wherefore  the  angle  B  AC,  is 
e quail  to  the  angle  A  B  E.Wherfore  the  angle  A  H  E 
is  double  to  the  angle  BAH ,  (by  the  32.  of  the frf ) 
for  it  is  an  outward angle  of  the  triangle  A  B  H .  And 
the  angle  E  AC  is  double  to  the  angle  BAG  (  by  the 
la  ft  of  the  fixtb ) .  For  the  circumference  EDCis  dou¬ 
ble  to  the  circumference  C  B .  Wherefore  the  angle  H- 
A  E  is  equall  to  the  angle  AH  E  .  Wherefore  alfo  the 
right  line  H  E ,  is  (  by  the  6 .  of  the  frf  )  equallto  the 

right  line  E  A ,  that  is  to  the  line  A  B .  Andforafnuchas  the  right  line  B  A  is  equall  to  the 
right  line  A  E ,  therefore  the  angle  A  B  E  is  equall  to  the  angle  A  EB .  But  it  is  proued  that 
the  angle  A  B  E  is  equal  to  the  angle  B  A  H:  wheref  ore  alfo  the  angle  B  E  A  is  equall  to  the 
angle  B  A  H.^yindin  the  two  triangles  <^A  B  Eynd  <^A  BHjhe  angle  A  BE  is  common  to 
them  hotbqwherefore  the  angle  remay  ning,  namely ,  B  A  E  is  equall  to  the  angle  remay ninq, 
namely, to  A  HB(by  the  corollary  of  the  3  2. of  the first )  .  Wherforcthe  triangle  A  B  J?,  is  e- 
quiangleto  the  triangle  A  B  H  .Wherefore proportionally  as  the  line  E  B  ^  is  to  the  line  B  Ay 
fo  is  the  line  A  B  to  the  line  B  H(by  the  4. of  the  f  nth  ) .  But  the  line  B  A  is  equall  to  the  line 
E  H  Wherefore  as  the  line  B  E  is  to  the  line  E  If  fo  is  the  line  EH  to  the  line  H  B  .  But  the 
line  B  E  is  greater  then  the  line  B  A  .-wherefore  the  line  E II 5  alfo  is  greater  then  theline  H- 
B  .Wherefore  the  line  B  Ejs  diuided by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  H  (by 
the  3  .diffnition  of  the fxth)and  his  greater fegment  E  H  is  equall  to  the fide  of  the  Penta¬ 
gon  .In  like  fort  alfo  may  we  proue  that  the  line  A  C  isdiuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  pro - 
portion  in  the  point  H,and. that  his  greater  fegment  C  H,  is  equall  to  the  fide  efthe  Penta¬ 
gon.,,  (For  the  whole  line  A  C  is  equallto  the  whole  line  B  E./md  it  hath  bene  proued  that  the 
farts  taken  away  B  H^and  A  H  are  equall wh  erf  ore  the  ref  due  CH  is  equall  to  the  ref  due 
E  PIf  by  the  1  $  .of the  fifth)  .if therefore  in  an  equilater  and  equiangle  Pentagon  two  right 
lines  Jo  fubfend  two  oft  he  angles  following  in  order:  thofe  lines  doo  diuide  the  one  the  ci¬ 
ther  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion :  and  the  greater  fegments  of  thofe  lines  are  eche 
equal  to  the  fide  of  the  Pentagon:  which  was  required  to  be  demonfi rated. 


T  he  9. Theorems.  T  he  p/Propofition. 

If  the fide  of an  equilater  hexagon  }and  the fide  of  an  equilater  decagon  or 
teangled figure  flinch  both  are  mferibed  in  one  &  thefelfe fame  circle 3  be 
added  together :  the  whole  right  line  made  of  them  is  a  line  dmided  by  an 
extreame  and  meane  proportion ,  and  the  greater  fegment  of  the  fame  is 

LLl.fi  tk 


the  fide  of  the  hexagon. 


Coti  Strutt  ion. 


Vtmonji  ra¬ 
tion. 


Vppofe  that  there  be  a  rirdc  ABC.  \Jftod  let  the fide  of  a  decagon  or  tenangled 
figure  infcribed in  the  circle  A  B  CfieB  C,and  let  the fide  of  an  hexagon  or  fixe 
angled  figure  infcribed  in  the fame  circle  fie  C  D  .And  let  the  lines  B  C  and  CD 
be  fo  ioyned  together  directly  that  they  both  make  one  right  line,  namely ,  B  D . 
Then  I  fay  that  the  lineB  D  is  diuided  by  an  cxtreame 
and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  C.and  that  the  greater 
fegmettherofis  the  line  CD.T ake(by  the  i .of  the  third) 
the  centre  of the  circle.  And  let  it  be  the  point  E:  and  draw 
thefe  right  lines  E  B,E  C,  and  E  D  .  And  extend  the  line 
BE  to  the  point  A.Nowforafmuch  as  BC  is  the fide  of  an  B 
equilater  decagon, therefore  the  circumference  or  femicir - 
cle  A  C  Bis  quintuple  to  the  circumference  C  B .  Where¬ 
fore  the  circumference  AC  is  quadruple  to  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  C  B .  But  as  the  circumference  A  C  is  to  the  circum¬ 
ference  C  B,fois  the  angle  AEC  to  the  angle  CEB, by  the 
lafi  of the fixth  .  Wherefore  the  angle  A  EC  is  quadruple 
to  the  angle  CEB.  And forafnuch  as  the  angle  EBCis 
squall  to  the  angle  EC  B(by  the  5. of thefirfi,)for  the  line 
E  B  is  equall  to  the  line  E  Cfiy  the  definition  of  a  circle,  therefore  the  angle  A  EC  is  double 
to  the  angle  E  C  B,  by  the  3  2.  of thefirfi.  Andforafmuch  as  the  right  line  E  C  is  e  quail  to  the 
right  line  C  D  fiy  the  corollary  of  the  is -of  the fourth  ( for  either  of them  is  equallto  the fide 
of the  hexagon  infcribed  in  the  circle  A  B  C)  therefore  the  angle  C  ED  is  equall  to  the  angle 
CD  E  .wherefore  the  angle  EC  B  is  double  to  the  angle  E  D  Cfiy  the  32.ofthefirfi.But  it  is 
proued  that  the  angle  AECis  double  to  the  angle  EC  B,  wherefore  the  angle  A  E  C  is  qua¬ 
druple  to  the  angle  ED  C.  And  it  is  proued  that  the  angle  AEC  is  quadruple  to  the  angle 
B  E  C. Wherefore  the  angle  E  D  C  is  equallto  the  angle  BE  C.  Andthe  angle  E  B  D  is  com¬ 
mon  to  the  two  triangles  B  EC  and  BED :  wherefore  the  angle  remay  ning  BED  is  equall 
to  the  angle  remayning  E  C  Bfiy  the  corollary  of  the  32.  of  thefirfi .  Wherefore  the  triangle 
EBDis  equiangle  to  the  triangle  E  BC.Wherf ore, by  the+.ofthe fixt, proportionally, as  the 
line  BD  is  to  the  line  B  E,  fo  is  the  line  B  E  to  the  line  B  C .  But  the  line  E  B  is  equallto  the 
line  C  D .  Wherefore  as  the  line  B  D  is  tothcD  C ,  fo  is  the  line  DC  to  the  line  C  B .  But  the 
line  B  D  is  greater  then  the  line  D  C :  wherefore  alfo  the  line  D  C  is  greater  then  the  line  C- 
B.  Wherefore  the  right  line  B  D  is  diuided  by  an  cxtreame  and  meane  proportion  in  the 
point  C:  and  his  greater fegment  is  DC,  If therefore  the  fide  of an  equilater  hexagon ,  and 
the  fide  of  an  equilater  decagon  or  tenangled  figure,  which  both  are  infcribed  in  one  and  the 
felfe fame  circle, be  added  together  -the  whole  right  line  made  of  them,  is  a  line  diuided  by  an 
cxtreame  and  meane  proportion, and  the  greater  fegment  of  the fame  is  the  fide  of the  hexa¬ 
gon:  which  was  requiredto  be  proued.  ; 


This  Corollary 
is  she  ipropo- 
fitocniftbe 

1  ^.booke  af* 
ter  I  amp  me. 


A  C  orollary  added  by  Flufias. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  fide  of  an  exagon  infcribed  in  a  circle  being  cut  by  an  extreame  and 
meane  proportion ,  the  greater  fegment  thereof  is  the  fide  of  the  decagon  infcribed  in  the  feme  circle. 
For  if  from  the  right  line  D  C  be  cut  of  a  right  line  equall  to  the  line  C  B ,  we  may  thus  reafon ,  as  the 
whole  D  B  is  to  the  whole  D  C ,  fo  is  the  part  taken  away  D  C  to  the  part  taken  away  C  B  :  wherefore 
by  th?  19. of  the  fifth,  the  refidue  is  to  the  refidue  as  the  whole  is  to  the  whole .  Wherefore  theline  D- 
C  is  cutte  like  vino  the  line  D  B  :and  therefore  is  cut  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion. 

Campane 


of Suclides  Elementes.  FoU^  oo. 

Crnpane  putteth  the  conuerfe  of this  proportion  after 

this  maner. 

';1'  -  *  '  v  ‘  »  iv  wi.  vA  \J  -1  .  ‘  A 

If  U  line  be  Maided  by  an  extreme  and  frieane  proportion  jf\hhxt  circle  t be greater  figment  is  the 
fide  of  an  eqtulater  Hexagon,  of  thcfamcjhall  the  lejfi figment  be  the  fide  of  an  eqailater  Decagon  , 
jind  of vp  hat  circle  the  lefie figment  is  the  fide  of  an  equilater  Decagon  ,of  the fame  it  the  greater  fig¬ 
ment  the  fide  of  an  equ  Hater  Hexagon. 


DemonHta- 
Um  cfthe 
firil  part* 


Demonftrati- 
on  of  theje . 
cond  part* 


Conjlruttkn* 


Dcm  :njlr4- 
tfon. 


e 

being  aUidi^ihedfin'^^hMjffilfi’J^e  Ztrfk. 

<  i  AX  J  '  \*  ,  k  J  JtHl  . 

Fppofe  that  ABC  D  E  be  a  circle .  x^And  in  the  circle  ABC  D  E  defcribe  (  by 
the  II  .ofthefourthfa  pentagon  figure  ABC  D E.T  hen  I  fay ,  that  the  fide  of 
phe  pentagon  figure  A  BCDE  containeth  in  power  both  the fide  of  an  hexagon 
figure  i  and  of  a  decagon  figure,  being  defcribed  in  the  circle  ABC D  E  .  T  ake 
(  by  the  i .  of  the  third )  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  let  the  fame  be  F .  And  drawing  a  right 
line from  the  point  A  to  the  point  f,  extend  it  to  the  point  G .  And  dr  awe  a  right  line  from 
the  point  E  to  the  point  B .  And from  the  point  F  drawe  (by  the  12  .of the first )  vnto  the  line 
A  B  apei'pendicular  line  F  H and  extend  it  to  the  point  K  .  And  drawe  the  right  lines  A  K 
and  K  B  And  dgaine,  from  the  point  F  draw  (by  the fame)  <vnto  the  line  A  K,  a  perpendi¬ 
cular  line  F  N..:  and  extend  F  N  to  the  point  M,  which  line  let  cut  the  line  A  B  in  the  point 
L  .  An  f  draw  a  right  line  from  the 
point  fi  to  the  point  L  .  Now  for af- 
much  as  the  circumference  ABCG  is 
equall  to  the  circumference  A  E  D  G, 
of  which  the  circumference  A  B  C  is 
equal l  to  the  circumference  A  E  D, 
fiber  fore  the  r ell  of  the  circumference, 
namely  fid  G,  is  equall  to  the  reft  of  the 
■> circumference ,  namely,  to  D  G  .  But 
the  circunfifeienceC  D  is  fubtknded  of 
the  fide  of  a  pentagon  :  Wherefore  the 
-circumference  C  G  is fubtended  of the 
fide  of  a  decagon  figure' .  And  foraf- 


... 

fir  thcangiesat  The  point  H  lire  right ;  ■- 
ang^s^W'heieforefbythe'firdflhe-Wa’- 
fir  si )  the  angle  A  F  K  is  equall  to  the  angle  K  F  B.  Wherefore  alfio  ( by  the  26. of  the  third) 
the  circumference  A  K,is  equall  to  the  circumference  K  B. Wherefore  thceircumference  A  B 
is  double  to  the  circumference  BK  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  A  K  is  the  fide  of  a  decagon  fi¬ 
gure.  And  by  the  fame  reef  on  alfo  the  circumference  A  I<  is  double  to  the  circumference  K  M. 
find  far  a fm  rich  as  the  circumference  A  Bis  double,  to  the  circumference  BBC,  but  the  cir¬ 
cumference  C  D  is  equall  to  the  circumference  A  B  ;  wherefore  the  circumference  C  D  is 
double  to  the  circumference  B  K .  But  the  circumference  CD  is-  double  to  the  circumference 
C  G ;  wherefore  the  circumference  C  G  is  equall  to  the  circumference  B  K ,  But  the,  cir.cum »■ 
ferenceB  K  is  double  to  the  circumference  K  M  ( for  that  the  circumference  IC  A  is  double 
thereupto  )  •  wherefore  alfo  the  circumference  ,C'G is  double  f fit  he  citcubfferjfictigyM .  But 
the  circumference  C  Bis  alfo  double  to  the  circumference  B  &  ( for  the  circumference  C  B  is 
equall  to  ilecirctimferenceB  A  )  .Wherefore  the  whole  circumference  G  Bis  double to  the 
whole  circumference  B  M ,  by  the  1 2. of  the  f ft .  Wherefore  alfo  the, angle  G  F  B  is  double  to 
the  angle  B  F  M,  by  the  laft  of the fiy^.f^tfegfig^f^kisfimble  to  the  angle F  AB(by 
the  3  fi.of  thefirft,  or  20. of  the  third  )  .For  the  angle  F  AB  is  equall  to  the  angle  A  B  F, 
Wherefore  theangleBF  Lisgquqlltpthe  angle  F  A}B ,hy  the j$,  of thefift .  And  the  angle 
A  B  F  is  common  to  the  two  triangles  ABF  and  B  F  L  .  Wherefore  (  by  the  Corollary  of the 


of  Sue  tides  Element es.  FoL  4  ©  J. 

the  right  line  B  L  therefore  thatwhich  is  contained 'under  the  lines  A  B  and  BL  is  equall 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  F,by  the  1 7. of  the fixt,  J game  for afmuch  as  the  line  A  Lis  equall 
to  the  line  L  K  C for  by  the  lafi  of the  fix  t, the  angle  K  F  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  A  F  L, which 
equall  angles  are  contained < vnder  the  lines  F  K,F  L,and  F  A,F  L,fjj  the  line  F  K  is  equall 
to  the  line  F  A,  and  the  line  F  L  is  common  to  them  both  .  Wherefore,  by  the  4.  of  thefirfi , 
the  line  A  L  is  equall  to  the  line  L  K~\  and  the  line  L  N  is  common  to  them  both,  efi  maketh 
right  angles  at  the  point  N,  and  {by  the  3.  of  the  third  )  the  bafe  2 \js  equall  to  the 
bafe  K  N.  Wherfore  alfo  the  angle  LK  N  is  equall  to  the  angle  L  A  N.But  the  angle  LAN 
is  equall  to  the  angle  K  B  L  (by  the  5.  of the firsi )  .  Wherefore  the  angle  LK  N  is  equall  to 
the  angle  I<  B  L  .  And  the  angle  K  A  Lis  common  to  both  the  triangles  A  K  B  and  A  I(  L. 
Wherefore  the  angle  remaining  A  K  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  remay  ning  A  L  K  (by  the  Corol¬ 
lary  of  the  y  2.0 f thefirfi ) .  Wherefore  the  triangle  K  B  A  is  equiangle  to  the  triangle  K  L  A . 
Wherefore(by  the  4-ofthe  fixt )  proportionally  as  the  right  line  B  A  is  to  the  right  line  A  I<, 
foisthe  fame  right  line  K  A  to  the  right  line  A  L.  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder 
the  lines  BA  and  A  Lis  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  K  (by  the  iy. of  the  fixt).  And  it  is 
proued  that  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  L,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  B  F.  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  A  B  &  B  L  together  with  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  BA  and  A  L  ( which  by  tbe  2. of the fecond,is  the fquare  of  the  line  BA) 
is  equall  to  the fquarcs  of  the  lines  A  F  and  A  I<  .But  the  line  B  A  is  the fide  of  the  pentagon 
figure,  and  A  F  the  fide  of  the  hexagon figure  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  is -of the fourth),  and 
A  K  the fide  of  the  decagon  figure .  Wherefore  the  fide  of  a  pentagon  figure,  containeth  in 
power  both  the  fide  of  an  hexagon  figure,  and  of  a  decagon  figure,  being  aejfcribed  all  in  one 
and  the felfe fame  circle :  which  was  required  to  be  demonfirated. 

cy  A  Corollary  added  by  Fluff  as. 

cN  perpendicular  line  from  any  angle  draveen  to  the  bafe  of  a  pentagon,pajfeth  by  the  centre . 

For  If  we  drawe  a  right  line  from  the  poynt  A  to  the  poynt  C ,  and  an  otherfrom  the  poynt  A  to 
the  point  D  :  thofe  right  lines  fhail  be  equality  the  4.of  the  firft :  and  therefore  in  the  triangle  A  C  D 
the  angles  at  the  points  C  and  D,are  by  the  /.of  the  firll3equall.But  the  angles  made  at  the  point  where 
the  line  A  G  cutteth  the  line  C  D,  are  by  fuppofition  right  angles  :  wherefore  by  the  z6.  of  the  firft,the 
line  CD  is  by  the  line  AG  diuided  into  two  equall  partes  ^  and  it  is  alfo  diuided  perpendicularly: 
wherefore  by  the  corollary  of  the  firft  of  the  third  in  the  line  A  G  is  the  centre  of  the  circle :  and  there¬ 
fore  the  line  A  G  paffeth  by  the  centre. 

yjT  he  1  i.Theoreme.  T  he  1  ifPropofition. 

If  in  a  circle  hatting  a  rationall  line  to  his  diameter  be  inferibed  an  eqnila* 
ter  pent  agomthe  fide  of  the  pentagon  is  an  irrational!  line  3  and  is  of  that 
kinde  which  is  called  a  lefie  line. 


Fppofe  that  in  the  circle  A  B  CD  E  hauing  a  rationall  line  to  his  diameter  be 
inferibed  a  pentagon  figure  A  B  C  D  E.T hen  I fay  that  the fide  of the  pentagon 
figure  AB  CD  E, namely, the fide  A  B,is  an  irrational  line  of  that  kinde  which 
is  called  a  leffe  line.T ake(hy  the  1 .  of  the  third )  the  centre  of  the  circle ,  and  let 
thefame  be  the  point  F ,  and  draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  F, and  an  other 
from  the  point  F  to  the  point  B,  and  extend  thofe  lines  to  thepointes  G  and  FI .  And  draw  a 
right  line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  C .  And from  the femidiameter  F  H  take  the  fourth 
part  (by  the  9  .of the fixt)  and  let  the  fame  be  F  K :  But  the  line  F  H  is  rationall  (for 
that  it  is  the  half e  of  the  diameter  which  is  fuppofed  to  be  rationall)  ,  wherefore  alfo  the 

line 


ConilrukUon. 


line  F  K  is  rational!:  And  the  tine  or femidiameter  B  F  is  rationall.Wherefore  the  whole  line 
B  K  is  ration all.  And for afmuch  as  the  circumference  AC  G  is  equall  to  the  circumference 
A  D  G,of  which  the  circumference  ABC  is  equall  to  the  circumference  A  E  D ,  wherefore 
the  ref  due  CG  is  equall  to  the  ref  due  G  D  .  Now  if we  dr  awe  a  right  tine  from  the 'point  A 
to  the  point  D  }it  is  manifef  that  the  angles  ALC  and  A  LD  are  right  angles.  Forforaf 
much  as  the  cmumference  C  Gis  equal l  to  the  circumference  G  D ,  therefore  (  bfthe  lafi  of 
the  fixlh)  the  angle  C  A  Cis  equall  to  the- angle  D  A  G.And  the  line  A  C  is  equall  to,  the  line 
A  Dyfor  that  the  circumferences  which  they fubtmd are  equall ,and  the  line  AL  is  common 
to  them  both  ,  therefore  there  are  two  lines  A  C  and  A  L  equall  totwo  tines  A  D  and  A  L, 
and  the  angle  C  A  Lis  equall  to  the  angle  DAL.  Wherefore  (by  the  4.  of the first )  the  bafe 
C  L  is  equall  to  the  bafe  L  D ,  and  the  nit  of  the  angles  to  the  ref  of  the  angles  ,  and  the 
tine  C  D  is  double  to  the  tine  C  L  .  ^ylnd  by  the  fame  reafon  may  it  be  p roued,that  the  an¬ 
gles  at  the  point  M  are  right  angles, and  that  the  tine  A  C  is  double  to  the  line  C  M.Now for - 
afmuch  as  the  angle  ALC  is  equallto  the  angle  A  M  F for  that  they  are  both  right  angles , 
and  the  angle  LACis  common  to  both  the  triangles  ALC  and  A  M  F:  wherefore  the  an¬ 
gle  remaynwg,n4mdy,  A  C  L,is  equal  to  the  angle  remay  ning  A  F  M,by  the  corollary  of  the 
3  2. of  the frf.  Wherefore  the  triangle  AC  Lis  equiangle  to  the  triangle  A  M  F.  Wherefore 
proportionally  jby  the  4. of thefixtb^s  the  line  L  Css  to  the  line  C  A, fo  is  the  tine  M  F  to  the 
tine  F  A.  And  in  the  fame  proportion  alfo  are  the  doubles  of the  antecedents  L  C  and  MF  (by 
the  15. of  the  fifth)  Wherefore  as  the  double  of  the  tine  L  Cis  to  the  line  C  A,  fo  is  the  double 
of  the  line  M  F  to  the  line  F  A  .But  as  the  double  of the  line  M  F  is  to  the  line  F  A,  fo  is  the 
line  MiF  to  the  k#lfe  of  the  line  F  A, by  the  1  $  .of the fifth, wherefore  as  the  double  of  the  line 
L  Cis  to  the  tine  C  Afo  is  the  line  M  F  to  the  halfe  of  the  tine  FA, by  the  n.of the  fifth .  And 
in  the  fame  proportion  Jby  the  15. of  the  fifth, are  the  halues  of  the  confequents,, namely,  of C  A 
and  of  the  halues  of the  tine  A  F  Where fore  as  the  double  of  the  line  L  Cis  to  the  halfe  of the 
line  A  C,fo  is  the  tine  M  F  to  the  fourth  part  of  the  line  F  A .  But  the  double  of the  line  L  C 
is  the  line  D  C,and  the  halfe  of  the  tine  C  A  is  the  line  C  M,as  hath  before  bene  proved,  and 
the  fourth  part  of the  line  F  A  is  the  line  F  K  ( for  the  line  F  K  is  the  fourth  part  of  the  line- 
F  H  by  confiruchon)  Wherfore  as  the  line  D  C  is  to  the  tine  C  Mfo  is  the  tine  MF  to  the  line 
F  K  Wherfore  bycompofition(  by  the  1 8 .  of  the fifth )  as  both  the  tines  DC  and  C  M  are  to  the 
line  C  Mfo  is  the  whole  tine  MK to  the  tine  F  K. 

Wherefore  alfo  (  by  the  2 2.  of  the  fixt)  as  the 
fquares  of  the  tines  D  C  and  CM  are  to  the  fquare 
of  the  tine  C  M ,  foisthe  fquare  of  the  line  M  K 
to  the fquare  of  the  tine  F  K .  And for  afmuch  as 
(by  the  8. of  the  thirtenth)  a  line  which  is fubten- 
ded  vnder  two fides  of  a  pentagonfgure  7  as  is  the 
tine  A  C,  being  divided  by  an  extreame  dr  means 
proportion ,  the  greater  figment  is  equall  to  the 
fide  of  the  pent  agon  figure ,  that  is,  vnto  the  line 
D  C:and  (by  the  1.  of the  thirtenth  )  the  greater 
figment  hauing  added  •vnto  it  the  halfe  of  the 
whole,  is  in  power  quintupled  the  fquare  made 
of  the  halfe  of  the  whole :  and  the  halfe  of  the 
whole  tine  A  C  is  the  line  C  M .  Wherefore  the  fquare  that  is  made  of  the  lints  JD  C  and 
C  M,  that  is,  of  the  greater figment  and  of  the  halfe  of  the  whole, as  of  one  line, is  quintuple 
to  the  fquare  of  the  tine  C  M,that  is ,  of  the  halfe  of  the  whole. But  as  the fquare  made  of  the 
lines  D  C  and  CM  ,as  of  one  tine, is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  CM  ,fo  is  itproued,  that  the 
fquare  of  the  line  M  I<  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  K.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  tine  M- 
K  is  quintuple  to  the fquare  of the  tine  F  K  .  But  the  fquare  of  the  tine  K  F  is  rat  ion  all,  as 


A 


ofSuclides  Elemerites ;■  Fohfy  e£* 

hath  before  bene  proved,  wherefore  alfo  the f quart  of  the  line  M  K  is  rationality,  the  p  Jiff * 
nition  of  the  tenth ) ,  for  the fquare  of  the  line  M  K  hath  to  thefquare  of  the  line  K  F  that 
proportion  that  number ,  hath  to  number ,  namely ,  that  $•  hath  to  i .  and  therefore  the  fayd 
fqmr.es  are  commenfurable, by  the  6 .  of  the  tenth )  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  M  K  is  rationall. 
And  for aj much  as  the  line  B  F  is  quadruple  to  the  UneF  K  (for  the  femidiameter  BF  is  equal 
to  the  femidiameter  F  B),  therfore  the  line  B  K  is  quintuple  to  the  line  F  K .  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of  the  line  B  K  is  2S-  times  fo  much  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  K  F,by  the  corollary  of 
the  20  of  the  fixt .  But  the fquare  of  the  line  M  K  ,is  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of the  F  K,as  is 
proved  When  fore  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  K  is  quintuple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  K  M.Wher- 
forey fquare  of  the  line  B  Kjoath  not  toy  fquare  of the  line  K  M,that  proportwthat  a  fquare 
number  hath  to  a fquare  number, by  the  corollary  of  the  2s.ofthe  eight  Wherefore  (by  the  p . 
of  the  tenth  )  the  line  B  K  is  incomrnenfurablein  length  to  the  line  JC  M ,  and  either  of the 
lines  is  rationall .  Wherefore  the  lines  B  K  and  K  Mare  rationall  commenfurable  in  power 
onely.But  if  fro  a  rationall  line  be  taken  away  a  rationall  line  being  commenfurable  in  power 
onely  to  the  whole,  that  which  remayneth  is  irrationall,and  is  (by  the  y$.  of  the  tenth )  cal¬ 
led  a  refiduall  line  Wherefore  the  line  MB  is  a  refidudU  line.  <Wnd  the  line  conueniently  ioy - 
ned  vntoit,  is  the  line  M  K.  Now  I  fay  that  the  ImrJ M  is  a  fourth  refiduall  line .  ■ Vnto  the 
exceffe  of  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  K  aboue  the  fqMre  of  the  line  K  M ,  let  thefquare  of  the 
line  N  be  e quail ( which  exceffe  how  to  fnde  out,ts  taught  in  the  affumpt put  after  the  i $  .pro- 
f  option  of  the  tenth  )  .  Wherefore  the  lineBK  is  in  power  more  then  the  line  K  M  by  the 
fquare  of  the  line  N.  ind forafmuch  as  the  line  K  F  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line 
F  Bfor  it  is  the fourth  part  thereof,  therefore  (by  the  id. of the  tenth  )  the  whole  line  K  B  is 
commenfurable  in  length  to  the  line  F  B.But  the  UneF  B  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the 
line  B  H, namely,  the  femidiameter. to  the  diameter :  wherefore  the  line  B  K  is  commenfura¬ 
ble  in  length  to  the  line  B  B,  by  the  12.  of  the  tenth .  And forafmuch  as  the fquare  of  the  line 
B  Ids  quintuple  to  the fquare  of the  line  K  CM,  therefore  thefquare  of  the  line  B  K  hath  to 
the  fquare  of  the.  line  K  'CM  that  proportion  thatfue  hath  to  one .  Wherefore  by  conuerfon 
of  proportion  (by  the  corollary  of  the  19 .  of  the  fifth)  the fquare  of B  K  hath  to  thefquare  of 
the  line  N,that  proportion  thatfue  hath  to fower.-Jr  therfore  it  hath  not  that  proportio  that 
a fquare  number  hath  to  a fquare  number, by  the  corollary  of  the  2$. of the  eight .  Wh  erf  ore, 
the  Urn  B  ICis  incomrnenfurablein  length  to  the  line  N  (by  the  p.  of  the  tenth)  W her  fore  the 
fine  B  K  is  in pHvermore  then  the  line  I<  CM ,  by  the  fquare  of  aline  incommenfurable in- 
length  to  the  line  B  K .  Flow  then  forafmuch  as  the  whole  line  B  K  is  in  power  more  then  the 
line  conueniently  ioy  ned, namely, then  I(  M,  by  the fquare  of  a  line  incomenfurable  in  length 
to  the  line  B  K.and  the  whole  line  B  K  is  commenfurable  in  length  to  the  rationall  line geuen 
B  B  .-therefore  the  line  CM  B  is  a  fourth  refiduall  line,  by  the  definition  of  a  fourth  refiduall 
line. But  a  rectangle  par allelogramme  coni  ay  ned  <vnder  a  rationall  line  and  a fourth  ref  dual 
line, is  irrationally  and  the  line  which  ccntayneth  in  power  the  fameparallelogramme  is  alfo 
irr at;  on  all, and  is  called  a  le(fe  line  ( by  the  p  4. of  the  tenth  )  .  But  the  line  A  B  contayneth  in 
power  the  par allelogramme  contaymd  nender  the  lines  H  B  and  B  M  ( for  if  we  dr  awe  aright 
linefom  the  point  A  to  the  point  Fl,the  triangle  ABB  fall  be  like  to  the  triangle  A  B  CM, 
by  the  8. of  the fixth.Forfiom  the  right  angle  B  AB  is  drawen  to  the  hafe  B  H  a  perpendicu¬ 
lar  lineaWnd  therefore  as  the  line  B  B  is  fo  the.  line  B  A , fo  is  the  line  A  B  to  the  line  B  M. 
this followeth  alfo  of  the  cotollary  of  the fayd  8. of  the fixth.  Wherefore  the  line  A  B  which  is 
the fide  of  the  pentagon  figure,  is  an  ir rationall  line  of  that  kinde  which  is  called  a  lejfe  Urn . 
if  therefore  in  a  circle  hatting  a  rationall  line  to  his  diameter  be  inferibedan  equilater  pen¬ 
tagon,  the  fide  of  the  pentagon  is  an  irrationalliine,and  is  of  that  kinde  which  is  called  a  lejfe; 
line:  which  was  required  to  be  demonstrated. 

if  The  12.  Theorems.  The  iz.Tropofition. 

If  in  a  circle  he  defer  ibed  an  equilater  triangle:  the fquare  made  of  the  fide  of 

MMmj.  the 


Cmjlrtttthft* 

Demonfirx- 


■A 


7 he  thirtenth  Hooke 

the  triangle  js  treble  to  thefquare  made  of  the  Une^hich  is  drawenfrom 
the  cen  tre  of  the  circle  to  the  circumference. 

Vppofe  that  BC  he  a  circle ,  and  in  it  defcribe  an  equilater  triangle  cWB  C. 

T  hen  I faythat  thefquare  made  of  the  fide  of  the  triangle  ABC  ,is  treble  to  the 
fquare  made  of  the  line  drawn from  the  center  of the  circle  <^A  BC  to  the  circum- 
ference.T ake(  by  the  i  .of the  third)  the  centre  of the  circle, and  let  the  fame  be  D .  And  draw 
a  right  line  from  the -point  A  to  the  poynt  I>  r and  extend  it  to  the  point  E.And  draw  a  right 
line from  the  point  B  to  the  poynt  E.Now forafmuch  as  the  triangle  B  C  is  equilater , 
therefore  echeof  thefe  three  circumferences  AB , 

AC,(fi  BEC  is  the  third  part  of  the  whole  circum¬ 
ference  of  the  circle  ABC:  wherefore  the  circumfe¬ 
rence  BE  is  the fixthpart  of  the  cir  cuference  of the 
circle  for  the  circumferece  of  the femicircle  ABE 
is  equall  to  the  circumference  of  the  femicircle  A- 
C  Efrom  which  taking  away  equal  circumferences 
A B and  AC ,  the  circumference  remay ning B E 
Jhalbe  equal  to  the  circumference  remayningE  Cl: 
wherefore  the  right  line  BE.  is  the fide  of  an  equi¬ 
later  hexagonfigure  deferibedin  the  circle  Where¬ 
fore  it  is  equall  to  the  line  drawenfrom  the  centre 
of  the  circle  to  the"  circumference ,  that  is  vnto  the 
line  D  E  (by  the  corollary  of the  15. of  the fixth)  .And forafmuch  as  the  line  A  E  is  double  to 
the  line  D  E, therefore  thefquare  oftheUneA  Eis  quadruple  tothe fquare  of  the  line  D  E 
(by  the  4.ofthe  fecond)  :that  is, to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E. But  the  fquare  of  the  line  AE 
uares  of  the  lines  A  B,and  B  E  (by  the  4j.ofthefrfi)for  the  angle  A  B  E 


tse , 


is  (by  the  3  t. of  the  third)  a  right  angle  Wherf ore  the  fquares  of  the  line  AB  &  BE  are  qua¬ 
druple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E .  Wherefore  taking  away  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E,the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  B  Jhalbe  treble  to  thefquare  ofB  E  :  but  the  line  B  E  is  equall  to  the  line 
D  E. Wherefore  the fquare  of the  line  A  Bis  treble  tothe  fquare  of the  line  D  E  Wherefore 
the fquare  made  of  the  fide  of  the  triangle, is  treble  to  the fquare  made  of the  line  drawen fro 
the  centre  of the  circle  to  the  circumference :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

x.  A  Corollary  added  by  Campane. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft,  that  the  lineB  C, which  is  the  fide  of  the  equilater  triangle,diuideth  the  femi- 
diameter  DE  into  two  equall  parts  -  EorletthepoyntofthediuifionbeF.  And  fuppofe  a  line  to  be 
drawen  from  the  poynt  D  to  the  B  ,and  an  other  from  the  poynt  D  to  the  poynt  C  .  Now  it  is  manifeft 
(by  the4.of  the  firft)  that  the  line  B  F  is  equall  to  the  line  F  C,and  therefore  (  by  the  3  .  of  the  third)ali 
the  angles  at  the  poynt  F  are  right  angles .  Wherefore(by  the  47 .  of  the  firft)  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  D 
is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  F  and  F  D ,  and  by  the  fame  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E  is  equall  to 
the  fquares  of  the  lines B  F, and  F  E:  but  the  line  BD  is  equall  to  the  line  BE  (as  hath  before  bene 
proued)  .  Wherefore  by  the  common  fentence  the  twoo  fquares  of  the  two  lines  BF  and  FD  are 
equall  to  the  two  fijuarcs  of  the  lines  BF,  and  FE.  Wherefore  taking  away  the  fquare  of  the  lineB- 
F  which  is  comon  to  them  both :  the  refidue, namely,  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  E  fhalbe  equall  to  the  re- 
fidue,  namely ,  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  E.  Wherforealfo  the  line  F  D  is  equal  to  the  line  F  E.  Wher- 
fore  hereby  it  is  manifeft  that  a  perpendicular  line  drawen  from  the  centre  of  a  circle  to  the  fide  of  an 
equilater  triangle  inferibed  in  it,is  equall  to  halfe  of  the  line  drawen  from  the  centre  of  the  fame  circle, 
to  the  circumference  thereof. 

* 

#  A  Corollary  added  by  Flujfas. 

The  fide  of  an  equilater  triangle  is  in  power  fefquitertia  to  the  perpendicular  line  which  is  drawe 
from  one  of  the  angles  to  the  oppofite  fide. For  of what  parts  the  line  ABcontayneth  in  power  n. of 

fuch 


of Sue  Sides  Element es. 


FoLq.  05, 


fuch  parts  the  line  B  F  which  is  the  halfe  of  A  B  contayned  in  power  3  .Wherefore  the  refidue^namelys 
the  perpendicular  line  A  F  coritayneth  in  power  offuch  parts  9.  (for  the  fquares  of  the  lines  AF,and  B  F 
are  by  the  47  .of  the  foil  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B  y.Now  iz.  to  y.is  fcfquitcrtia:  wherforc  the 
power  of  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  power  of  the  line  A  F  in.  iefquitertia  proportion. 

hloreoner  the  fide  ofthe  triangle  is  the  meaneproportionall  betwene  the  diameter  and  the  per¬ 
pendicular  line :  For  (by  the  Corollary  ofthe  8  .of  the  fix  th)  the  line  AE  is  to  the  line  AB  as  the  line  A  B 
is  to'  the  line  AE. 

Farther  the  perpendicular  line  drawen  from  the  angle  diuideth  the  bafe  into  two  equal  parts  and 
pafteth  by  the  center.  For  if  there  fhould  be  draw’en  any  other  right  line  fro  the  point  A  to  the  poynt  F, 
the  that  which  is  drawen  by  the  point  D3two  right  lines  fhould  include  a  fuperflcies,  which  is  impoffi- 
ble.  Wherefore  the  contrary  fohoweth,  namely,  that  the  line, which  being  drawen  from  the  angle  pat 
feth  by  the  cemer5is  a  perpendicularline  to.  the  bafefby  the  3  of  the  thirdj. 


The  i.Probleme. 


The  1 3. Proportion. 


€ 


T  0  make  a  *  Pyramis  }and  to  comprehend  it  in  a Jfiheregeuen:  and  to  prone 
that  the  diameter  ofthe Jfihere  is  in  power  fefpmaltera  to  the fide  of  the 
Pyramis. 

?  Fppofe  that  the  diameter  of the fiber egeuen  he  A  B,and  diuide  A  B  in  the  poynt  C, 
fo  that  the  line  A  C'be  double  to  the  line  B  C(by  the  9.  ofthe fixth)  .  x^And  •vpon 
the  line  A  Braking  the  center  the  point  N, deferibe  a  femirircle  A  D  B.^And(by 
the  11. of  the firfi  )  from  the  point  C  rayfe  <vp  vnto  the  line  odT  B  a  perpendicular  line  C  D. 
And  drarve  a  right  line  from  the  point  D  to  the  point  A.  And  deficribe  a  circle  E  F  G  hauing 
his femidiameter  equall  to  the  line  CD.  And  deferibe  in  the  circle  E  F  G,an  equilater  trian¬ 
gle  E  FG  (  by  the  2.  of  the  fourth ) .  And  ( by  the 
1. of  the  third)  take  the  cetre  of the  circle, and 
let  the fame  be  the  point  H.  And  draw  thefe 
right' lines  E H ,H  F,fy  H  G.  And  ( by  the  12. 
oft  he  elcuenth ) fro  the  point  H  ray fe  vp  vnto 
the playne fuperfeies  of  the  circle  E  F  G  a  per- 
pedicular  line  IlK,fflet  the  line  HK  be  equal 
to  the  right  line  A  C.  And  draw  thefe  right 
lines  I(E,KF,  fp  K  G.Now  forafmuch  as  the 
line  HK  is  erected perpedicularly  to  the  plaine 
fuperfeies  ofthe  circle  EFG ,  th  erf  ore  (by  the 
2.  definition  ofthe  eleuenth  )  it  maketh  right 
angles  with  all  the  right  lines  that  touch  it, 
and  which  are  in  the  fielfe fame fuperfeies  of 
the  circle  EFG.  But  it  toucheth  euery  one  of 
thefe  right  lines ,  HE,  H  F  and H  G  :  Where¬ 
fore  the  right  line  H  K  is  erected  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  euery  one  of  thefe  lines  H  E,  H  F,  and 
H  G  .x^And forafmuch  as  the  line  AC  is  equal 
to  the  line  H  K ,  and  the  line  CD  to  the  line 
H  E,and  they  comprehende  right  angles,  there¬ 
fore  the  bafe  D  A  is  equall  to  the  bafe  K  E(by 
the  4.  ofthe firfi) .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  ech 
ofthe  lines  K  Ffand  K  G  is  equall  to  the  line 
D  A.  Wherefore  the  three  lines  K  E,K  F,and 
K  G  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other .  And forafmuch  as  the  line  AC  is  double  to  the  line  C  B9 
(by  confirucUon}:  therefore  the  line  A  Bis  treble  to  the  line  B  C:  but  as  the  line  A  Bis  to  th 

MMrn.fi  line 


This  CoroUarf 
is  the  xx. prop'  - 
fttion  ofthe 
books  after 
Campane , 


This  Corollary 
is  the  3  .Corolla¬ 
ry  after  the  17, 
propofitton  of 
the  X^boake af¬ 
ter  Campane. 


*  By  the  name 
of  a  Pyramis 
both  here  &  its 
this  bookefcl- 
loir/ng  Sender- 
j land  a  Tetra¬ 
hedron. 

firfi  part  of  the 
conJlru&icK, 


firfi  part  ofthe 
demonfiratim. 


The  thirtenth  Bool^e 

fkh  Affumpt  ^ne  ^  C’fi  %iS  feuare  °f  the  line  AD  to  the f quart  of  the  line  D  CXwhiche  may  thus  he 

is  agMKe  .at.  ’*  froued.lt  is  manifefi(  by  the  Corollary  of the  8. of  fixth )  that  the  line  CD  is  the  means  pro- 
the  end  »f  thy  ,,  portionall  betwene  tht  lines  A  C  and  C  BWherfore  ( by  the  corollary  of  the  20.  of  the fame ) 
tfthepTf-  ”  t^je. fliMre  of  the  line  AC  is  to  the f quart  of  the  line  C  D ,  as  the  line  AC  is  to  the  lint  CB: 
mn pressed.  ”  wherefore  by  comfofition ( by  the  18. of  the  fueth  )  thefquares  of  the  lines  A  C and  C  D  are 
»  to  the fquare  of the  line  C  D ,  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  BC.  But  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  A  C  and  C  D  are  (by  the  47. of the frf)equallto  the fquare  of the  line  AD:  wherefore 
ll  ( by  the  7  .of the fueth )  the fquare  of  the  line  A  D  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  DC ,  as  the  line 
».  A  Bis  to  the  line  B  C.1  Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  AD  is  treble  to  the fquare  of  the 
line  D  C.<^And forafmuch  as  the  line K  E is  e quail  to  the  line  AD  (  as  it  hath  ben  p roued ) 
and  the  line  H  E  is -put  equall  to  the  line  C  D :  therefore  the  fquare  of the  line  KE  is  triple  to 
the fquare  of  the  line  H  E.But  vnto  the  fquare  of  the fame  line  H  E  is(  by  the  12.  of  the  thir¬ 
tenth  )the fquare  of  the  line  E  E  treble  wherefore  the  line  E  F  is  equall  to  the  line  K  E.  Now 
the  lines  K  E,  IC  F , and  K  G  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other, as  it  hath  before  benproued ,  and 
fo  alfo  are  the  lines  E  F,  F  G  and  G  Efor  that  they  are  the fides  of  an  equilater  triangle «, 
Wherefore  entry  one  of  theje  lines  E  F,  F  G,and  G  E,is  equall  to  euery  one  of  the  lines  K  E, 
K F and K  G. Wherefore thefefower triangles EFG,KEF,KFG and K G Ear e equila - 
ter  .Wherefore  there  is  mads  a  Fyramis  conffing  of fower  equall  and  equilater  triangles, 
whofiebafe  is  the  triangle  E  F  G  and  toppe  the 
poynt  K. 

Now  it  is  required  to  comprehende  the 
TZcfJfZ#”-  few  Pyramis  in  the  ft  here  gene ,  and  toproue 
that  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  is  in  power fief- 
second  part  of  quialtera  to  the fide  of the  pyrarnis.  A  dde  1 >n- 
the  demofiratit.  to  the  right  line  H  K  a  right  line  direttly,  na¬ 
mely  H  L,and  let  the  line  UK  be  equall  to  the 

*  Leohe  at  the  the  line  BC.*  Now  for  that  as  the  line  A  C 

end  rf this  de-  js  p0  the  line  C  D ,  fo  is  the  line  CD  to  the 
Zlr:J:r  line  CB(b  the  corollary  of  the  8.  of  the  fixth) 
firuCiton  and  but  the  line  A  C  is  equal  to  the  line  KH,&  the 
demenftration  ////<?  C  Dto  the  line  H  E,&  the  line  C  B  to  the 
nfthufeeond  herfi,n  as  the  line  KH  is  to  the  line 

jjEjfoisthe/;„effEt0  the  line  H  L .Where¬ 
fore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
HK  and hs  L  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
E  H.And  ether  of  the  angles  K  H  E,fr  EH  L 
is  aright  angle ,  wherefore  a  femicircledefcri- 
bed  vpon  the  line  K  L  fall pajfe  by  the  poynt 

*  Reads  the  two  E*  For  ifwc  draw  a  right  line  from  the  point 

ajptmpts added  E  t0  the  poynt  L ,  the  angle  LE  K  jhalbe a 
b(v3Z'e[et  right  angle  for  that  the  triagle  ELK  is  equi - 
at  the  end  of  the  angle  to  either  of  the  triangles  E  L  Hand  E- 
demonflratton  //  K(by  the  8 .ofthefixth. )  Now  then  if  the 
ofttnspropofiu-  diameter  K  L  abiding  fixed, the femicircle  be  turned  round  about, vntil  it  returns  rvn- 

TerZJderfUn-  to  the  fdfe  fame  place  from  whenfe  it  began  to  be  moued,  it /ball  alfopajfe  by  the  pointes  F 
ding  of  this  re  a-  q,E  or  drawing  a  right  line from  the  ponit  F  to  the  point  L,and  an  other fr om  the  poynt 

F*'  L  to  the  point  G, which  alfo  maketh  at  the  points  F  and  G  right  angles ,  the  pyramis jhall  be 

cpmtayned  in  the  fphere  geuen. For  the  line  K  L  being  the  diameter  of  the  jfhere  is  equall  to 
the  line  A  B, which  is  the  diameter  of  the jphere  geuen  for  the  line  KHis  put  equall  to  the 
line  AC, and  the  line  H  L  to  the  line  C  B. 

7  -  fn 


■ententes « 


Z  In  the  femicircle  A  D  B  of  the  former  figure  drawe  the  line  D  N.  And  diuide  the  line  K  L  into 
two  equall  parts  in  the  point  M. And  draw  a  line  from  M  to  G.  And  forafmuch  as  by  conilrudhon  the  Axotherem* 
line  KH  is  equall  to  the  line  AC, and  the  line  H  L  to  the  lineCB :  therefore  the  whole  line  AB  is  equal  firuttton*nd 
to  the  whole  line  K  L. Wherefore  alio  the  halfe  of  the  line  KL,  namely,  the  line  L  M,is  equal  to  the  fe-  demonftraticts 
midiamecerB  N :  wherefore  taking  away  from  thofe  equall  lines,equall  parts  B  C  and  L  H,  the  refidues  efthefeccnd 
N  C, and  M  H  fhalbe  equall  .  Wherefore  in  the  two  triangles  M  H  Gand  NCD,the  two  fidesabour  fxrtafter  Iluf- 
the  equall  rightanglesDCN  and  GHM,namely,thefides  D  C,CN,and  G  H,HM,  are  equall:  wher-  ft. 
fore  the  bales  M  G  and  N  D  are  equall  (by  the  4. of  the  firit.)  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  it  be  pro  lied 
that  right  -ines  drawen  from  the  poyntM  to  the  points  E  and  Fare  equal  to  the  line  N  D.  But  the  right 
line  N  D  is  equall  to  the  line  A  N,  which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  :  wherefore 
the  line  M  G  is  equall  to  the  line  M  K,&  alfo  to  the  lines  M  E,M  F  and  M  L.Wherfore  making  the  cetre 
thepoyntM,andthefpaceMKorMG  deferibe  a  femicircle  K  G  L  : and  the  diameter  KL  abiding 
fixed  let  the  fayd  femicircle  KGL  bemoued  roundeabout  vntillit  returneto  the  fame  place  from 
whence  it  began  to  be  moued  :and  there  fhalbe  deferibed  a  fphere about  the  centre  M  (  by  the  iz.diffi- 
trition  of  the  eleuenth)touching  euery  one  of  the  angles  of  the  Pyramis  which  are  at  the  points  K,E,F, 

G :  for  thofe  angles  are  equally  diflat  from  the  centre  of  the  fphere,namely,  by  the  femidiameter  of  the 
fayd  fphere,as  hath  before  bene  proued. Wherefore  in  the  fphere  geuen  whofe  diameter  is  the  lineK- 
L,or  the  line  A  B,isinfcribeda  Tetrahedron  EFG  K.] 

Now  I  fay, that  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  is  in  power fefquialtera  to  the fide  of  the  Py-  Third  part  of 
r amis. For  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  is  double  to  the  line  CB  (by  cofiructio )therfore  the  line  the  demmffrm 
A  B  is  treble  to  the  line  B  C  Wher  fore  by  comer (on )  by  the  corollary  of  the  ip.of thefueih)  t,m> 
the  line  A  B  isfefquialtera  to  the  line  (A  C  .  But  as  the  line  B  A  is  to  the  line  A  C  ,fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  B  A, to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D . For  if we  draw  a  right  line  fro  the  point 
B,to  the  point  D,as  the  lineB  D  is  to  the  line  AD, Jo  is  the fame  AD  to  the  line  A  Cfby  re  afro 
of the  likenes  oft  he  triangles  D  A  Byfr  D  AC  ( by  the  S.of thefixth):&  by  reafon  alfo  that 
as  the frf  is  to  the  third fo  is  the fquare  of  the fir  ft  to  the fquare  of  the fecod(  by  the  corollary 
of  the  20.  of  the fxth)  Wherfore  the fquare  of  the  line  B  A, is  fefquialter  to  the fquare  of the 
line  A  D  .But  the  line  B  A  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the fphere  getie, namely  ,to  the  line  K 
as  hath  bene  proued ffr  the  line  A  D  is  equal  to  the  fide  of the  pyramis  infer ibed  in  the fphere. 

Wherfore y  diameter  of  the fphere  is  in  power fefquialter  to  the fide  of  the pyramis  Wherfore 
there  is  made  a  pyramis  comprehended  in  a  fphere  geuen ,  and  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  is 
fefquialtera  to  the fde  of the  pyramis  .-which  was  required  to  be  done  and  proued. 


•fAn  other  demonftration  to  prone  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  B  Cs 
fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  C. 


Let  the  defeription  of  the femicircle  A  DB  be  as  in  the  frf  defcription,And  vpon  the 
line  A  C  deferibe  ( by  the  46. of the  first)  a fquare  E  C,  and  make perfette  the  parallelograme 
F  B .  Now forafmuch  as  the  triangle  D  AB  is  equiangle  to  the  triangle  D  AC  (by  the  $2. of 
the  fixt  ■-  therfore  as  the  line  B  A  is  to  the  line 
A  D,fo  is  the  line  D  A  to  the  line  A  C,  by  the 
4.0ft he  fixt:  Wherefore  that  whichis contai¬ 
ned  'under  the  lines  B  A  and  A  C,  is  equall  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D,  by  the  17.  of  the 
fixt.  And  for  that  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line 
B  C,fo  is  the  parallelogramme  EB  to  the pa¬ 
rallelogramme  F  B,  by  the  1.  of  the fixt:  and 
the  parallelogramme  E  Bis  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  'under  the  lines  B  A  and  A  C  (for  the 
line  E  A  is  equall  to  the  line  AC)  :  and  the 
parallelogramme  BF  is  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  'under  the  lines  A  C  and  B  C .  Wherefore 
as  the  line  B  is  tty  the  line  B  C,fo  is  that 
which  is  contained  vnderthe  lines  BA  and 


csfG, 


UMm.if 


7 he  thirtenth  cBoofye 

cxf  C,  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  CB .  But  that  which  is  contai¬ 
ned  voder  the  lines  B  A  and  A  C,  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  D,  by  the  Corollary  of 
the  S  .of  the  fixt,  and  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  C  and  C  B ,  is  eqtiall  to  the 
fquare  of the  line  Cl),  for  the  perpendicular  line  D  C  is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the 
fegmentes  of  the  bafe, namely,  A  C  and  C  B ,  by  the  former  Corollary  of  the  8  .of the fxt ,  for 
t  hat  the  angle  AD  Bis  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  nhe  line  B  C,fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  AD  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  C,  by  the  u.ofthe  lift :  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  k  proueci  * 

^[  Two  AfTumptes  added  by  Campane. 

Firll  Afpmpt. 

Suppofe  that  vpon  the  line  AB  be  ere&ed  perpendicularly  the  line  D  C,  which  line  D  C  let  be  the 
meane  proportional!  betwene  the  partes  pf  the  line  A  B, namely,  A  C  &  C  B  :  fo  that  as  the  line  A  C  is 
to  the  line  C  D,  fo  let  the  line  C  D  be  to  the  line  C  B  .  And  vpon  the  line  A  B  defcribe  a  femicirde.  The 
1  fay,  that  the  circumference  ef  that  femicirde  lhall  paffe  by  the  point  D,which  is  the  end  of  the  perpe- 
dicular  line.But  if  not,-then  it  lhall  either  cut  the 
line  C  D,  or  it  fhall  paffe  aboue  it,  and  include  it 
not  touching  it .  Firll  let  it  cut  it  in  the  point  E. 

And  drawethefe  rightHnes  E  B  and  E  A.  Wher- 
fore  by  the  31.01  the  third,  the  whole  aiigie  A  £-- 
B  is  a  right  angle  .  W herefore  by  the  foil  part  of 
the  Corollary  of  the  8. of  the  fixt,  the  line  ACis 
to  the  line  E  C,  as  the  line  E  C  is  to  the  line  C  B. 

But  by  the  8.of the  fift,  the  proportion  of  the  line 
A  C  to  the  line  E  C,  is  greater  then  the  proporti¬ 
on  of  the’fame  line  A  C  to  the  line  C  D  (  for  the 
line  C  E  is  leffe  then  the  line  G  D)  .Now  for  that 
the  line  C'E  is  to  the  line  C  B,  as  the  line  A  C  is 
to.the-line  C  E,  andthelineCDis  to  the  line  CB,  as  the  line  A  Cis  to  the  line  CD,  therefore  by  the 
ij.tfrhe  fiftj  the  proportion  of  the  line  E  C  to  the  line  CB,is  greater  then  the  proportion  of  the  line 
C  D  to  the  line  C  B  .  Wherefore  by  the  io.of  the  fift,  the  line  E  Cis  greater  then  the  line  D  C,namely, 
the  part  greater  then  the  whole  :  which  is  importable  .  Wherefore  the  circumference  {hall  not  cut  the 
line  CD  .Now  I  fay,  that  it  lhall  not  paffe  aboue  the  line  C  D,  and  not  touch  it  in  the  point  D For  if  ic 
be  pofTibk,  let  it  paffe  aboue  it, and  extend  the  line  C  D  to  the  circuference,  and  let  it  cut  it  in  the  point 
F.  And  draw  the  lines  F  B  and  F  A , -and  it  fhall  foilowe  as  before  that  the  line  C  D  is  greater  then  the 
line  C  F whichisimpofiible  .  Wherefore  that  is  manifefl  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

Second  Ajfwnpt. 

If  there  be  a  right  angle  vnto  Vchich  a  bafe  is fubt  ended,  and  tfvpon  the  fame  be  deferibed  afe- 
mkircle :  the  circumference  thereof fall  paffe  by  tbepoint  of  the  right  angle . 

For  flippofe  that  there  be  a  right  angle  A  B  C,  vnto  which  fubtend  the  bafe  A  C,and  vpon  the  line 
AC  defcribe  a  femicirde .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  circumference  thereof  fhall  paffe  by  the  pbint  B. For  if 
not,  then  it  lhall  paffe  either  aboue  thepointB,  orvnder  the>pointB  .  Firllletit  pafle  vnder  the  point 
B,  and  l'-tthe  circumference  be  A  E  C  .  And  (tby  the  n.of  the  firll)  from  the  point  B  draWe  Ynto  the 
line  A  C  a  perpendicular  line  B  D,which  let  cut  the 
circumference  of  the  femicirde  in  the  point  E.  And  _ 
drav;e  thefe  rightlincs  E  A  and  EC.  Now  it  is  ma- 
mfcff,  by  the  3 1  .of  the  third,  that  the  angle  A  E  C 
is  a  right  angle .  But  (by  the  2 1  .of  the  firll )  the  an¬ 
gle  AEG  is  greater  then  the  angle  ABC:  which 
is  irapoffible,by  the  io.common  fentence  .  Where¬ 
fore  the  circumferece  of  the  femicirde  paffethnot 
vnder  the  angle  B .  Now  I  fay,  that  it  paffeth  not  a- 
boue  the  angle  B .  For  if  it  be  polfible,  let  it  paffe  a- 
boue  the  point  B,  and  let  the  circumference  be  A  - 
E  C  :  and  produce  the  perpendicular  line  B  D  till  it 
cut  the  drcumference  AFC  in  the  point  F*.  And 
draw  thefe  right  lines  A  F  and  F  C  .  Wherefore  a- 

gaine 


ofEuclldes  Elementes.  FoL^of* 

game,by  the  3  i.b£  the  thirds  the  angle  A  F  C  is  a  right  angle  .  But  by  fuppofition,  the  angle  ABC  isa 
right  angle,  and  is,  by  the  2 1  .of  the  fir  ft,  greater  then  the  right  angle  AFC:  which  againe  by  the  ffore-' 
fayd  common  fentence,  is  impoffible .  Wherfore  a  femicircie  defcribed  vpon  die  bafe  A  C,  paffeth  nei¬ 
ther  vnder  the  point  B,nor  aboue  it .  Wherefore  it  paffeth  by  it :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

The  conuerfe  of  this  was  added  after  the  demtmftration  of  the  31  .of  the  third,out  of  Pelitariusi  And 
thefe  two  Aifumptes  of  Campane  are  neceffary,  for  the  better  vnderihnding  of  the  demonfiration  of 
the  fecond  part  of  this  ij.Propofition,  wherein  is  proued  that  the  pyramis  is  contained  in  the  Sphere 
geuen. 

«[  Ceitainc  Corollary  csadded  by  Fluff  as. 


Firjl  Corollary. 


The  diameter  of  the  Sphere  is  in  power  quadruple  fefcjuialtera  to  the  line  "which  is  dr  men  from 
the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle  Which  containeth  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis. 


For  forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued,  that  the  diameter  K  L  is  in  power  fefquialter  to  the  fide  E  F.: 
and  it  is  proued  alfo,  by  the  12  .of  this  booke,  that  the  fide  E  F  is  in  power  triple  to  the  line  E  H  (  which 
is  drawen  from  the  centre  of  the  circle  contayning  the  triangle  E  F  G  )  .  But  the  proportion  of  the  ex- 
tremes,namely,of  the  diameter  to  the  line  E  H,  confifteth  of  the  proportions  of  the  meanfes,  namely,of 
the  proportion  of  the  diameter  to  the  line  E  F,  and  of  the  proportion  of  the  line  E  F  to  the  line  E  Fi,  bv 
the  y.  definition  of  the  fixt :  which  proportions,  namely,  triple,  and  fefquialter,  added  together,  make 
quadruple  fefquialter  (as  it  is  eafie  to  proiie  by  that  which  was  taught  in  the  declaration  of  the  $  .defini= 
lion  of  the  fixt  booke  )  .  Wherefore  the  Corollary  is  manifefh 

•  Second  Corollary. 

Onely  the  line  Which  is  drawen  from  the  angle  of  the  pyramis  to  the  bafe  oppofte  vntoit,  &  paffing  Tbit  Corolla* 
by  the  center  of  the  Sphere  }is  perpendicular  to  the  bafe ,  and falleth  vpon  the  centre  of the  circle  Which 
containeth  the  bafe.  proportion  of 

-  ,  ,  .  the  i^.booke 

For  if  any  other  line  (then  the  line  K  M  H  which  is  drawen  by  the  cenrre  of  the  Sphere  to  the  centre  after  Cam - 
of  the  circle )  fliould  fall  perpendicularly  vpon  the  plaine  of  the  bafe,  then,  from  one  and  the  felfe  fame  dane 
point  fliould  be  drawen  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  plaine  two  perpendicular  lines,  contrary  to  the  13  .of  V  * 
the  eleuen  th  :  which  is  impoffible  *  Farther  if  from  the  toppe  K  fliould  be  drawen  to  the  center  of  the 
bafe,namely,  to  the  point  H,  any  other  right  line  not  paffing  by  the  centre  M,  two  right  lines  fhoulde 
include  a  fuperficies  contrary  to  the  laft  common  fentencc  :  which  were  abfurde.  Wherefore  onely  the 
line  which  is  drawen  by  the  center  of  the  Sphere  to  the  centre  of  the  bafe,  is  perpendicular  to  the  fayd 
bafe.  And  the  line  which  is  drawen  from  the  angle  perpendicularly  to  the  bafe,  fhall  paffe  by  the  centre 
of  the  Sphere. 

'  *  U  y,  ■  v:\Yh  'in  Vh  ,\V  j  .'  ,  v.  -f 

#T hit d  Corollary. 


T  he  perpendicular  line  which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  of  the  Sphere  to  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis , 
is  equall  to  the  fixt  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere. 

For  it  is  before  proued,  that  the  line  M  H  (which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  of  the  Sphere  to  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  bafe )  is  equall  to  the  line  N  C  :  which  line  N  C  is  the  fixt  part  of  the  diameter  A  B,  and  ther- 
fore  the  line  M  H  is  the  fixt  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere .  For  the  diameter  A  B  is  equall  to  the  di¬ 
ameter  of  the  Sphere,  as  hath  alfo  beforebene  proued. 


This  Corolla¬ 
ry  Campane 
putteth  as  a 
Corollaryaf- 
ter  the  17. pro- 
pofition  of  the 
14.  bookgt 


T he  2.  (problems. 


The'  14.  Propofition. 


T 0  make  an  offobedron,  and  to  coprehend  it  in  the  fphere  geuen gamely, that 
where, n  the  pyramis  was  comprehended-,  and  to  proue  that  the  diameter  of the fphere  is 
in  power  double  to  the fide  of  the  ociahedron. 


Cmffrnffihn. 


Frijl  part  tfthe 
demttnftrauan^ 

*  For  the  4.  ax- 
gles  <tt  the  point 
entail  to 
fatter  right  an¬ 
gles  hj  the  Co- 
rollarj  of  the j 
I  •p.aftbefrfh 
and  thofe  4  ./«»- 
gli^rt-re  e^uall  . 
the  one  to  the  o- 
therbj  thei.of 
the jdrfl'.and 
t  he  ref  ore  ech '  is 
n  right  angle. 


Seaihd'part  of 
the  demiftratto . 


Ake  the  dimeter  of  the  former  fpheregeuen,  which  let  be  the  line  A  B :  and 
diuideit(hythe  to.  of  the  fir f  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  point  C.  Andder 
fMjjjf  ficribe  vgon  the  line  A  B  a  fiemicircle  A  D  B.And(  by  the  it -of thefirfi  )  fro 
A'WJA  the  point  Q  rayfevp  vnto  the  line  A  Bn  perpendicular  UneC  D  . And  draw  a 
right  line  from  the  point  D  to  the  point  B . And  defcribe  a  fquare  EF  GH 
homing  entry  one  of  his  fides  equall-  to  the  line  B  D. 
and  draw  the  diagonal  lines  FH  dr  EG, cutting  the 
one  the  other  in  the  point  K.And  ( by  the  12.  of  the 
eleuenth ) from  the  point  K  ( namely , the  point  where 
the  lines  F  H  and  E  G  cut  the  one  the  other  )  rayfe 
<vp  to  the  play  ne fuperfcies, wherein  the fquare  EF- 
GH  is, a  perpendicular  line  K  f  ,  and  extend  the-  I 
line  K  L  on  the  other  fide  of  the  playne fuperfcies  f- 
to  the  point  c M.  ^And  let  eche  of  the  lines  K  L  and ' 

K  M  be  put  equall  to  one  ofthefe  lines  KE,K  F,  K- 
H  or  K  G.And  draw  thefe  right  lines  JLE,  L  F,  L- 
G,L  H,M  E,M  F,M  G,and  M  FI.  Now  forafmuch 
as  the  line  I<  E  is  (  by  the  corollary  of  the  34.  of  the 
firff quail  to  the  line  K  H, and  l  he  angle*  EK  H  is 
a  right  angle, therefore  the  fquare  of  II E  is  double 
to  the  fquare  of  E  K,by  the  47  .oft  he  firf :  Agayne 
forafmuch  as  the  line  L  K  is  equall  to  the  line  K  E 
by  pofition,  and  the  angle  L  K  E,is  by  the  fecond 
diffnition  of  the  eleuenth', aright  angle :  therefore’ 
the  fquare  of'  the  line  E  Lis  double  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  E  K:  and  it  is proued  that  the  fquare  of  the 
line  HE  is  double  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  EK. 

Wherefore  ’  the  fquare  of  the  line  LE  is  equall  to 
the fquare  of  the  line  E  H .  Wherefore  alfo  the  line 
LE  is  equall  to  the  tine  EH.  And  by  the  fame  rea- 

fon  the  Line  L  H  is  alfo  equall  to  the  line  H  E.  Wherefore  the  triangle  LH  £■  is  equilater  .In 
like  fort  may  weproue  that  euery  one  of  the  rest  of  the  triangles  whofe  bafes  are  the fides  of 
the  fquare  E  FG  H,and  toppes  thefomtesL  atid-CM,are  equilater.  T  hefayd  eight  triangles 
alfo  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other, for  euery  fide  of  eche  is  equall  to  the fide  of  the  fquthre  E- 
F  GH.  Wherfore  there  is  made  an  octohedron  cotained  vnder  eight  triangles  whofe fides  are 
equall. Now  it  is  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the fpheregeuen,  and  toproue  that  the  diame¬ 
ter  of  the  fiphere  is  in  power  double  to  the  fide  of  the  oclohedron. 

Forafmuch  as  thefe  three  lines  L  K,K  M,and  I(  E  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,  ther - 
fore  a  femicircle  defer  ibed  vpon  the  line  L  M jhallpafie  alfo  by  the  point  E .  And  by  the  fame 
reafon,if the femicircle  be  turned  round  about ,  vntill  it  returne  vntothe  felfe  fame  place 
from  whence firfi  it  began  to  be  moued ?  it  jhal pafifeby  thepointes  F,G ,H,and the  octohedron 
Jhall  be  comprehended  in  afphere.lfay  alfo  that  it  is  comprehended  in  the  fpheregeuen .  For 
forafmuch  as  the  line  L  K  is  equal  to  the  line  I<  CM,  by  pofition, and  the  line  K  E  is  common 
to  them  both. and  the y  contaync  right  angles  by  the  3  .diffnition  of  the  eleuenth, therefore  (by 
the  4.0ft  he fir g)  the  bafe  L  E  is  equall  to  the  bafe  E  M .  Andforafmuch  as  the  angle  LEM 
is  a  right  angle, by  the  3 1. of  the  third  for  it  is  in  a femicircle,  as  hath  bene  proued,  therefore 
the fquare  ft  he  line  L  M  is  double  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  LE  by  the  47. of  the frfl.Againe 
forafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  is  equall  to  the  line  B  C, therefore  the  line  A  B  is  double  to  the  line 
B  C,  by  the  diffnition  of  a  circle.  But  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  BC,fo  is  the  fquare  of the 

line 


o/Suclides  Element e s< 


FoL\.o6* 


Itne  A  B to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  D  , by  the  corollaries  of  the  2. and  zo.ofthefixt ..  Where - 
fore  the fquare  oft  he  line.  A  &  is  double  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  D  .  And  it  is  froued  that 
the  fquare  of  the  line  L  M  is  double  to  the fquare  of the  line  L  F.  Where fore  the  fquare. of  the 
line  B  D  is  equall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  L  E  .  For  the  line  E  B  which  is  e  quail  to  the  line 
L  F,  is put  to  be  equall  to  the  line  D  B  .  Wherefore  the.  fquare  Of  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  L  M  Wherefore  the  line  A  Bis  equall  to  the  line  L  M ,  And  me  line  A  Bis 
the  diameter  of  the fphere  geue,. where fore  the  line  L  Mas  equall  to.  the  diameter  'of the fphere 
geuen. Wherefore  the  ocloedron  is  contained  in  the fphere  geuen:  *  and  it  is  alfo  froued  that 
the  diameter  of the fp  here  is  in  power  double  to  the  fide  of  the  o  clone  dr  on.  Wherefore  there  is 
made  an  o  Slope  dr  on, and  it  is  comprehended  in  the;  fpheregeuen, wherein  was  comprehended 
the  Pyramisuand  it  isproued  that  the  diameter  of  the. fphere  is  in  power  double  to  the fide  of 
the  oilohedrmwhich  was  required  to  be  doone,and  to  be  froued. 

<  ^  '■  \  ■*.  '  .v  fW 

Certayne  Corollaries  added  by  Flujfas. 

^  F irfi  Corollary ,  ;p 

The  fide  of  a  Tyramts  is  in  power  fefquitertia  to  the  fide  of  an  oliohedron  infer  ibed  in  the  fame 
Sphere. 

For  forafmch  as  the  diameter  is  in  power  double  to  the  fide  of  the  o&ohedron ,  therefore  of  what 
partes  the  diameter  contayneth  in  power  6.of  the  fame,  the  fide  of  the  o&ohedron  cotayneth  in  power 
3  ibutofwhat  partes  the  diameter  contayneth  £.of  the  fame,  the  fide  of  the  pyratnis  contayneth  4.  by 
the  13  .of  this  booke  .  Wherefore  of  what  partes  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  Contayneth  4.  of  the  fame  the 
fide  of  the  o&ohedron  contayneth  3 . 

Second  Corollary « 

An  s  cl  oh  c  dr  on  is  deuided  into  two  equall  and  like  * Pyramids . 

common  bafes  of  thefe  Pyramids  are Set  vpon  euery  fquare  contayned  of  the  fides  of  the  oc- 

i/l n  imArt  xirluVn  fonn  «*«  o *■  *-1-*  a-'O.  — 1‘ _ _  f _ _  CX  '  J  ,  _ _ 1*1  •  t  t  l  — 


*  Tor  the f? arc 
of  the  line  A  E, 
which  is  proued 
equall  to  the 
fquare  of  the 
line  L  M y, dou~- 
hie  to  the  fquare 
of  the  line  S  O, 
which  is  alfo  e- 
quall to  the 
fquare  of  the 
line  L  E. 


---------  - -  .  ...  -  — . . .  luiuuiuu  v«j  tiH/ie  rpuimu),  j.: 

halfe  ofthe  fquare  of  the  diameterof  the  fpherd/oritisthe  fquare  ofthe  fide  of  the  o&ohcdron . 

ityat* yl\  \i  %v^a  f  .  .  : . nk  '>h 

:  .  Third  Corollary  i 

T he  three  diameters  ofthe  oUohedron)  do  cut  te  the  one  the  other  perpendicularly  into  two  equall 
parts, in  thee  enter  ofthe fphere  which  contayneth  the fayd  oSlohedron. 


This  Corollary 

is  the  16. props* 
ftton  of  the  14, 
heoke  after 
Cam  pane. 


1  \ 


As  it  is  manifeft  by  the  three  diameters  EG,  FH,  and LM  which  cutte  the  one  the  other  in  the 
center  K  equally  and  peipendicularly. 

■  ■  *  "  -  ■  '  . 

tf  The  3.  Trobleme.  The  is.  Vropofition, 

T  0  make  a Jo  tide  called  a  cube3and  to  comprehend  it  in  the  fphere  geuen  7 

namely  , that  Sphere  wherein  the  former  two  folides  were  comprehended1  and  tO  prOUe  that  tht 

diameter  of the  fphere fis  in  poSver  treble  to  the fide  of the  cube. 


Ake  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  geuen 'namely,  A  B,and  diuide  it  in  the  point  C .  So 
that  let  the  line  A  C  be  double  to  the  line  Js  C  by  the  p .  of  the  fxt .  And  vpon  the 

TlNn.i,  line 


Ttrftpart  of  the 
Mmonflr^Uon , 

Second  fart  of 
the  ConflruQt'o, 
Second  fart  of 
the  decnonf  ra¬ 
tten. 


X  Sjthet.Af- 
ptmpt  of  tbs  13. 
0 f this  hooks. 


Third  part  of 
the  de rn  on f  ra¬ 
tion. 


line  A  B  describe  a  fimicirck  A  D  B.Artdiby  the  n, of  the  firfi  )  from  tbepoynt  Crayfivp 
<vnto  the  line  A  B  aperpedicular  line  C  D  .And  draw  a  right  line  D  B.  Anddefiribea fquare 
£  F  G  H,  hailing  euery  one  of  his  fidcs  equall  -  - 

to  the  line  D  B^Andfrcm  the  pointes  E,  F,  G, 

Fl,rayfirup  (  by  the  12.  of  the  eleuenth  )  vnte 
the  playne  fuperficies  of  the  fquare  E  F  Gfl 
perpendicular  lines  EK,F  L,G  M,  and H  N: 
and  let  euery  one  of  the  lines  E  K,  FL,GM, 
and  H  N  be  put  equdl  to  one  of  the  lines  E  F, 

F  G  ,G  H ,  or  H  E ,  which  art  the  fides  of  the 
fquare,  and  draw  thefi  right  lines  KL,L  M, 

M  N,and N  K .  Wherfore  there  is  made  a  cube 
namely  F  If  which  is  contayned  vnder  fix  e- 
quall  f quarts .  Now  it  is  required  to  compre¬ 
hend  the  fame  cube  in  the  fpheregeuen,  and  to 
prous  that y  diameter  of thefphere  is  in  power 
hie  to  the  fdeof  the  cube .  Draw  thefe  right 
lines  K  G  and  E  G .  And  for af much  as  the  an¬ 
gle  K  EG  is  a  right  angle,  for  that  the  line  K- 
E  is  eretted  perpendicularly  to  the  playne  fu- 
ferficies  E  G,and  therefore  alfo  to  the  right 
line  E  G,  by  the  2.  diffinitio  of  the  eleuenth , 
wherefore  a  fimicirck  defcribed  vpon  the  line 
2t  G  jhail*pajje  by  the  poynt  E .  Agaynefor- 
afinuch  as  the  line  FG  is  creeled  perpendicu¬ 
larly  to  either  of  thefi  lines  F  L  and F  E,by 
the  diffinition  of  a fquare,  &  by  the  2.diffini- 
tioneftheekuenth,  therefore  the  line  F  G  is  erefted perpendicularly  to  the  playne ftperfcies 
F  K,by  the  4. of  the  eleuenth, Wherefore  if  we  draw  a  right  line  from  thepoint  F  to  the  point 
K,ihe  line  C  F  flail  beereckd perpendicularly  to  the  line  K  F,by  the  2.  diffinition  of  the  ele¬ 
venth.  Andby  the  fame  reaf  on  agayne  a  fimicirck  defcribed  vpon  the  line  G  K  flail pafie  alfo 
by  the  point  F.  And  likewife flail  it  pafie  by  the  ref  of  the  pointes  if  the  angles  of  that  cube. If 
now  tlx  diameter  K  G  abiding  fixed  the  fimicirck  be  turned  round  about  vntillit  returnc 
into  the  felfe fame place  from  whence  it  began  firfi  to  lemoued,  thecubeflalbe  compreheded 
in  a  fphere.I fay  alfo  that  it  is  comprehended  in  thefphere geuen. 

For  forafmuch  as  the  line  G  F  is  equal!  to  the  line  F  E  andthe  an  fie  F  is  a  rifiht  an - 


double  to  thefquare  of  the  line  E  K. Wherfore  the  fquares  of  E  G  and E  K  that  is  the  fqttare 
of  the  line  G  K,by  the  47.  of the firfi-, are  treble  to  thefquare  of  the  line  E  K .  Andforafmuch 
as  the  line  A  Bis  trebk  to  the  line  B  C,but  as  the  line  A  Bis  to  the  line  BC ,  fo  is  the fquare 
of  the  line  A  B  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  BD ,  by  the  corollaries  of  the  8, and  20.  of  the fixt . 
Wherefore  the fquare  of the  line  A  B  is  treble  fo  the fquare  of  the  line  B  D.  And  it  is proued 
that  thefquare  of  the  line  G  K  is  treble  to  thefquare  of  the  line  K  E,  and  the  tine  K  E  is  put 
equallto  the  line  B  D  Wherefore  the  lineK  G  is  alfo  equall  to  the  line  AB.  Andthe  line  A  B 
is  the  diameter  of  the  fphere geuen  .Wherefore  the  line  K  Gis  equallto  the  diameter  of  the 
fphere  geuen. Wherfore  the  cube  is  copreheded  in  the  fpheregeuen:  and  it  is  alfo  proued  that 
the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  is  in  power  treble  to  the  fide  of  the  cube :  which  was  required  to 
be  dmne,andto  be  proued. 


An  other 


ofSuclides  Eletnentes. 


F0/.407. 


#  An  other  demonftfafion  zfi&xFluJfas. 

Suppofe  that  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  geuen  in  the  former  Propofitions,  be  the  line  A  B.  An4 
let  the  center  be  the  point  C, vpon  which  deferibe  a  femicircle  A  D  B  .  And  from  the  diameter  A  B 
cut  of  a  third  part  B  G,  by  the  9. of  the^fixt.  And  from  the  point  G  raife  vp  vnto  the  line  A  B  a  perpends 
cular  line  D  G,  by  the  n .  of  the  firfl.  And  draw  thefe  right  lines  D  A,D  C,andDB.  And  vnt©  the  righs 
line  DB  put  an  equall  right  line  fZ  I  s 
and  vpon  the  line  Z I  deferibe  a  fquare 
E  Z I T  4  And  fro  the  pointes  E,Z,I,Tj 
eredte  vnto  the  fuperficies  E  Z I T  per¬ 
pendicular  lines  E  K,Z  H,I  M,  T  N(by 
the  ii.  of  the  eleuenth):and  puteuery 
one  of  thofe  perpendicular  lin  es  equall 
to  the  line  Z I .  And  drawe  thefe  right 
lines  K  H,  HM,  MN,  and  N  K,  ech  of 
which  (hall  be  equall  and  parallels  to 
the  line  Z  I,  and  to  the  rell  of  the  lines 
of  the  fquare  ,by  the  33  .of  the  firft.And 
moreouer  they  (hall  containe  equall 
angles(by  the  io.of  the  eleuenth):  and 
therefore  the  angles  are  right  angles, 
forthatEZlT  is  afquate  :  wherfore 
the  rell  of  the  bafes  lhall  be  fquares. 

Wherfore the  folide  EZITKHMN 
being  cotained  vnder  f>  squall  fquares, 
is  a  cube,  by  the  ax.  definition  of  the 
eleuenth.  Extend  by  the  oppofite  fides 
K  E  and  M I  of  the  cube,a  plain  e  K  E I- 
M  :  andagaine  by  the  other  oppofite 
fides  N  T  and  H  Z  ,  extend  an  other 
plaine  HZT  N.Now  forafmuch  as  ech 
of  thefe  plaines  deuidethe  folide  into 
two  equall  partes,  namely,  into  two 
Prifmes  equall  and  like  ( by  the  8.  defi¬ 
nition  of  the  eleuenth) :  therfore  thofe 
plaines  fhall  cut  the  cube  by  the  cen¬ 
tre,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  39.  of  the 
eleuenth.  Wherefore  the  comon  fc&i- 
on  of  thofe  plaines  fhall  paffe  by  the 
centre  ;Let  that  common  fedtion  be  the 
line  LF.  And  forafmUch  as  the  fides 
H  N  and  k  M  of  the  fuperficieces  K  E  - 
I M  and  H  Z  T  N  do  diuide  the  one 
the  other  into  two  equall  partes,  by 
the  Corollary  of  the  34.  of  the  firli,  andfb  likewife  do  the  fides  Z  T  and  E I :  therefore  the  common 
ledhonLF  is  drawen  by  thefe  fettions,  and  diuideth  the  plaines  KEIMandHZTN  into  two  equal! 
partes,  by  the  firft  of  the  fixt :  for  their  bafes  are  equall,  and  the  altitude  is  one  and  the  fame,  namely, 
the  altitude  of  the  cube  .Wherefore  the  line  LF  fhall  diuidp  into  two  equall  partes  the  diameters  of 
his  plaines,  namely,  the  right  lines  K  I,  E  M,  Z  N,and  N  T,  which  are  the  diameters  of  the  cube  .Wher¬ 
fore  thofe  drameters  fhall  concurre  and  cut  one  the  other  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  poynt,  let  the  fame 
be  O. Wherfore  the  right  lines  O  K,  O  E,  O  I,  OM,  O  H,  OZ,  OT,and  O  N, fhall  be  equal!  the  one 
to  the  other,  for  that  they  are  the  halfes  of  the  diameters  ©f  equal!  and  like  rediangle  parallelogrames. 
Wherefore  making  the  centre  the  point  O,  and  the  fpace  any  of  thefe  lines  O  E,  or  O  K.&c.  a  Sphere 
deferibed,  fhall  pafle  by  euery  one  of  the  angles  of  the  cube,namely,which  are  at  the  pointes  E,Z,I,T, 
K,H,M,Njby  the  n.de'finition  of  the  eleuenth,for  that  all  the  lines  drawen  from  the  point  O  to  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  cube  are  equall  .  But  the  right  line  E I  containeth  in  power  the  two  equall  right  lines  E  Z, 
andZl, by  the  47. of  the  firil.  Wherefore  the  fquare  ofthe  line  E 1  is  double  [to  the  fquare  jof  the  line 
Z I .  And  forafmuch  as  the  right  line  K I  fubtendeth  the  right  angle  K  E I  (for  that  the  right  line  K  Hj  is 
erefled  perpendicularly  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  of  the  right  lines  E  Z  and  Z  T  (by  the  4. of  the  eleueth) :! 
therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  K I  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  E I  and  E  K,;but  the  fquare  of  the 
line  E I  is  double  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  K  (for  it  is  double  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  Z  I,as  hath  bene 
proued,  and  the  bafes  of  the  cube  are  equall  fquares  )  .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  K I  is  triple  to 
the  fquare  ofthe  line  K  E,  that  is,  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  Z I .  But  the  right  line  Z I  is  equal!  to  the 
right  line  D  B,bv  pofition,  vnto  whofe  fquare  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  A  B  is  triple,  by  that  which- 
was  demonfirated  in  the  13  .Propofition  of  this  booke.  Wherefore  the  diameters  K I  &  D  B  are  equall.. 
Wherefore  there  is  deferibed  a  cube  K  I,and  it  is  comprehended  in  the  Sphere  geuen  wherin  the  other 

NNn.ij’.  *  fplideft' 


folides  were  contained,  the  diameter  of  which  Sphere  is  the  line  AB .  And  the  diameter  K I  or  A  B  of 
she  lame  Sphere,  is  proucd  to  be  in  power  triple  to  the  fide  of  the  cube,namely,  to  the  line  DB,orZl. 

^  Corollaryesadded  by  Flu  fas. 

$  Firfi  Corollary. 

thereby  It  is  manifefi ,  that  the  diameter  of  a  Sphere  containeth  in  power  the fides  both  ofapyra - 
mis  and  of  a  cube  itifcribed  in  it. 

For  the  power  of  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  is  two  thirdes  of  the  power  of  the  diameter  (  by  the  tj  .of 
this  booke  )  .  And  the  power  of  the  fide  of  the  cube  is ,  by  this  Propofition,  one  third  of  the  power  of 
thefayd  diameter.  Wherefore  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  contayneth  in  power  the  fides  of  the  pyra¬ 
mids  and  of  the  cube.. 

Second  Corollary. 

zAll  the  diameters  of  a  cube  cut  the  one  the  other  into  two  equaR  partes  in  the  centre  of  the  (phert 
Which  containeth  the  cube  .  Andmoreouer  thoft  diameters  do  in  the  felfe  fame  point  cut  into  two  e- 
tpuail  partes  the  right  lines  which  ioyne  together  the  centres  of  the  appofite  bafes. 

V - ) ’  1 1  i  i. r 

As  it  is  manifefi  to  fee  by  the  right  line  LOF.  For  the  angles  L  K  0,and  F I O,  are  equall,  by  the  29. 
of  the  firfi :  and  it  is  proued,  that  they  are  contained  vnder  equal!  fides  :  Wherefore  (  by  the  4.of  the 
firft)  the  bafes  L  O  and  F  O  are  equall  >  In  like  fort  may  be  proued,that  the  refi  of  the  right  lines  which 
ioyne  together  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes  do  cut  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  partes  in  the 
centre  O. 


f  The  ^Trobleme.  The  sS.Tropofition. 

T  0  make  an  Ico/ahedron ,and  to  comprehend  it  in  the Sphere geuenftohtr* 
in  Here  contained  the former folides ?  and  to  prom  that  the fide  of  the  lco* 
fahedron  is  an  irrationall  line  of  that  kinde  which  is  called  a  lefie  line . 


firfi  fart  of the 
enafirttHion. 


Ake  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere, namely,  the  line  AB;  and  deuide  it  in  the 
point  C,  fo  that  let  the  line  AC  be  quadruple  to  the  line  C  B,  by  the  9.  of the 
fixt.And  defertbe  <vpd  the  line  ABa  femicircle  A  D  B.And(by  the  11. of the 
• firH) from  the point  Craifevpvnto  the  line  AB  aperpendicular  line  CD. 
Anddraw  a  right  line from  the  point  D  to  the  point  B .  And  deferibe  a  circle 
EFG  B  K  whofe  line  from  the  centre  {which  let  be  the  point  Z  )  to  the  circumference ,  let 
heegudl  to  the  line  D  B .  And  in  the circle  E  FG  B  K  deferibe  ( by  the  11. of the fourth )  an 
eqtdlatcr  and  equiangle  Pentagon  figure  E  FGBK  •  And  deuide  the  circumferences  E  Fy 
F  GtGH,B  K,a»dK  E,  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  pointes  L,M,N,X,0.  Draw  alfio  theje 
right  lines  L  M,  M  N,  NX,XQ,  and  O  L;  andmoreouer  thefie  lines  O  E,EL,L  F}F  M, 
M  G,  G  N,  N  By  B  Xy  X  K,  and  KO,  and  they  (hall  be  the fides  of  an  equilater  decagon  in- 
ferihed  in  the  circle  EFG  B  K,  by  the  29. of  the  third .  Wherefore  the  figure  LMNXO 
is  an  equilater  pentagon  ,by  the  29.  of the  third, and  the  right  line  E  0  is  the  fide  of  a  decagon 
or  m  angled  figure.  Raifevp  (by  the  i2.oftheeleuenth )  from  t he  pointes  E,F,G,B,K,and 
the centre  Zyvnto  the  plainefuper fries  of the circle, perpendicular  lines  E  P  ,F  R,G  S,  BT, 
KV,  and  ZW,  and  let  ech  of  them  be  put  equall  to  the  line  drawers  from  the  centre  of 
the  circle  EFG  H  K,  to  the  circumference ,  namely ,  to  the  line  Z  E .  Wherefore  right  lines 
drawn  from  W  to  P, from  Wto  V, from  W  to  T,from  W  to  S,from  W  to  R,jhallbe  equall 
and  parallels  to  right  lines  drawen  from  Zto  E,from  Z  to  Kfrom  Z  to  B,from  Z  to  G, 
and  from  Z  to  F,  by  the  6. and  y.oftheeleuenth,  and  3  3 .  ofthefrfl  .  Wherefore  theplaine 
faperfickccs  EFGH  K,  and  PRS  TV ,  which  are  extended  by  thofe  parallel  lines,  are  pa¬ 
rallel 


ofBuclides  Elemented  FoL^ o8» 

rallel fuperficieces,  by  the  ts. of  the  eleuentk.  Wherefore  making  the  centre  the  point  VP,  and 
the /pace  W  P,  or  W  Vi  defcribea  circle ,  and  it  (hall pafefy  the  pointes  T,SyR,  and  jhall  be 
equall  to  the  circle  EF  G  H  K .  For  the  femidiameters  ofeche  are  equall .  And  dr  awe  thefe 
right  lines  P  R,RSySTy  TV,  VP,  and  they  jhall  make  a  pentagon ,  whofe  j ides jhall  be  e* 
quallto  the  fides  of  the  Pentagon  0  L  M  N  X,  by  the  z 9.  of the frit  .  For  ech  of  them  doth 
fubtend  two  fides  of  the  decagon ,  or 
the f ft  part  of  equal l  circles.  From 
the  vpper  pointes  P,R,S,  T,Vy  draw 
thefe  lines  P  0,P  LyR  L^RM,SMy 
SN,TNy  T X,  VXy  VO  :  which 
jhall  fubtend  right  angles  cosained 
'under  the fides  of  the  decagon  EL - 
F  <lMGN  H  X  K  0  ,  and  the  per¬ 
pendicular  lines  PE  ,  RF  ,SG, 

TH,KK. 


'How forafmuch  as  the  perpendicular  lines  P  E,RF,SG,T  H,  and  V  K,  are  put  e-  *”/*?*(*  *ftf* 
quail  to  the  line  Z  E  drawen from  the  centre ,  therefore  they  are  equall  to  the fide  of an  equi -  •wrattm, 

later  hexagon  infcribedin  the fame  circle  ( by  the  Corollary  of  the  if.  of  the fourth ) .  Where¬ 
fore  the  right  lines  PO,P  L,V  0  ,  and  V  X  (  which  fubtend  the  right  angles  containedvn- 
der  thofe  perpendicular  lines  and  the fides  of the  decagon)  containe  them  in  power  Joy  the  47. 
of  the  firjl .  But  the fide  of  a  pentagon  ( namely ,  the fide  LOorPV)  containeth  in  power  the 
fides  of an  hexagon and  of 'a  decagon  infcribedin  one  and  the  felfeftme  circle,  by  the  10.  of 

TQ{n.iq.  this 


Second  fart  ef 
the  cofir nS  'ttn. 


this  booh  ^Wherefore  the fubtending  lines  P  0,  P  L,  # 0,  f  T X,  TIT,S  MIRM,- 

R  L,  containew  power  thefelfefamefquarethat  the  fidesof  the  pentagon  OL  M  NX  con - 
taint,  or  thattfie fides  oftbe pentagon  P  RS  TV  container: and  therefore  thofc  fubtending 
linesare  equdlto  the  fides  of  the  for (f aid.  pentagons .  Wherefore  the  triangles  contained  of 
thofe fubtending  line  sand  of  the fides  of  the  pentagons,  and  which  are  ten  in  number  ^name¬ 
ly,  P  L  0,0  'ft  P,  V  OX,VXT ,  TX  2^  Tllfs,  S  NjCM,,S  CMR,  R  CM  L,  andRL  P, 
are  equilater*  Againe  produce  the  right  line  ZW  on  either  fide  to  the  points  X  • and  vn- 

to  the fide  of the  decagon, namely  ,to  the  line  O  E,put  the  lines Z  T  and  W  Jfequal,  And for « 
afmuch  as  the  right  line  fVT  is  er  e- 
Bed perpendicularly  to  theplaine  fu- 
perficies  Q  L  M NX,  therefore  it  is 
alfo  ereBcd  perpendicularly  to  the  o- 
therplaine  fuperficies  P  RS  TV,  by 
the  Corollay  of the  14.  of  the  eleueth. 

^And  draxve  thefe  right  lines  £VP, 

JdS>  Off >  &  fiUd :  and  thefe 
lines  alfo  TL,  TM,  T2f,  TX ? 

And  T  0. 


1 

vW.  -• 

"  •  .  S*,  i  «■»  ■-  W 


T{ow  forafinuch  as  the  lines  fifP,  fff,filT,  fifiS,  and  £VR  do  eche fuhtend  right  an- 
second  fart  of  gles  contayned  'under  the  fides  of  an  equilater  hexagon  &  of  an  equilater  decagon  inferibed 
the  demofiratio.  ffc  circ[e  p  rs  TV  or  in  the  circle  EEC  UK  (which  two  circles  are  equall )  therforc  the 

ftyd  lines  are  eche  equal  to  the fide  of  the  pentagon  inferibed  in  the fore  fay  d  circle  by  the  10. 

"  .  .  '  °f 


ofEuclides  Elementes . 


of  this  hooke,and  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other, by  theg.of  th-efrf,  (for  all  the  angles  at  the 
poynt  W  which  they  fubtend  are  right  angles)  .Wherefore  the fi iie  triangles  £P  F ,  JfP  R, 

JfR  S,JgJ>T,and  JfT  F^whichare  contained  vnder  the  fayd  lines  'fv,  ,  JfR,  GJ, 

£1T , and  vnder  the  fides  of  the  pentagon  FP  RS  T^areequi later,  and  e  quad  to  the  ten  for¬ 
mer  triangles.And  by  the fame  reafon  the  pue  triangles  oppofite  vnto  them,  namely,  the  tru 
angles  TMLf  M  N,TNX,YXO,and  TO  L, are  eqmlater  andequd  to  the Jaid  ten  triangles . 

For  the  lines  T  L,T  Mf  N,T  Xgind  T  O  do  fubtend  right  angles  cot  ay  ned  vnder  the fdes 
of  an  equilater  hexagon  and  of an  equilater  decago  infer ibed in  the  circle  EF  G  H  K, which 
is  eqttall  to  the  circle  P  RST  F .  Wherefore  there  is  deferibed  a  folide  contayned  vnder 
20. equilater  triangles.  Wherefore  by  the  lasl  diffinition  of the  eleuenth  there  is  deferibed  an 
Jcofahedron. 

dforv  it  is  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the jphere  geuen^and  toproue  that  the fide  of the 
Jcofahedron  is  an  irrationallline  ofthatkinde  which  is  called  a  leffe  line .  Forafmuch  as  the 
line  Z  W is  the  fide  of  an  hexagon^  the  line  W  GJs  the  fide  of  a  deeagon,  therfore  the  line 
Z  flis  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meant  proportion  in  the  point  W,  and  his greater fe^met 
is  ZW(  by  the  9  .of the  thirteth )  .Wherfore  as  the  line  £FZ  is  to  the  line  ZW,fo  is  the  line  Z- 
W  to  the  line  W  ffBut  the  Z  W  is  equall  to  the  line  Z  L  by  confr  ullion,  and  the  line  W 
to  the  line  ZT  by  confruciton  alfo  '.Wherefore  as  the  line  £fZis  to  the  line  Z  Lfo  is  the  line 
Z  L  to  the  line  Z  T ,and  the  angles  JH  A  L.and  LZT  are  right  angles  ( by  the  2.  dijfinition 
of  the  eleuenth  f  if therfore  we  draw  a  right  line from  the  poynt  L  to  the  poynt  Jffhe  angle 
Tlijfjhalbe  a  right  angle, by  reaf 1  of  the  likenes  of the  triangles  T L  ffand  Z  L  jgjby  the 
&. of  the  fixth)  Wherfore  a femicircle  deferibed  vpo  the  line  £>T,jhal paffe  alfo  by  the  point 
L(by  the  affumpts  added  by  Campane  after  the  13.  of this  booke).  And  by  the fame  feafo  al¬ 
fo, for  that  as  the  line  £fZ  is  the  line  Z  W,fo  is  the  line  ZW  to  the  line  W  but  the  line  ror  the  lim 
Z  fits  equall  to  the  line  TW,and  the  line  Z  W  to  the  line  P  W :  wherefore  as  the  line  T  W  Wa*  equall  to 
is  to  the  line  WPfo  is  the  line  P  Wt  0  the  line  W  ffAnd  therefore  agayne  if we  draw  a  right  tl,e  !ttte 
line fro  m  the poy nt  P  to  the point  T, the  angle  FP  ffjhalbe  a  right  angle.  Wherfore  a femi-  ^omZnTheL 
circle  deferibed  vpon  the  line  flTfhdlpaffe  alfo  by  the  point  P,by  the former  affumpts  :&  if  both, 
the  diameter  ££T  abiding  fixed  the  femicircle  be  turned  round  about,  vntil  it  come  to  the  T hisfart **  «- 
felfe fame  place from  whence  it began firft  to  bcmouedjt fail paffe  both  by  the  point  P  ,  and  ^ffddeZn. 
alfo  by  the  reft  of  the  point  es  of  the  angles  of  the  Icofahedron ,  and  the  Icofahedron  fhalbe  fitted  bJTluf 
comprehended  in  a ff  here. if  ay  Alfo  that  it  is  contayned  in  the fhere  geuen.  /**• 

Diuide(by  the  10.  ofthefrft)  the  line  Z  W  into  two  equall parts  in  the  point  a .  And for¬ 
afmuch  as  the  right  line  Z  ffis  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane proportion  in  the  point 
W,and  his  leffe  figment  is  fygVphereforc  the  figment  £nv  hauing  added  vnto  it  the  halfe 
of the  greater figment,  namely,  the  line  W  a, is  (by  the  3  .of this  booke )in  power  quintuple  to 
the  fquare  made  of  the  halfe  of  the  greater figment  wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  ffa  is 
quintuple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  a  W.But  vnto  the fquare  of the  Jfa, the  fquare  of  the  line 
ffr  is  quadruple  ( by  the  corollary  of the  20.  of  the  fixth  ) for  the  line  ffY  is  double  to  the 
line  £fa:and  by  the fame  reafon  vnto  the fquare  of  the  WA  the fquare  of  the  line  ZW  is 
'  quadruple  ■  Wherefore  the  fquare  of the  line  £U  is  quintuple  to  the fquare  of the  line  Z  W 
(by  the  igofthefiueth ) .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  AC js  quadruple  to  the  line  C  B ,  there¬ 
fore  the  line  A  Bis  quintuple  to  the  line  C  B .  But  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  BC,fo  is  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  B  to  the fquare  of the  line  B  D  (by  the  S  of  the fixth,  and  corollary  of  the 
2  0  .of the fame ) .  Wherfore  the fquare  of  the  line  A  Bis  quintuple  to  the fquare  of the  line  B- 
D  .And  it  is  is  proued  that  the fquare  of  the  line  GT  is  quintuple  to  the fquare  of  the  line 
Z  W.And  the  line  B  D  is  equall  to  the  line  Z  W,for  either  of  them  is  bypofition  equall  to  the 
line  which  is  dr awen  from  the  centre  of  the  circle  EF  G  H  K  to  the  circumference. Where¬ 
fore  the  line  A  B  is  equall  to  the  T  But  the  line  A  B  is  the  diameter  of  the Jp  here  geuen: 

Wherefore  the  line  T  ffxvhich  is  proued  to  be  the  diameter  of  the (phere  contayning  the  Ico - 


jkhedron,is  €  quail  to  the  diameter  of  the fphere  geuen .  Wherefore  the  lcofahedr  on  is  contai¬ 
ned  in  the fp  here geue.  Now  I  fay  that  the  fide  ofthelcofahedron  is  an  irrationallline  of that 
kinde  which  is  called  a  lejfe  line. Tor forajmuch  as  the  diameter  of the fphere  is  rational ,  and 
is  in  power  quintuple  to  the f quart  of  the  line  drawen  fro  the  centre  of  the  circle  O  LMN  X: 
wherefore  alfo  the  line  which  is  drawen fiom  the  centre  of  the  circle  O  LM  N  X  isrationall: 
wherefore  the  diameter  alfo  being  comenfurable  to  the fame  line  (by  the  6. of  the  tenth)  is  ra¬ 
tio  nail. Butif  in  a  circle  hauing  a  ration  all  line  to  his  diameter  he  deferibed  an  squilater 
pentagon  ,the fide  of  the  pentagon  is  (by  the  u.  of this  booke )  an  irratiendlline.of  that  kinde 
which  is  called  a  lejfe  line. But  the Jide  of  the  pentagon  0  L  M-M  X  is  alfo  the  fide  of  the  Jco- 
fahedron  defcnbed7as  hath  before  ben  proued.  Wh erf  ore  thefideof the  Icofahedro  is  an  irra- 
tionall  line  of  that  kinde  which  is  called  a  lejfe  line .  Wherefore  there  is  deferibed  an  Icofahe- 
dron  and  it  is  contayned  in  the  fphere geuen,  and  it  ispronedthat  the  fide  of  the]  Icofa¬ 
hedron  is  an  irrationall  lint  of  that  kind  which  is. called  a  lejfe  line .  Which  was  res, 
he  done  sand  to  he  proued.  if  da- 


A  Corollary. 


: j  4  ,^, 


Trier  ehy  it  is  mamfejl  t  ha  t  the  diameter  of thejpherefis  in  power  quintuple 
to  the  line  1 tobitb  is  drawen  from  the  centre  of the  circle  to  the  circumference  .on 
“ tobich  the  Icofahedron  is  dcjcrihed.And  that  the  diameter  of the Jf here  its  com* 
pofed  of  the  fide  cf  an  hexagon  yand  of  ttyofides  of  a  decagon  deferibed  in  one 
and thejelfe  fame  circle. 


i  *iV. 


Flu  fas  proaeth  the  Icofahedron  deferibed,  to  be  cotayned  in  a  fphere,. by  drawing 
right  linesfrom  tjae  poynt,a,to  the  poyncesP  and  G  after  this  maner.  .. 

•  "  "axY- 'is' .  vV  .'.-  Ai  fo'ti  *?  '  \ 

Forafmuch'  as  the  lines  Z  W,W  Pare  put  equal  to  the  line  drawen  From  the  centre  to  the  cireurn- 
ference,and  the  line  drawen  from  the  cen  tre  to  the  circumference  is  double  to  the  linea  Wjbyoon- 
ilrudtion  :  therefore  thehneW  Pis  alfo  doable  to  thefame  line  a  W.  Wherefore  tshefqtia're  of  the  line 


line  a  P  .-Wherefore  (By  the  47  .of  the  firft  )  the  line  a  P  cOntayneth  in  power  the  lines  P  W  ■}  and  Ww* 
Wherefore  the  right  line  a  P  is  in  power  quintuple  to  theline  W  a.  Wherefore  the  rightlines  aP,ut)d 
a  Q^being  quintuple  to  one  and  the  fame  line  W  a,are(by  th.e5.0f  the  fiueth) equal!  .  In  like  forte  alfo 
may  we  proiie  that  vnto  thofe  lines  a  P  and  a  Q^are  equall  the  relf  of  the  lines  drawen'  fro  m  the" poy  nt 
ta  to  the  reft  of  the  aftgles  R,S,T,V.  Pot  theyfubtend  right  angles  contayned  of  the  line  W  a,and  of  the 
lines  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circ  umference ,  And  forafmifeh  as  vnto  the  line  W  a  is  eiptall  the 
line  V  a,which  is  likewife  eredled  perpendicularly  vnto  the  other  plaice  fuperficies  O  L  M  N  X:  there- 

‘te t*  li*  _ ~  ^  1  _ 1  _ _ •  _ id  1  il  AL  _  .  •  . 


not  onely  the  one  to  tlie  6ther,biitalfo  to  the  lines,drawen  fro  the  layde  poynta.to  the  former  angles 
at  thepoynts,  P,R,  S,T,Vt*  For.  the  lines  drawen  fro  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  ech  circle  are 
equaftyScthelinea  W  is  equall  to  the  linea  Z.But  the  line  aP  is  proued  equal  to  thefinea  which 
is  thehalfoofthe  whole  QJY  *  ’Therefore  therefidue  aY is  equall  to  the  forefaydlinesaP,a  QArc. 
W  hereforem  akin  g  the  centre  the  poynt  a,and  the  foace  one  of  thofe  linesa  Q^a  P,&c.extende  the  lu- 
perficies  of  a  fphere, &:  it  fhal  touch  the  is,. angles  of  the  Icofahed-rqn,which  are  at  the  po;ntesO,L,M. 
N,X,P,K ,S,T>V, Q^Y :  which  fphere  is  deferibed, if vpo  the  diameter  QJf,  be  drawen  a femicircle,and 
the  fayd  femicircle  be  moued  about,  tillit  remrne  vnto  the  fame  place  from  whenfe  it  began  firft  to  be 
moued.  ' 

«[[  A  Corollary  added  by  Flufjas. 

The  oppofite  fides  of  an  Icofahedron  are  parallels  .For  the  diameters  of  the  fphere  do  fall  vpon  the 
oppofite  angles  of  the  icofahedron :  as  it  "was  manifeft  by  the  right  line  QJf .  If  therefore  there  be  ima¬ 
gined  to  be  drawen  the  two  diameters  P  N,and  O  M  they  fhall  concurre  in  the  point  F :  wherefore  the 
tight  lines  which  ioyne  them  together,P  V,and  t  N,are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  playne  fuperficies,by 

the 


o/Suclides  Elemental.  FoU\  10. 

the  a. of  the  eleuenth.  And  forafmuch  as  the  alternate  angles  at  the  endes  of  the  diameters  are  equal! 
(by  the  8 .of  the  firft)  :for  the  triangles  contayned  vnder  equall  femidiameters  and  the  fide  of  the  Ico- 
(ahedron  are  equiangle:  therefore  (  by  the  sS.ofthe  firft) the  lines  P  V  and  L  N  are  parallcs . 

f  T he  sTrohleme.  T be  ir.Tropofition. 

To  make  a  (Dodecahedron  >  and  to  comprehend  it  in  the  fiheregeueny 
ypherin  There  comprehended  the forefay  d folidesiand  to  prone  that  the  fide 
of  the  dodecahedron  is  an  irrationall  line  of  that  kind lohich  is  called  a  re* 
Jiduall  line. 


*  The  li»‘  S  R 
is  equal pa¬ 
rallel  to  the  line 
ZV(bjthe  33. 
of  the fir (l )  for 
thej  tojne  toge¬ 
ther  equall  and 
parallel  lines , 
and  are  m  the 
fame  fu  erficies 
wtththcmfij 
the  7  .of  the  ele¬ 
venth. 


T he  pentagon 
VBIVCR , 
prone  /  to  be  in 
one  and.  the  filfe 
fame  playne  fu- 
perfictes. 


v  1 '  ■ 

:  C 

aw* 

•titt 


<TbethimntbcBoohg 

B  V(  by  the  47  .o^t'hefrfl )  :for  the  angle  B  RV  is  a  right  angle  (  by  the  2.  diffinition  of  the 
eleuenth )  Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  B  Vis  quadruple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  V  R. 
Wherefore  the  line  B  Vis  double  to  the  the  line  R  V(by  the  Corollary  of  the  20. of  the fixth )* 
And  the  line  Z  V  is  alfo  double  to  the  line  R  V(for*  that  the  line  S  R  is  double  to  the  line  0+ 
R,that  is  jo  the  line  RV  which  is  equall  to  the  line  OS).  Wherfon  the  line  BV  is  equall  to  the 
line  V  Z .  Andforafmuch  as  the  two  lines  B 
and  N  R  are  equal l  to  the  two  lines  B  H  and  II- 
Tfnamety  jhe  wholes  and  the  lejfe  fegniets,  and 
they  comprehend  right  angles ,  namely  ^  of  the 
fquares,B  O  ,and  B  P, there  fore  ( by  the  4. of  the 
frf)  the  bafes  B  R  and  B  T  are  equall.  And for- 
afmuch  as  the  lines  B  R,and B  T  areequall,and 
the  two  lines  R  V ,  and.T  W  are-  alfo  by  conjlru- 
ction  equall ,  and  the  angles  B  RV,  and  BTW 
are  by  fn'ppofition  right  angksvherefore againe 
( by  the  4  .of  the frf )  the  bafes  3  V  and  B  W  are 
equall ;  but  the  line  B  V ,  isproued  equallto  the 
line  VZ.Wherf ore  the  line  BJVts  alfo  equallto 
the  line  V  Z.  In  like  fort  alfo  may  we  preue  that 
either  ofthefe  lines  WC,CZ  is  equal  to  the  fame 
line.  V  Z. lifer  e fore  the  pent  agon  figure  BV  Z- 
CWisequihter. 

Now  I  fay  that  it  is  in  one  and  the  felffame 
playne  fuperfeies .  Forafmuch  ds  the  line  Z  V  is  ci 
a  parallell to  the  line S  R(as  was  before proued) 
but  vnto  the  fame  line  S  R,  is  the  line  CB  a 
parallell  (by  the  2S:ofthefrfl)  .  Wherfore  (by 
the  9  .of  the  eleuenth  )  the  line  V  Z  is  a parallell 
to  the  line  C  B  Wherefore,  by  thefeueth  of  thee - 
leuentkfitht '  right  lines  which  ioynethe  together 
are  in  the feife fame  playne  wherein  are'the  parallell  lines.  Wherefore  theTrapefium  B  V  Z- 
C  is  in  one  playne.  And  the  triangle  B  WC  is  in  oneptaynelby  the  2. of theeleuenth ) .  Now  to 


i  O  J  O''.'" 

thing  is. thus  proued.  F  or  a f much  as  the  line  H  P  is  dtuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  pro¬ 
portion  in  the  point  T,and  bis  greater fegment  is  the  line  PV,  therefore  as  theline  HP  is  to 
the  line  P  Tfo  is  the  line  P  f  to  the  line  T  H  JBut:  the  line  H  P  is  equall  io  the  line  H  0  ,  and 
theline  P  T  to  either  of thefe  lines  TW  and  0  T .  Wherefore  as  the  line  HO  is  to  the  line  0- 
T,fo  is  the  line  WT  to  theline  T  H.But  the  lines  HO  and  TW  being fides  of  like  proportion 
are  parallels  (by  the  6. of  the  eleuenth)  ••  (  For  either  of  them  is  ereffed perpendicularly  to  the 
plains  fuperfeies  B  D  }:  and  the  lines  T  H  and  of  are-parallels,  which  Art  alfo fides  of  like 
proportion,  by  the  fame  6. of  the  eleuenth,  (For  either  of  them  is  alfo  creeled  perpendiett- 

lnvh\  t/\  +ha  Ctittpvfirific  Id  V  \  Tdiit.  XllUpvt  thpVP  AVP  fxiiti  tri AWrtl Pt  hAljiviff  f.rxtfi  fi/IPC 


(as  tht  triangles  T  0  H  and  H  TWari)  ,whofe  two  f  des,  O  H  &  H  T,  being  in  the  two  ba¬ 
fes  of  the  cube  making  an  angle  at  the  point  II, the fides  remayning  of thofe  triangle!  ffal(by 
the  3  2. of lhefixth)be  in  one  right  line  Wherf ore  the  lines  T  H  &  H  JV  make  both  one  right 
line. hut  euery  right  line  is  (by  the  r.  of  the  eleuenth)  in  One  &  the  felffame  plaint fuperfeies. 
Whereforesfye.  draw  a  right  line  fomB  to  T ,  there jhalbe  made  a  triangle  BWT ,  which 
ybalbe  in  one  andthe  feife  fame  pUine(by  the  2  .of  the  eleuenth)  .  f^And  therefore  the  whole 
S.  pentagon 


of Euclides  Ekmentes . 


FoL^xtm 


pentagon  figure  V  BWC  Z  is  in  one  and  the fife fame  play  ni ftper fries. 

Now  alfo  I  fay  that  it  is  equiangle.F orforafmuch  as  the  right  line  N 0  is  dinided by  an 
extreame  and  meane proportion  in  the  point  R,and his  greater fegment  is  O  R ,  therefore  as 
both  the  lines  N  0  and  O  R  added  together  is  to  the  line  O  N,fo  ( by  the  5.  of  this  booke)is 
the  line  0  N  to  the  line  0  R.But  the  line  0  R  is  equall  to  the  line  O  S .  Wherefore  as  the  line 
S  NJs  to  the  line  Nj),fo  is  the  line  N  O  to  the  line  OS.  Wherfore  the  line  S  N  is  divided  by 
an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  0,and  his  greater fegment  is  the  line  N  O. 
Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  N  S  and  S  0  are  treble  to  thefquare  of  the  line  N  O  (  by 
the  4. of  this  booke )  .  But  the  line  N  O  is  e quail  to  the  N  B ,  and  the  line  S  0  to  the  line  S  Z: 
wherfore  the fquares  of the  lines  N  S  and  Z  S  are  treble  to  the fquare  of  the  line  N  B:  wher¬ 
fore  the fquares  of the  lines  Z  S,S  N  and  NR,  are  quadruple  to  thefquare  of  the  line  N  B. 
But  unto  the fquares  of  the  lines  SN  &  NB(  by  the  4j.ofthefrst  )is  equal  the fquare  of  the 
line  S  B :  wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  S  and  S  Z,that  is, the fquare  of  the  line  B  Z,  by 
the  47 -of thefrfl,  ( for  the  angle  Z  S  Bis  a  right  angle  by  poftio )  is  quadruple  to  the fquare 
of the  line  N  B  Wherfore  the  line  B  Z  is  double  to  the  line  B  N  ( by  the  Corollary  of  the  20.  of 
the fixth )  .But  the  line  B  C  is  alfo  double  to  the  line  B  N  Wherefore  the  line  B  Z  is  equall  to 
the  line  B  C.Nowforafmuch  as  thefe  two  lines  B  V and V  Z  are  equall  to  ihefe  two  lines  B- 
Wand  WC,and  the  bafe  B  Z  is  equall  to  the  bafe  B  C,therefore(  by  the  8  .of thefrf)the  an¬ 
gle  BV  Z  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  W  C.  And  in  like fort  (by  the  8.  of the fir  si )  may  we  pro  ue 
that  theande  V  ZC  is  equall  to  the  angle  BJVC  (  proving  firfr  that  the  lines  C  B  and  C  V 
are  equal '.which  are  proued  equally  this, that  the  line  N  S  is  equal  to  the  line  X  R,and  ther- 
fore  the  line  CR  is  equal  to  the  line  B  S,by  the  47  .of the frfi  .-wherfore  alfo  by  the  famey  line 
CV  is  equal  1 0  the  line  BZ,that  is,  to  the  line  B  C  (for  the  lines  B  C  &  B  Z  are  proued  equal. ) 
Wherefore  the  three  angles  BW  C,B  V  Z,andV  Z  C  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other. But  if  in 
an  equilater pentagon figure  there  be  thre  angles  equall  the  one  to  the  other ,  the  pentagon  is 
(by  the  7. of the  thirteth )  equiangle  .-wherfore  the  pentagon  B  V  Z  CW  is  equiangle.  And  it 
is  alfo  proued  that  it  is  equilater .  Wherfore  the  pentagon  BFZCWis  both  equilater  &  e- 
quianglexWnd  it  is  made  upon  one  of  the  fdes  of the  cube, namely, upon  BC.*  If  therefore 
upon  every  one  of  the  twelve fdes  oft  he  cube  be  u fed  the  like  con fruition ,  there  {hal  then  be 
made  a  dodecahedron  contayned  under  tw due  pentagons  equilater  and  equiangle. 

Now  it  is  required  to  comprehend  it  in  the fiber e  geuen, and  to  proue  that  the fide  of  the 
dodecahedron  is  an  irrational}  line  of  that  kinde  which  is  called  a  refduall  line .  Extend 
the  line  T  0 ,  and  let  the  line  extended  be  T  Jig  now  then  the  line  T  figfiall  light  uppon 
the  diameter  of  the  cube,  and  (hall  divide  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  parts .  For  this  is 
manifef  to  fe  by  the  5  7. of  the  eleuenth  .  (For  if  by  the  two  lines  NX  and  M  H  be  drawen 
two  pi aynes  perpendicularly  to  the  bafes ,  and  cutting  the  cube ,  the  common  fiction  of thofe 
playnes  fialbe  the  line  TO  produced: for  their  common  fetfion  is  from  the  poynt  0  erected 
perpendicularly  to  theplaine  E  B  C  F,by  the  19  .of  the  eleuenth ) . Let  them  cut  the  one  the  0- 
ther  in  the  point  figwherefere  figs  the  centre  of  the  fiber  c  which  comprehendeth  the  cube » 
and  T  figs  the  halfe  diameter  of  the Jpher  e  by  that  which  was  demof rated  in  the  15.  of  this 
booke:  wherefore  the  right  lines  drawen  from  the  centre  figo  all  the  angles  of the  cube  fbalbe 
equall.  And  draw  a  right  line  from  the  point  V  to  the  point  fig  Now forafmuch  as  the  right 
line  N  S  is  diuided  by  an  extreme  andmeane  proportion  in  the point  O  ,and  his  greater  feg¬ 
ment  is  the  line  N  0,as  hath  before  ben  proued ,  therefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  N  S  and 
S  O  are  treble  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  NO, by  the  4.0/ this  booke. But  the  line  N  S  is  equal  to 
the  line  T  filj  for  the  line  No  is  equal  to  the  line  O  fas  hath  before  ben  proued, &  the  line 
10  to  the  line  OS)  being  both  lejfe  fegmentesibut  the  line  O  S  is  equall  to  the  line  Y  V  ,f or 
the  line  R  0  is  equall  thereunto  .-wherefore  the  fquares  oft  he  lines  figf  and  T  F  are  treble  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  NO  .But  unto  the  fquares  of the  lines  figf  f  IF  the  fquare  of the  line 
F  figs  e  quail  ( by  the  47. of  the  frit) :  wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  UneF  figs  treble  to  the 

QOo.tj.  fquare 


The  pentagon 
V  BWC  l,  is 
proved  eqm- 
angle* 


*  Lookefor  4 
farther  con- 
fir  union  after 
Fluff  as  at  the 
ende  of  the  de - 
monfimion , 

That  the  do¬ 
decahedron  is 
contayned  in 
the  fibers 
geuen . 


7 he  thirtenth  <Boo%e 

f quart  t>f  the  line  NO  .  But  tbefemidiameter 
of  the j^here  copreheding  the [aid  cube  is  in  po¬ 
wer  treble  to  the  half  of  the fide  of  the  cube.  For 
we  haue  before ( in  the  i$>of this  booke )  taught 
how  to  make  a  cube ,  and  to  comprehende  it  in  a 
fp  here, and  haue proued  that  the  diameter  oft  he 
Jphere  is  in  power  treble  to  the  fide  of  the  cube. 

Now  in  what  proportion  whole  is  to  the  whole , 
in  the  fame  is  the  halfe  to  the  halfe( by  the  is -of 
the  fifth  ).Bnt  the  line  NO  is  the  half of  the fide 
of the  cube  Wherefore  the  line  V  fifis  e  quail  to 
the femidiameter  of  the  Jphere  copreheding  the 
cube.  But  the  point  fifiis  the  centre  of the Jphere  ® 
reprehending  the  cube.  Wherefore  the  point  V, 
which  is  one  of  the  angles  of  the  dodecahedron , 
touchetb  the  fuperfcies  of  the  Jphere  geuen  .  In 
like fort  alfo  may  we  prone ,  that  euery  one  of 
the  rest  of  the  angles  of  the  dodecahedron 
toucheth  the  fuperfcies  of  the Jphere  Wherefore  ci 
the  dodecahedron  is  comprehended  in  the  Jphere 
geuen. 

Now  I  fay,  that  the fide  of  the  dodecahedron 
That  the  fide  it  an  irrationall  line  of  that  kinde  which  is 
ofthedodeca -  called  a  refiduallline .  For  forafmuch  as  the 
hedronha  ljne  ]$  o  is  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  mean e 
tefi.iudl  line,  proportion  in  the  point  R,  and  his  greater fegment  is  the  line  0  R,  and  the  line  OX  is  alfo  di¬ 
uided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  S ,  and  his  greater fegment  is  the  line 
O  S .  Wherefore  the  whole  line  N  X  is  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,  and  his 
greater fegment  is  the  line  RS .(  For  for  that  as  the  line  O  N  is  to  the  line  O  R,fo  is  the  line 
O  R  to  the  line  N  R,  and  in  the  fame  proportion  alfo  are  their  doubles  ( for  the  partes  of eque - 
multiplices  haue  one  and  the felfe fame  proportion  with  the  whole ,  by  the  1$.  of  the fifth  ) . 
Wherefore  as  the  line  N  X  is  to  the  line  R  S,fo  is  the  line  RS  to  both  the  lines  N  R  and  S  X 
added  together.  But  the  line  NJC  is  greater  then  the  line  RS,  by  both  the  lines  N  R  and  S  X 
added  together.  Wherefore  the  line  NX  is  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportioned 
his  greater  fegment  is  the  line  R  S  .  But  the  line  R  Sis  equall  to  the  line  V  Z,  as  hath  before 
bene  proued.  Wherefore  the  line  TJX  is  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,  and 
his greater fegment  is  the  UneVZ  .And forafmuch  as  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  isratio- 
nall,and is  in  power  treble  to  the  fide  of  the  cube,  by  the  i$.of  this  booke,  therefore  the  lint 
N  X,  king  the fide  of  the  cube,  is  rationall .  But  if  a  rationall  line  be  diuided  by  an  extreme 
and  meane  proportion,  either  of the fegmentes  is  (  by  the  6.  of this  booke)  an  irrationall  lint 
of  that  kinde  which  is  called  a  refiduallline ,  Wherefore  the  line  V  Z  being  the fide  of the  do¬ 
decahedron, is  an  irrational  line  of  that  kinde  which  is  called  a  refduall  line  Wherf ore  there 
is  made  a  dodecahedron, and  it  is  coprehended  in  the  Sphere  geuen,  wherein  the  other folidcs 
were  contained,  and  it  is  proued  that  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  is  a  refiduallline  ;  which 
was  required  to  be  done,  and  alfo  to  be  proued. 


yj  Corollary. 

Hereby  it  is  manifefi ,  that  the  fide  of  a  cube  being  diuided  by  an  extreme 

and 


of  Euclitles  E/ementes*  FoL/^iu 

and  means  proportion  f  he  greater  fegment  thereof  is  the fide  of  the  dode * 

cahedron  .  As  it  was  manifeft  by  the  line  V  Z  which  was  proued  to  be  the  greater  fegment 
of  the  right  line  N  X,  namely,  of  the  fide  of  the  cube. 

A  further  conftru&ion  of  the  dodecahedron  after  Flujfas. 

Forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued  that  the  pentagon  BVZCW  is  equilater  and  equiangleand 
toucheth  one  of  the  fides  of  the  cube.Letvs  ihow  alfo  by  what  meanes  vpon  eche  of  the  12  .fides  of  the 
cube  may  in  like  fort  be  applyed  pentagons  ioyning  one  to  the  other,and  compofing  the  n.bafes  of  the 
dodecahedron.  Draw  in  the  former  figure  thefe  right  lines  A  1,1  D,I  L ft  K.Now  forafmuch  as  the  line 
P  L  was  in  the  point  d  diuided  like  vnto  the  lines  P  H,C>  N  .or  O  X,and  vpon  the  pointes  T,P,d,were 
ereded  perpendicular  lines  equall  vnto  the  line  O  Y.and  the  rell:  namely  ,vnto  the  greater  fegmetrand 
the  lines  T  W  and  d  I  were  proued  parallels ,  therefore  the  lines  WI  and  T  <51  are  parallels,  by  the  7. 
of  the  eleuenth,and  3  3  .of  the  fir  ft.  Wherefore  aIfo,by  the  9.  of  the  eleuenth, the  lines  W I  and  D  C  are 
parallels.  Wherefore  by  the  7. of  the  eleuenth  C  W I D  is  a  playne  fuperficies  .And  the  triangle  A I D  is 
a  playne  fuperfides,by  the  2  .of  the  eleuenth.Now  it  is  manifeft  that  the  right  lines  ID,&  I A  are  equall 
to  the  right  line  W  C.For  die  light  lines  A  L  &  l  d  (which  are  equall  to  the  right linesB  H,&  H  T)do 
make  the  fubteded  lines  A  ft  and  B  T  equall  by  the  4. of  the  firft.Andagayne  forafmuch  as  the  lines  B  T 
and  T  W  contayne  a  right  angle  B  T  W,  as  alfo  doo  the  right  lines  A  d  and  &  I  contavnethe  right  an-. 
gleA  dl(  for  the  right  lines  WT,  and  Id  are  ereded  perpendicularly  vnto  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
playne  A  B  C  D  by  fuppofition)  .  And  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  T  and  T  W  are  equall  to  the  fquares  of 
the  lines  A  d ,  and  d  I(for  it  is  proued  that  the  line  B  T  is  equall  to  the  line  A  d ,  and  the  line  T  W  to 
the  line  d  I)  .And  vnto  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  T  and  T  W  is  equall  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  W,by  the 
47  .of  the  fir  ft :  likewife  by  the  fame  vnto  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  d  and  d  I  is  equall  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A I.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  W  is  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  I,wherefore  alfo  the 
line  B  T  is  equall  to  the  line  A I .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  ale  the  lines  I D  and  W  C  equall  to  the  lame 
lines.  Now  forafmuch  as  the  lines  A I  and  I  D,and  the  lines  A  L  and  L  D  are  equall ,  and  the  bafe  I L  is 
common  to  them  both,  the  angles  A  L I  and  D  L I  lhalbeequall,by  the  8, of  the  firlhand  therefore  they 
are  right  angles,bv  the  io.diffinition'of  the  firft.And  by  the  fame  reafon  are  the  angles  WHB,  and  W- 
H  C  right  angles.And  foratmuch  as  the  two  lines  H  T  and  T  W  are  equall  to  the  two  lines  L  d  and  d- 
I,  and  they  contayne  equall  angles,  that  is,  right  angles  by  fuppofition,  therefore  the  angles  WH- 
T,and  I L  d,are  equall  by  the4.of  the  firft .  Wherefore  the  playne  fuperficies  A I D  is  in  like  fort  incli¬ 
ned  to  the  playne  fuperficies  A  B  C  D,as  the  playne  fuperficies  B  W  C  is  inclined  to  the  lame  playne  A- 
B  C  D,by  the  4.diffinition  of  the  eleuenth  .  In  like  fort  may  we  proue  that  the  plavne  WCDI  is  in  like 
fort  inclined  to  the  playne  ABC  D,as  the  playne  B  VZ  C  is  to  the  playne  EBCF.  For  that  in  the  trian¬ 
gles  Y  O  H  and  ft  P  K  which  confift  of  equall  fides  (  eche  to  his  correfpondent  fide),the  angles  Y  H  O, 
and  ft  K  P, which  are  the  angles  of  the  inclination,are  equall  .And  now  if  the  rightline  ft  K  be  extended 
to  the  pointa,  and  the  pentagon  C  W I D  a  be  made  perfed ,  we  may,by  the  fame  reafon,  proue  that 
that  playne  is  equiangle  and  equilater ,  that  we  proued  the  pentagon  B  V  Z  C  W  to  be  equaliter  and  e- 
quianglc  .And  likewife  if  the  other  playnes  B  W I A  and  A I D  be  made  perfed ,  they  may  be  proued  to 
be  equall  an  d  like  pentagons  and  in  like  fort  fituate.and  they  are  fet  vpon  thefe  common  right  lines  B» 
WjW  C,W  I,AI,and  I  D.Andobferuing  this  methode ,  there  fhall  vpon  euery  one  of  the  ia.fides  of 
the  cube  be  fet  euery  one  of  the  12. pentagons  which  compofe  the  dodecahedron. 

%  Certayne  CoroIIaryes  added  by  Fluff  as. 

#  Firjl  Corollary. 

T he fide  of  a  cube, is  equall  to  the  right  line  Which  fubtendeth  the  angle  of  Ihe pentagon  of  A  dode¬ 
cahedron  contayned  in  one  and  the  felfe fame fphere  with  the  cube. 

For  the  angles  B  W  C  and  A I  D,are  fubtended  of  the  lines  B  C  and  A  D .  Which  arc  fides  of  the 
Cube. 

Second  Corollary. 

In  a  dodecahedron  there  are fixe fides  euery  two  of  which  are  parallels  andoppofte,  Whofe fetli- 
ons  into  two  equall  partes ,  are  coupled  by  three  right  lines ,  Which  in  the  center  of  the  fphere  which 
contayneth  the  dodecahedron  ,deuide  into  two  equall  partes  and  perpendicularly  both  them fellies  and 
alfothefid.es. 

QOo.iijv  For 


Draw  in  the 
former  figure 
thefe  lines , 

$  A 
liD, 


The  thirtenth^ooke 

Forvpon  the  fixe  bafts  of  the  cube  arefet  fixe  fides  of  the  dodecahedron ,  as  it  hath  bene  pro¬ 
ved  ("by  the  lines  ZVVW I  &rc.)  which  are  cutte  into  two  equall  partes  by  right  lines,  which  ioyne 
together  the  centers  of  the  bafes  of  the  cube,as  the  line  Y  O  produced,  and  the  other  like.Which  lines 
coupling  together  the  centers  of  the  bafes  are  three  in  number,  cutting  the  one  the  other  perpendicu- 
larly(for  they  are  parallels  to  the  fides  of  the  cube  )  and  they  cutte  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall 
partes  in  the  center  of  the  fphere  which  contayneth  the  cube  ( by  that  which  was  demonllrated  in  the 
ij.of  this  booked  .And  vnto  thefe  equall  lines,ioyning  together  the  centers  of  the  bafes  of  the  cube,are 
without  the  bafes  added  equall  partes  O  Y,  P  ft,  and  the  other  like ,  which  by  fuppofition  are  equall  to 
halfe  of  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  .  Wherefore  the  whole  lines ,  which  ioyne  together  the  fedoins 
of  the  oppolite  fides  of  the  dodecahedron ,  are  equall ,  and  they  cut  thofe  fides  into  two  equall  partes 
and, perpendicularly. 

T  bird  Corollary. 

A  right  hntioyning  togetherthepoynts  of  the fiElions  of  the  oppofite fides  of  the  dodecahedron  in¬ 
to  two  equall  partes  ,bewgdiuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion :  the  greater  figment  thereof 
fhalbe  the  fide  of  the  cube }  and  the  lejfe  figment  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  contaytiedin  the  filfe 
fame  fphere. 

For  it  was  proued  that  thexight  line  Y  Q_is  diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion  in  the 
pqynt  O,  and  that  his  greater  fegment  O  QJs  halfe  the  fide  of  the  cube  ,  and  his  Idle  fegment  O  Y  is 
halfe  of  the  fide  V  Z  (which  is  thefide  of  the  dodecahedron)  .Wherefore  it  followeth  (by  the  i/.of  the 
fifth),  that  their  doubles  are  in  the  fame  proportion.  Wherefore  the  double  of  the  line  Y  Qwhich  ioy- 
nech  the  poynt  oppofite  vnto  the  line  Y,is  the  whole:  and  the  greater  fegment  is  the  double  of  the  line 
O  Q_which  is  the  fide  of  the  cube:  &  the  Idle  fegment  is  the  double  of  the  line  Y  O,  which  is  equall  to 
the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron,namely,to  the  fide  V  Z. 


f  The  6.  Trobleme.  The  iS.  Tropofition* 


'I  he  fide  of  a 
pyramis,, 


The  fide  of  A 
cube. 


To  finch  mt  the  fides  of the  for  efajd  fine bodies ,  and  to  compare  them 
together . 


Ake  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  geuen,  and  let  the  fame  be  Ah,  and  dittide  it 
in  the  point  C,fo  that  let  the  line  AC  be  equall  to  C  B,  by  the  io.  of  the  fir  fit 
and  in  the  point  Dfo  that  let  At)  be  double  to  DB,by  the  p  .of the fxt.And 
'  vpon  the  line  A  B  defer  the  a femicirck  AEB  .And from  the  pointes  C  and 
D,raifevp  (by  the  n.  of  the  fir  ft l)  vntothtiine  A  B  perpendicular  lines  C  E 
and  D  F  .And  drarv  thefe  right  lines,  A  F,  F  B,  and  B  E  .  Now for afmucb  as  the  line  A  D 
is  double  to  the  line  D  B ,  therefore  the  line  A  B  is  treble  to  the  line  D  B  .  Wherefore  the  line 
B  A  is  (efquialter  to  the  line  A  D  (for  it  is  as  y.  to  2.).. But as the  line  B  A  is  to  the  line  AD, 
fo  is  the  fqnare  of the  line  B  A  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  F  (by  the  <S.ofthefixt,or  by  the  Co¬ 
rollary  of ; the fame ,  and  by  the  Corollary  of  the  20. of the fame  )  :  for  the  triangle  Ca  F  Bis 
equiangle  to  the  triangle  A  F  D  .  Wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  B  A  is  [efquialter  to  the 
fquare  of thelmeAF .  But  the  diameter  of  a fphere  is  in  power fefquialter  to  the fide  of the 
pyramisfy  the  1 3  .cfthisbooke ,  andtheline  A  B  is  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  .  Wherefore 
the  line  A  F  is  equall  to  the fide  of  the pyramis. 

AgaineforafmUch  as  the  line  A  B  is  treble  to  the  line  B  D  .-but  as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line 
B  D,fo  is  the  fquare  of the  line  ABto  the fquare  of the  line  F  B  ,by  the  Corollaries  of  the  2. 
and  20  .of the fixt.  Wherefore  the fquare ;  of  the  line  A  B  is  treble  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  B. 
But  the  diameter  of  a  fphere  is  in  power  treble  to  thefide  of  the  cube  (  by  the  15. of  this  booh ) 
and  the  diameter  oftbefphere  is  the  line  A  B.  Wherefore  the  line  B  F  is  the fide  of the  cube . 

'  Andfwafmufib  as  the  fine  AC-is  'equaiito'the  line  C  B,  therefore  the  line  A  B  is  double  to 
the  line  C  B.But  as  the  line  A  Bis  to  the  line  C  B,fo  is  the fquare  of  the  line  ABto  the fquare 
oft  he  line  B  E  (by  the  former  Corollaries )  .  T herefore  the  fquare  of the  line  A  B  is  double  to 
‘  "  ;v  the 


cfEucUdei  ElementeSo  FoL  4 15. 

the f quart  of the  line  B  E .  Bui  the  diameter  of  the ffhere  is  in  power  double  to  the fide  of the 
oclohedron ,  and  A  B  is  the  diameter  of  the fiber  egeuen  :■  wherefore  the  line  BE  is  the  fide  of 
the  oclohedron .  Raife  %>p  (  by  the  i  i  .oft he  fir fi  )from  the  point  A  vnto  the  right  line  A  B 
a  perpendicular  line  A  G .  And put  the  line  A  G  equal l to  the  line  A  B .  (_xfnd  dr  awe  a  right 
line  from  the  point  Gio  the  point  C.  And  let  the  line  G  C  cut  the  circumference  in  the  point 
Ht  And  (  by  the  1 2.0 fthefirfl  )  from  ihepoint  H  dr  awe  vnto  the  line  AB  a  perpendicular 
line  H  K .  Now  forafmuch  as  the  line  G  A  is  double  to  the  line  A  C  ( for  G  A  is  e quail  to 
AB)  .  But  as  G  A  is  to  A  C,  fo  is  H  K  to  EC  (  by  the  28  wf the  fir  ft,  and  Corollary  of  the 
2. of  the  fixt )  ■■  wherefore  the  line  H  K  is  double  to  the  line  K  C.  Wherefore  thefquare  of  the 
line  UK  is  quadruple  to  the fquare  of the  line  K  C,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  20.  of  the fixt. 
Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  H  K  and  K  C,  which  are  all  one  with  the fquare  of  the  line 
H  C,  by  the  47. of  the first,  is  quintuple  to  the fquare  of the  line  K  C .  But  the  line  H  C  is  e* 
quail  to  the  line  C  B,  by  the  definition  of  a  circle.  Wherfore  the  fquare  oftheline  B  C  is  quin-* 
tuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  <* 

C  K .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line 
A  Bis  double  to  the  line  B  C  ,of 
which  theline  AE>  is  double  to 
the  line  T)  B  ;  Wherfore  the  refi- 
dtie,namely,B  D, is  double  to  the 
refidue, namely,  to  D  C  (  by  the 
j  p.  of  the  fi ’ft  )  .  Wherefore  the 
line  BC  is  treble  to  theline  C  D. 

Wherefore  the  fquare  oftheline 
B  C  is  nonecuple  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  C  D,  by  the  Corollary  of 
the  2 o.oft he fixt. But  the fquare 
of  BC  is  onely  quintuple  to  the 
fquare  of  C  K  .  Wherefore  the 
fquare  of  CK  is  greater  the  the 
fquare  ofC  D ,  by  the  to.  of  the 
fift.  Wherefore  alfo  the  line  C  K 
is  greater  then  theline  D  C. Vn¬ 
to  the  lin/C  K  put  (  by  the  2. of  the  fir  fi  )  an  equallline  C  L .  And  from  the  point  L  raife  nap 
' vnto  the  line  A  B  a  perpendicular  line  L  M.  And  dr  awe  a  right  line from  ihepoint  M  to  the 
point  B  .  Now  forafmuch  as  the fquare  of  the  line  C  Bis  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
C  K,  and  the  line  A  B  is  double  to  the  line  B  C,  and  t  he  line  K  L  is  double  to  the  line  CK  : 
therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  AB  is  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  K  L,by  the  is. of 
the  fift  .But  the  diameter  of  a  fi  here  is  in  power  quintuple  to  the  line  which  is  drawenfrom 
the  centre  of  the  circle  to  the  circumference  on  which  the  Icofahedron  is  deferibed, by  the  Cok 
r^Uaryoffheiff.ofthefixt .  Andtheiine  AB  tithe  diameter  of the  fibers  :  whereforethz 
line  K  Eis  the  femidiameter  of  the  circle  on  which  tfie  icofahedron  is  deferibed .  Wherefore 
the  lipe  K  Lis  the  fide  of  an  hexagon  figure  deferibed  in  the fame  circle,  by  the  Corollary  of 
the  ?5‘0f the  fourth.  And  forafmuch  as  the  diameter  of  the fihere  is  made  of  the fide  an  hex- 
ugbn figure y  and  of  two  fides  of  a  decagon  being  ech  oft  hem  deferibed  in  one  and  the felfe 
famed  re le  (by  the  Corollary  of the  16.  of this  booh )  ••  and  the  line  A  Bis  the  diameter  of  the 
fihire,  and  the  line  K  L  is  We fide  oft  he  hex  agon, and  the  tine  A  K  is  t  quail  to  theline  L  Be 
where  fore  either  of  the  lines  A  K  and  LB  is  thefide  of a  decagon  deferibed  in  the  circle  on 
which  the  Icofahedron  is  defcribed(  that  is, in  the  circle  whafe  femidiameter  is  the  line  K  L)  j 
And forafmuch  as  the  line  L  B  is  thefide  of  a  decagon, and  the  line  M  L  of  an  hexagon  (for 
M  Lis  equal!  to  K  L,for  that  it  is  equall  to  K  H,by  the  14. of  the  third,  for  they  are  equally 


The  fide  of  an 
Icojahedron. 

The  (ides  of* 
dodecahedron* 


Tomparifon  of 


diftani from the  centre,  and  ech  of  the  lines  H  K  and  K  Lis  double  to  K  C  ) .  Wherefore  the 
line  M  B  is  the fide  of a  pentagon, by  the  1  o  .of  this  booke .  But  the  fide  of the  pentagon  is  alfo 
the  fide  of  the  Icofahedren,  by  that  which  was  demonfir ated in  the  10  of this booke.  Where¬ 
fore  the  lint  MB  is  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedr  on. 

And  for afmuch  as  the  line  F  B  is  the  fide  of  a  cube,  let  it  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and 
meane  proportion  in  the  point  N,  and  let  the  greater fegment  therofbe  NB .  Wherefore  the 
Une  2 fB  is  the fide  of  a  Dodecahedron,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  17.  of this  booke. 

And forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued, by  the  13. of  this  booke,  that  the  diameter  of  the 
the  fine, tides '  fi^reis  in  power fifquialter.  to  A  F  the fide  of the  pyr  amis, and  is  in  power  double  to  BE  the 
of  the  fo/ejayd  octahedron, by  the  14.0ft be  fame, ,  and  is  in  power  treble  to  F  Bthe fide  of  the  cube, 

bodies*  by  the  i$.of the  fame .  Wherefore  it follow  eth,  that  of  what  partes  the  diameter  of thefihere 

containethfixe ,  of  fuck  partes  the  fide  of  the  pyr  amis  ccntaineth  fower :  and  the  .fide  of  the 
oflohedron  three :  and  the  fide  of  the  cube  two .  Wherefore  the  fide  of the  pyr  amis  is  in  power 
to  the fide  of  the  oclohedron  in  fefquitertia  proportion and  is  in  power  to  the  fide  of the  cube 
in  double  proportion .  And  the fide  of  the  oclohedron  is  in  power  to  the fide  of the  cube  in fefi 
quialtera  proportion  .  Wherefore  theforefaid fides  of  the  three  figures,  that  is,  of  the  pyra- 
mis,ofthe  ofiohedron,and  of  the  cube,are  the  one  to  the  other  in  rationallproportionsWher - 
fore  they  arc  ration  all.  (But  the  other  two fides, namely, the  fides  ofthelcofahedron  and  of  the 
Dodecahedron,  are  neither  the  one  to  the  other, nor  alfo  to  the f ore f aid fides  jin  rationall pro¬ 
portions  :  for  they  are  irrationall  lines,  namely, a  lefie  line,  and  a  refiduall  line. 

The  fide  of  the  But  that  MB  the  fide  of  the  c  ■  ■  -  r  .  . 

Icofahedren  Icofahedron  is  greater  then  N  B 

proued  greater  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron 
then  the  fide  may  thus  be  proued'.  For  afmuch 

as  the  triangle  FDB  isequian- 
gle  to  the  triangle  F  A  B,  by  the 
S  .of  the  fixt, therefore  proporti¬ 
onally,  as /he  dine  B  D  is  to  the 
line  B  F,fo  is  the  line  B  F  to  the  , 
line  B  A .  ^And  for  afmuch  as 
there  are-three  right  lines  pro¬ 
portional!,  therefore  as  the firfi 
is  to  the  third  ,fio  is  the  fquare 
made  of  the  firfi  to  the  fquare 
made  ofthefecond,by  the  Corol¬ 
lary  of  the.zd.  ofthefixt.  Wher- 
fore  as  the  line  D  B  is  to  the  line. 

B  A,  fo  isthe  fquare  of  the  line 
V  B.  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 

B  F :  Wherefore  (  by  conuerfion  ,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  4.  of  the  fiueth  )  at  the 
line  AB  is  to-t he  line  B  D,  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  UneFB  to  the  fquare  of the  line  B  D . 
"But  the  line  A  B  is  treble  to  the  line  B  D ,  as  hath  before  bene  proued.  Wherefore  the  fquare 
of  the  line  F  Bis  treble  to  the fquare  of  the  line  B  D  .But  the fquare  of  the  line  AD  is  qua* 
drupletothe  fquare  of  the  line  D  B,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  20. of  the  fixt,  for  the  line  AD 
is  double  to  the  line  D  B .  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  AD  is  greater  then  the  fquare 
of  the  line  F  B,  by  the  1 0. of  the f ft. Wherefore  alfo  the  line  A  D  is  greater  then  the  line  FB. 
Wherefore  the  line  A  Lis  much  greater  then  the  line  F  B .  And  the  line  A  L  being  diuided 
by  . an  extreme.^  meane  proportion,  his  greater  fegment  is  the  line  K  L,by  the  p. of  this  boke : 
f  for  the  line  L.K  isthe  fide  of  an  hexagon,  and  the  line  K  A  is  the  fide  of  a  decagon  inferi- 
bed  in  one  and  the fame  circle,  as  hath  before  bene  proued  )  :  and  the  Une  F  B  being  diuided 

by  an 


of  the  dodeca¬ 
hedron* 


ifSuclides  Elementes . 


F0/414. 


by  an  extreme  and  meane proportion,  his  greater  fegmsnt  is  NB .  Wherefore  the  line  K  Lis 
greater  then  the  line  NB  .(*  For  two  lines  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion, are 
euery  rvay  like  proportionall )  .  But  the  line  K  Lis  equal l  to  the  line  L  M .  wherefore  the  line 
L  Mis  greater  then  the  line  NJS .  But  the  line  CM  B  is  greater  then  the  line  L  CM .  Wher- 
fore  the  line  CM  B  being  the fide  oft  he  Icofahedron,  is  much  greater  then  the  line  2 fiB  be¬ 
ing  the fide  of the  Dodecahedron :  which  was  required  to  be  done ,  and  to  be  proued. 

CAja  other  way  to  proue  that  the  line  CM  B  is  greater  then  the  line  TflB .  Forafimuch 
as  the  line  AD  is  double  to  the  line  D  B,  therefore  the  line  A  Bis  treble  to  the  line  D  B.  But 
as  A  B  is  to  B  D,  fio  is  the fiquare  of the  line  A  B  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  F,  by  the  $  of  the 
fixt  ( for  the  triangle  F  A  B  is  equiangle  to  the  triangle  F  D  B  )  .  Wherefore  the  fiquare  of 
the  line  A  Bis  treble  to  the fiquare  of  the  line  B  F .  And  it  is  before  proued,  that  the fiquare  of 
the  line  A  B  is  quintuple  to  the fiquare  of  the  line  K  L  .  Wherefore  fiue  fiquares  made  of  the 
line  K  L,  are  e  quail  to  three  fiquares  made  of the  line  F  B .  But  three fiquares  made  of  the  line 
F  B,  are  greater  then  fixe  fiquares  made  of  the  line  N  B,as  is ftraight  way  proued .  Wherfore 
fiue  fiquares  made  of  the  line  K  L,  are  greater  then  fixe fiquares  made  of  the  line  N  B.  Wber- 
fo*e  alfio  one fiquare  made  of the  line  K  L ,  is  greater  then  one  fiquare  made  of  the  line  NJi. 
Wherefore  the  line  K  L  is  greater  then  the  line  NJ> .  But  the  line  K  L  is  equall  to  the  line 
L  M .  Wherefore  the  line  L  M  is  greater  then  the  line  N  B .  Wherefore  the  line  M  B  is  much 
greater  then  the  line  NJS  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued . 

But  now  let  vs  proue  that  three  fiquares  made  of  the  line  F  B, are greater  then  fixe  fiquares 
made  of the  line  NJs  .  Forafimuch  as  the  line  B  N  is  greater  then  the  line  N  F,for  it  is  the 
greater figment  of the  line  B  F  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion ,  therefore  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  F,and  B  N,  is  greater  then  that  which  is  obtained  vn- 
der  the  lines  B  F  and  F  N,  by  the  1. of the  fixt. Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
lines  B  F  and  B  N,  together  with  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  F  and  F  N,  is 
greater  then  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  B  F  and  F  N  twifie .  But  that  which  is 
contained  vnder  the  lines  BF  and  F  N,  together  with  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the. 
lines  B  F  and  B  N,is  the fiquare  oft  he  line  B  F,by  the  2  .of the fecond ,  and  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  lines  B  F  and  F  N  once,  is  equall  to  the  fiquare  of  NJ3  .  For  the  line  F  B  ii 
diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  Nj  (  and  (  by  the  17. of  the  fixt) 
that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  extremes,  is  equall  to  the  fiquare  made  of the  midle  line  )  . 
Wherefore  the fiquare  of  the  line  F  B,  is  greater  then  the  double  of  the  fiqu4re  of  the  line  B  N. 
Wherefore  one  of  the  fiquares  made  of the  line  B  F,  is  greater  then  two  fiquares  made  of the 
UneB  Wherefore  alfio  three  fiquares  made  of  the  line  F  B ,  are  greater  then  fixe  fiquares 

made  of the  line  B  N :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


*  This  A  flumps 
is  afterward 
proued  tn  the 
l^.bool^‘  and 4. 
propoflttoK. 


An  other  demo- 
monp ration  to 
proue  that  the 
ftde  of  the  loo¬ 
fah  e  dr  b  is  grea¬ 
ter  then  the  fde 
of  the  dodecahe¬ 
dron  , 


That  3 .  fljttarej 
of  the  line  F  B 
are  greater  the 
6.  fquare  s  of 
the  line  N  B, 


A  Corollary* 

Now  alfio  I  fay  that  befides  the  fiue  forefayd  fiolides  there  can  not  be  deficribed  any  other  That  there  earn 
folide  cbpreheded  vnder  figures  equilater  dp  equiangle  the  one  to  the  other.  For  of two  trian -  be  no  ether  fo¬ 
gies, or  of  any  two  other play  ne fuperficieces  can  not  be  made  a  folide  angle  (for, that  is  cot r ary  heftds  tnefif 

to  the  dffmiiion  of  a  folide  angle  ) .  Vnder  three  triangles  is  contayned  the  folide  angle  of  a  ‘vnder  efiuiUttr 
pyramis :  vnder fower, the fohde  angle  of an  oclohedro-  vnder  fiue, the folide  angle  of  an  Ico-  and 
fahedro ■  of  fixe, equilater  &  equiangle  triangles  fit  to  one  point  can  not  be  made  a folide  an- 
gle.F  or  forafimuch  as  the  angle  of an  equilater  triangle  is  two  third  partes  of a  right  angle , 
the fixe  angles  of  the  folide  jhalbe  equall  to fower  right  angles, which  is  impofifible.  For  euery 
folide  angle  is  (by  the  21. of  the  eleueth  )  contayned  vnder  playne  angles  lefie  the fower  right 
angles.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  can  not  be  made  a folide  angle  contained  vnder  more  the  fixe 
playne fiuperficiall  angles  of equilater  triangles  .Vnder  three fiquares  is  contained  the  angle  of 
a  cube.Vnder fower fiquares  it  is  impofifible  that  a  folide  angle  fhould  be  contayned  -  for  then 

PPp.i.  againe 


T hat  the  angle 
of  an  equilater 
and  equi angle 
Pentagon  is  one 
right  angle  and 
a fiueth  part 
oner -.which 
thing  was  alfo 
’before  proued 
in  the  corollary 
of. the 32, of  the 

fefi- 


The  thirtenth  Hooke 

agayne  it jhonld  be  contained  vnder  fower  right  angles .  Wherefore  much  lefe  can  any  folide 
angle  be  contained  vnder  more  fquares  then  fower. Vnder  three  eqnilater  and  equiangle pen¬ 
tagons  is  contayned  the  folide  angle  of  a  dodecahedron.  But  •vnderfomr  it  is  impoffible. 
For forafmuch  as  the  angle  of  a  pentagon  is  a  right  angle  and  the f ft  part  more  if  a  right 
angle, the  fewer  angles  jhalbe greater  then  f ova er  right  angles:  which  is  impoffible.  And  there¬ 
fore  much  lejfe  can  a  folide  anglebe  compofed  of  more  pentagons  then fower  .Neither  can  a 
folide  angle  be  contayned  vnder  any  other  equilater  and  equiangle  figures  of  many  angles, 
fort  hat  that  alfo  jhould  be  abfiurd.For  the  more  the fides  increafe ,  the  greater  are  the  angles 
which  they  contayne,and  therfore  the  farther  of  are  the fuperficiall  angles  contayned  ofthofe 
fides  from  comp  of ng  of  a  folide  angle .  Wherefore  be  fides  the  forefay  d  fine figures  there  can 
not  be  made  any  folide  figure  contayned  vnder  equall fides  and  equal l  angles :  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  pro  tied  s 

An  AfTumpt. 

But  now  that  the  angle  of  an  equilater  and  eqttiangle  pentagon  is  a  right  angle  and  a 
fifth  part  more  of a  right  angle, may  thus  be  proued.  S  uppofe  that  ABC  D  £  bean  equilater 
and  eqttiangle pentagon  ■  And  ( by  the  i^.ofthe fourth)  deferibe  about  it  a  circle  ABC D  F. 
And  take  (  by  the  1  .of  the  third)  the  center  thereof, 
and  let  the  fame  be  F  .  And  drape  thefe  right  lines 
F  A,F  B,F  C,  F  D,F  E.  Wherefore  thofe  lines  do 
diuide  the  angles  of  the  pentagon  into  two  equall 
partes  in  the poyntes  A,B  ,  C,  D,  E,  by  the  4.  of  the 
firfi .  And  forafmuch  as  the  fine  angles  that  are  at 
the  poynt  F  are  equall  to  fower  right  angles ,  by  the 
corollary  of  the  if:  of  the fir H ,  and  they  are  equall 
the  one  to  the  other  by  the  S.ofwefirjl:  therfore  one 
of thofe  angles, as  for  example fake, the  angle  AF  B 
is  a  fifth  part  lefe  then  a  right  angle. Wh  erf  ore  the 
angles  remay  ning,  namely  ,F  A  B,&  A  B  F,are  one 
right  angle  and  a fifth  part  oner  .But  the  angle  F- 
A  Bis  equall  to  the  angle  FBC.  Wherefore  the  whole  angle  ABC  being  one  of  the  an* 
gles  of  the.  pentagon  is  a  right  angle  and  a  fifth  part  more  then  a  right  angle:  Which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  proued. 

«^[  A  Corollary  added  by  Flnffas. 

Tfo'Wjet  vs  teach, bow  thofe fine folides , haue  echelike  inclinations  oftheyr  bafes. 


The  fides  of  the 
angle  of  the  tn-r 
donation  of  the 
fuperfcieces  of 
the  Tetrahedro 
are  proued  ratt¬ 
en  all. 

T  he  fides  of  the 
angle  of  the  in¬ 
clination  of  the 
fuperfcieces  of 
the  cube  proued 
r.-tttonall. 


Firftlet  vs  take  a  Pyramis,  and  diuide  one  of  the  fides  thereof  into  two  equall  parts:  and  from  the 
two  angles  oppofite  vnto  that  fide,draw  perpediculars,  which  fhall  fall  vpon  thefe&ion,  by  the  co¬ 
rollary  of  the  ix. of  the  thirtenth,and  at  the  fayd  poynt  of  diuifion(as  may  eafily  be  proued)  .Wherfore 
they  fha!  containe  the  ang  e  of  the  inclination,  of  the  plaines,by  the  4.diffinition  of  the  eleuenth, which 
angle  is  fubtended  of  the  oppofite  fide  of  the  pyramis  .  Now  forafmuch  as  the  reft  of  the  angles  of  the 
inclination  of  the  plavnes  ofthe  Pyramis, are  contayned  vnder  two  perpedicular  lines  of  the  triangles, 
and  are  fubtended  ofthe  fide  ofthe  Pyramis ,  it  foloweth ,  by  the  8 .  of  the  firft  ,  that  thofe  angles  are 
equall.  Wherefore(by  the  *. definition  ofthe  eleueth)thefuperficieces  are  in  like  fort  inclined  the  one 

to  the  other.  ’  . 

One  ofthe  fides  ofa  Cube  being  diuided  into  two.equall  parts,iffrom  the  fayd  fe&ion  be  drawen 
in  two  of  the  bafes  thereof,  two  perpendicular  lines, they  lhalbe  parallels  and  equall  to  the  fides  ofthe 
fquare  which  cotayne  a  right  angle.  And  forafmuch  as  all  the  angles  of  the  bafes  of  the  Cube  are  right 
angles  :  therefore  thofe  perpendiculars  falling  vpon  the  fedtion  ofthe  fide  comfnon  to  thetwq  bales, 
fhall  cbntavne  a  right  angle  (by  the  10.  ofthe  eleuenth)  :  which  felfe  angle  is  the  angle  of  inclination 
( by  t  h:e:  4.  diffi  ni  do  n  of  the  ekuenth)and  is  fubtended  ofthe  diameter  of  the  bafie  ofthe  Cube.  And  by 


ofEmUJes  Elementes * 


the  fame  reafbn  may  we  proue  that  the  reft  of  the  angles  of  the  inclination  of  the  bafes  ofthe  cube  are 
right  angles.  Wherefore  the  inclinations  of  the  fuperficieces  of  the  cube  the  one  to  the  other, are  equal 
(by  the  y  idiffinition  of  the  eleuenth) . 

In  an  O&ohcdron  take  the  diameter  which  coupleth  the  two  oppofite  angles .  And  from  thofe 
oppofite  angles  draw  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide  of  the  Gcftohedron,  in  two  bafes  thereof,  two  per¬ 
pendicular  lineSjWhich  ihall  diuide  that  fide  into  two  equall  parts  and  perpendicularly  (by  the  Corol¬ 
lary  ofthe  i  a. of  the  thirtenth).  Wherefore  thofe  perpendiculars  Ihall  contayne  the  angle  of  the  incli¬ 
nation  of  the  bafes(by  the  4.diffinition  of  the  eleu  eth) ;and  the  lame  angle  is  fubtended  of  the  diame¬ 
ter  ofthe  Odohedro.Wherfore  the  reft  ofthe  angles  after  the  fa  me  maner  deferibed  in  the  reft  of  the 
bafes,being  comprehended  and  fubtended  of equall  fides, ihall  (by  theS.ofthefirft)  be  equall  the  one 
to  the  other. And  therefore  the  inclinations  of  theplaynes  in  the  Odohedron,fhal(by  the  y.diffinitkm 
of  the  eleuenth)be  equalU 

In  an  Icofahedronlet  there  be  drawenfrom  the  angles  of  two  of  the  bafes  ,  to  one  fide  common 
to  both  the  fayd  bafes  perpendiculars  ,  which  fhall  contayne  the  angle  of  the  inclination  of  the  bafes 
(by  the  4.diffinition  of  the  eleuenth)  :  which  angle  is  fubtended  of  the  right  line  which  fubtendeth  the 
angle  of  the  pentagon  which  contayneth  fiue  fides  of  the  Icofahedron,  by  the  16.  of  this  booke  :  for  it 
coupleth  the  twoo  oppofite  angles  of  the  triangles  which  are  ioyned  together .  Wherefore  the  reft  of 
the  angles  of  the  inclination  of  the  bafes  being  after  the  lame  maner  found  out,  they  lhalbe  contayned 
vnderequall fides, and  fubtended  of equall  bafes,and  therefore  (by  the  S.ofthefirft)  thofe  angles  lhal- 
be  equall.  Wherfore  alfo  al  the  inclinations  ofthe  bales  of  the  Icoiahedron  the  one  to  the  other  lhalbe 
equall,by  the  y  .diffinition  of  the  eleuenth. 

InaDodecahedron,from  the  two  oppofite  angles  of  two  next  pentagons  draw  to  theyr  common 
fide  perpendicular  lines,palfing  by  the  centres  of  the  fayd  pentagons,which  lhal, where  they  fal,duiide 
the  fide  into  two  equall  parts  by  the  3  .of  the  third. (For  the  bales  of  a  Dodecahedron  are  contayned  in 
a  circle)  And  the  angle  contayned  vndcr  thofe  perpendicular  lines  is  the  inclination  of  thofe  bales  (by 
the  4.diffinition  of  the  eleuenth)  .And  the  forefayd  oppofite  angles  are  coupled  by  a  right  line  equal  to 
the  right  line  which  coupleth  the  oppofite  fe&ions  into  two  equall  parts  ofthe  fides  of  thedodecahe- 
dro(bv  the  3  3  .of  the  firft).For  they  couple  together  the  halfe  fids  ofthe  dodecahedrdjwhich  halfes  are 
parallels  and  equall,by  the  3  .corollary  ofthe  17.  of  this  booke:  which  coupling  lines  alfo  are  equall,by 
the  fame  corollary .  W  herefore  the  angles  being  contayned  of  equal  perpendicular  lines,and  fubtended 
of  equal!  coupling  lincs,lhal!(by  the  8. of  the  firft)be  equal  .And  they  are  the  angles  of  the  inclinations. 
Wherefore  the  bafes  ofthe  dodecahedron  are  in  like  fort  inclined  the  one  to  the  other  (  by  the  y .dilfi- 
mition  of  the  eleuenth). 

Flufas  after  this  teacheth  howto  know  the  rationality  orirratlonality  of  the  fides 
of  the  triangles,  which  contayne  the  angles  of  the  inclinations  of  the  fuperficieces  of 
the  forefayd  bodies. 

In  a'Pyramis  the  angle  ofthe  indinatio  is  contayned  vnder  two  perpedicular  lines  of  the  triangles, 
and  is  fubtended  ofthe  fide  ofthe  Pyramis  Now’  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  is  in  power  fefquitertia  to  the 
perpendicular  line,by  the  corollary  of  the  iz  .of  this  booke :  and  therfore  the  triangle  cotained  of  thofe 
perpedicular  lines  and  the  fide  of  pyramis,hath  his  fides  rational  &  commenfurable  in  power  the  one 
to  the  other. 

F0rafm.uch.3s  the  twoo  fides  of  a  Cube  (or  right  lines  equall  to  them  )  fubtended  vnder  the  dia¬ 
meter  of  one  of  the  bafes,doo  make  the  angle  of  the  inclination  :and  the  diameter  of  the  cube  is  in 
power  fefquialter  to  the  diameter  ofthe  bafe,  which  diameter  of  the  bafeisin  power  double  to  the 
fide(by  the  47. of  the  firft) :  therefore  thofe  lines  are  rationall  and  commenfurable  in  power. 

,  In  an  O£tohedron,whofe  two  perpendiculars  of  the  bafes  contayne  the  angle  of  the  inclination  of 
she  Q&ohcdron/which  angle  alfo  is  fubtended  of  the  diameter  of  the  O&ohedron  ,  the  diameter  is  in 
power  double  to  the  fide  of  the  Odtohedron,&  the  fide  is  in  power  fequitertia  to  the  perpediclar  line, 
by  the  12. of  this  booke:  wherfore  the  diameter  thereof  is  in  power  duple  fuperbipartiens  tertias  to  the 
perpendicular  line.  Wherfore  alfo  the  diameter  and  the  perpedicular  line  are  rationall  and  commenfu- 
iable  (by  the  Gof  the  tenth.) 

As  touching  an  Icofahedron,it  was  proued  in  the  iGofthis  booke ,  that  the  fide  thereof  is  a  lefle 
lincjwhen  the  diameter  of  the  fphereis  rationall.  And  forafmuch  as  theangleof  the  inclination  ofthe 
bafes  thereof,  is  contayned  of  the  perpendicular  lines  ofthe  triangles,  and  fubtended  of  the  right  line 
which  fubtendeth  the  angle  of  the  Pentagon  which  contayneth  fiue  fides  of  the  Icofahedron  :  and  vn~ 
to  the  perpendicularlines  the  fide  is  commenfurable  (namely ,  is  in  power  fefquitertia  vnto  them,  by 
the  Corollary  ofthe  i2.of  this  booke)  :  therefore  the  perpendicular  lines  which  contayne  the  angles 
areirrationalllines,namely,lefi£lines(by  the  ioj  .ofthe  tenth  booke.)  And  forafmuch  as  the  diameter 
contayneth  in  power  both  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,and  the  line  which  fubtendeth  the  forefayd  an¬ 
gle  ,  if  from  the  power  of  the  diameter  which  is  rationall ,  be  taken  away  the  power  of  the  fide  of  the 
Icofahedron  which  is  irrationall ,  it  is  manifeft  that  the  refiduc  which  is  the  power  ofthe  fubtending 
linefhalbeirrationall.Forifit  flioulde  be  rationall,  the  number  which  meafureth  the  whole  power  of 
the  diamecer,and  the  part  taken  away  of  the  fubtending  line,ihouldalfo,by  the4.common  fentence  of 

PPp.ij.  the 


T hat  the  plat- 
net  of  art  oilo- 
hedren  are  iti 
hhe  fort  incli¬ 
ned. 


That  the  p  fai¬ 
ries  of  an  Icoft- 
h edi  cts  are  in 
like  fort  incli¬ 
ned. 


That  the  plai¬ 
nts  of  a  Dsdecst 
hedros  are  in 
like  fort  incli¬ 
ned. 


T he pdes  of the 
angle  ofthe  in¬ 
clination  ofthe 
fupetfcieces  of 
t  he  Tetrahedrd 
are  frosted  rati* 
cnall. 

The  fides  ofthe 
angle  of  the  in¬ 
clination  of  the 
(nperfaeces  of 
the  cube  proued 
rationall, 

T he  fdes  of  the 
angle  ffc.of 
the  octahedron 
piouedratio- 
nail . 


7 he  thirtenth  <Boo%e 


T  be  fats  of  the 
angle  .of 
eke  Icofahedron 
fretted  irrati - 
(HU/tll, 


The  fides  of  the 
angle  &c.  of 
the  dodecahedro 
proued  irratto- 
nail. 

Hew  to  know 
whether  the  an¬ 
gle  of the  incli- 
natiobea  right 
angle, an  acute 
angle,  or  an  oh- 
lique  angle. 


the  feuenthmeafure  the  refidue,namely,the  power  ofthefide-.whichisirrationallfbr  that  it  isalefie 
line,whichwereabfurd.  Whereforeitis  manifeft  that  the  right  lines  which  compofe  the  angle  ofthe 
inclination  of  the  bafes  of  the  Icofthedron  are  Irrationall  lines.For  the  fubtending  line  hath  to  the  line 
conrayninge,a  greater  proportion,tben  the  whole  hath  to  the  greater  fegment. 

The  angle  of  the  inclina  tion  of  the  bafes  ef  a  dodecahedron,is  contayned  vnder  two  perpendicu- 
lars  of  the  bafes  of  the  dodecahedron, and  is  fubtended  of  that  right  line,  whofe  greater  fegment  is  the 
fide  ofa  Cube  inlcribed  in  the  dodecahedron,which  right  lineis  equall  to  the  line  which  coupleth  the 
fedfionsjinto  two  equal  parts,of  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  dodecahedron ,  And  this  coupling  line  we  fay 
is  an  irrationall  line, for  that  the  diameter  ofthe  fphere  contayneth  in  power  both  the  coupling  line, 
and  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron :  but  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  is  an  irrationall  line,  namely 5a  re- 
fiduall  line(by  the  17. of  this  bookej.  Wherefore  the  refidue  namely ,  the  coupling  line  is  an  irrationall 
line,as  it  is  eafy  to  proue  by  the  4.comon  fentencc  of  the  feueth .  And  that  the  perpedicular  lines  which 
contayne  the  angle  of  the  inclination  are  irrationallfis  thus  proued. 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  Pe  ntagon  ABCD  E,and  draw  in  it  the  perpendicular  line,  A  G,  and  lee 
the  line  fubtending  theangleof  the  pentagon  be  A.  C.Now  forafmuch  as  the  right  line  A  C  is  the  fide 
ofthe  cube,and  CD  the  fide  the  Dodecahedron  inferibedinoneand  the  felfe  fame  fphere ,  by  the  z. 
Corollary  of  the  i7.ofthis  booke;  but  the  line  A  C  is  commenfurable  to  the  diameter  of  the  fphere,by 
the  iy.of  this  booke,  and  is  therefore  rationall,by  the  6.  ^ 

diffinitio  of  the  tenth :  &  the  right  line  C  D  which  is  the 
fide  of  the  dodecahedron  is  irrationall  (by  the  17. of  this 
booke).  Wherfore  the  line  C  G  which  is  the  halfe  of  the 
line  C  D  is  irrationall  by  the  103  .of  the  io.boke.  And  the 
right  line  A  C  contayneth  in  power  the  two  right  lines 
AG  andG  C(by the47.ofthefirft).Iftherforefrom the 
power  ofthe  right  line  A  C  being  rationall,be  take  away 
the  power  of  the  line  C  G  being  irrationall ,  the  power 
remayning ,  namely ,  thepower  ofthe  line  AG,  mall  of 
necerfitie  be  irrationall.  For  if  the  power  of  the  line  AG 
taken  away  fhould  be  rationall ,  and  the  whole  power  of 
thelineACisrationall,  the  refidue,  namely,  the  power 
ofthe  line  CG  fhould  be  alfo  rationall,  and  fhould  be 
meafured  by  the  felfe  fame  numbers,  by  the  4.common 
Tentence  of  the  feuenth.  But  it  is  proued  that  the  line  C- 
G  is  irrationall ,  for  it  is  the  halfe  of  the  whole  refiduali 
line  C  D(by  the  i7-of  the  thirtenth) :  which  is  impoffible.  Wherefore  the  perpendicular  line  A  G  is  ir¬ 
rationall  .  Wherfore  the  angle  ofthe  inclination  of  the  dodecahedron ,  which  is  contayned  vnder  two 
perpendicular  lines  ofthe  pentagon,and  is  fubtended  of  a  right  line, which  coupleth  the  fe&ions  into 
two  equall  parts  of  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  dodecahedronfby  the  a  .corollary  of  the  18.  of  this  booke) 
which  line  we  haue  proued  to  be  irrationall(for  that  it  is  equall  to  the  two  lines  A  C,and  C  D  by  the  4. 
corollary  of  the  i7.of  this  booke)is  contayned  vnder  irrationall  right  lines. 

By  the  proportion  ofthe  fubtending  line(of  the  forefayd  angles  ofindination)  to  the  lines  which 
containe  the  angle,is  found  out  the  obliquitie  ofthe  angle.For  if the  fubtending  line  be  in  power  dou¬ 
ble  to  the  line  which  contayneth  the  angle,then  is  the  angle  a  right  angle  (by  the  48.  of  the  firlt. )  But  if 
it  be  in  power  lelfe  then  the  double  it  is  an  acute  angle  (  by  the  13 .  of  the  fecond  )  .  But  if  it  be  is 
power  m  ore  then  the  double, or  haue  a  greater  proportion  then  the  whole  hath  to  the  greater  fegmet, 
the  angle  (halbe  an  obtufc  angle(by  the  la.ofche  fecond  and  4 .  of  the  thirtenth  )  .  By  which  may  be 
proued  that  the  fquare  ofthe  whole  is  greater  then  the  double  ofthe  fquare  of  the  greater  fegment. 

This  is  to  be  noted  that  that  which  Tlujfas  hath  here  taught  touching  the  inclinations  of  the  bafes 
of  the  fiue  regular  bodies,Hypficles  teachech  after  the  y  propofition  of  the  15  .booke.  Where  he  confefe 
feth,that  hereceiued  it  of  one  Ifidbrus ,and  feking  to  make  the  mater  more  cleare  ,he  endeuored 
himfelfe  to  declare,  that  the  angles  of the  inclination  of  the  folides  are  geuen,  and  that  they 
are  either  acute  or  obtufe.according  to  the  nature  of  the  folide :  although  Eucltde 
in  all  his  1  y .  bookes  hath  not  yet  fhewed,  what  a  thing  geuen  is.  Wherefore 
I  luff  at  framing  his  demoftration  vpon  an  other  ground  procedeth  after 
an  other  maner,which  femeth  moreplayne,  and  more  aptly  here¬ 
to  be  placed  then  there.  Albeit  the  reader  in  that  place  flial 
not  be  fruftrate  of  his  alfo. 

(•*•) 


The  ende  of  the  thirtenth  Booke 

of Euclides  Elementcs » 


Euclides  Elementes, 


N  this  booke ,  which  is  commonly  accompted  the  1 4. 
booke o  fEuchdeis  more  at  large  intreatedofourpriu- 
cipallpurpofe:  namely,  of  the  comparifon  and  propor-  the  argument 
tion  of  the  fine  regular  bodies  (cuftomably  called  the  °fthe four  tench 
f  .figures  or  formes  of  Pythagoras')  the  one  to  the  other, 
andalfo  of  their  fides  together,  eche  to  other  :  which 
thinges  areof  moft  fecret  vfe,and  ineftimable  pleafurc, 
andcommoditie  to  fuch  as  diligently  fearch  for  them, 
andattayne vnto  them .  Which  thinges  alfo  vndoub- 
tedly  for  the  woorthines  and  hardnes  thereof  (  for 

I  thinges  of  moft  price  are  moft  hardeft )  were  firft  fear- 
ched,and  found  out  of  Philofophers,  not  of  the  inferi- 

_ _  or  or  meane  fort ,  but  of  the  depeft  and  moft  grounded 

Philofophers ,  and  beft  exercifed  in  Geometry .  And  albeit  this  booke  with  the  booke 
following, namely,the  r  booke, hath  bene  hetherto  ofall  men  for  the  moft  part,  and 
is  alfo  at  this  day  numbred  and  accompted  amogft  Euclides  bookes,and  fuppofed  to  be 
two  of  his,  namely,  the  i4.and  1 5. in  order:as  all  exemplars  (notonely  new  and  lately 
fetabroade,but  alfo  old  monumentes  written  by  hand  )  doo  manifeftly  witnes  :  yet  it 
isthought  by  the  beft  learned  in  thefe  dayes ,  that  thefe  two  booke  s  are  none  of  Eu- 
elides,  but  of  feme  other  author,no  lefte  worthy,  nor  of  lefle  eftimation  and  authorities 
notwithftanding,then  Euclide.  Apollonius  a  man  of  deepe  knowledge  a  great  Philofopher 
and  in  Geometrie  maruelous  (whofewoderful  booke  s  writtc  of  the  fe&ions  of cones, 
which  exercife  &  occupy  thewitte  s  of  the  wifeft  and  beft  tearned,are  yet  remayning  )  is 
thought, and  that  not  without  iuftcaufe,  to  be  the  author  of  them ,  or  as  fame  thinke 
Hypficks  him  felfe. For  what  can  be  more  playtiely,then  that  which  he  him  felfe  witnef- 
feth  in  the  preface  of  this  book  t,Bafllides  of  Tire  (fayth  HypCic\ss)aud  my  father  together s 
/canning, and  peyfivg  a  Writing  or  booke  of  Apollonius ,  Which  Was  of the  comparifon  of  a  dodecahe - 
drontoan  Icofahedron  infertbedin  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fphere ,  and  what  proportion  thefe  figures 
had  the  one  to  the  other, foundthat  Apollonius  had fay  led  in  this  matter. Bat  afterward  (  fayth  he) 

I  found  an  other  copy  or  books  of  Apollonius ,  wherein  the  demonflration  of  that  matter  was  fall  and 
perfect, and fhewed it  vnto  them,  whereat  they  much  reioyfd .  By  which  wordes  it  femeth  to  be 
manifeft  that  Apollonius  was  the  firft  author  of  this  booke ,  which  was  afterward  fet 
forth  by  Hypfcles.Yot  fo  his  owne  wordes  after  in  the  fame  preface  feme  to  import. 


5&>The  Preface  of  Hyp  fides  before 

the  fourtenth  booke. 

JJ^^/Protarchus5w^e  that  Bafilides  of  T  ire  came  into  Alexandria  flatting 
■ familiar  frendfhip  with  my  father  by  reafon  of  his  knowledge  in  the  mathe¬ 
matic  all fciences ,  he  remaynedwith  him  a  long  time ,  yea  euen  all  the  time  of 
the  pef fence.  And fometime  reafoning  betwene  themfelues  of  that  which  A- 
pollonius  had  written  touching  the  comparifon  of  a  dodecahedron  and  of 
an  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  one  and  the felfe fame  fphere ,  what  proportion  fuch  bodies  haue 
the  one  to  the  other, they  ludged  that  Apollonius  had fomewhat  erred  therein .  Wherefore 
they  (as  my father  declared  vnto  me)  diligently  weighing  it, wrote  it  perfectly .  Howbeit  after¬ 
ward  I  happened  to  fnde  an  other  booke  written  ^Apollonius,  which  contayned  in  it  the 

FP.iij,  right 


I 


Firjl  propor¬ 
tion  after 
Flujfas. 


Conttruflion. 


Demonfra- 

tm* 


T be  fourtenth  ‘Boofy 

right  demorJlration  of  that  which  they  fought  for:  which  when  they  fiw,they  much  reioy = 
fed.As for  that whkh  Apollonius  wroie,may  hefeneof ail  men  for  that  it  is  in  eiiery  mans 
hand .  And  that  whic h  was  of vs  more  diligently  afterward  written  agayne ,  I  thought  good 
to  fend  and  dedicate  vnto  you^as  to  onewhome  1  thought  worthy  commendation ,  both  for 
that  deepe  knowledge  whkh  /  know  you  haue  in  all  kindes  of  learning, and  chief ely  in  Geome¬ 
tric  fo  that  you  are  able  redily  to  iudge  of  thofe  thinges  which  are  fpoken ,  and  alfofor  the 
greate  loue  and  good  will  which  you  beare  towardes  my  father  and  me.Wherfore  vouchfafe 
gently  to  accept  this}whkh  J  fend  vnto  you. But  now  is  it  time  to  end  our  preface 7  and  to  be¬ 
gin  the  matter.  -  *  H. 


f  The  i.Theoreme. 


The  j.  Profiqfitmi. 


jd perpendicular  line  drawen  from  the  centre  of  a  circle  to  the  fide  of  a 
(pentagon  dejcribedin  the  fame  circle  :  is  the  halfe  of  thefe  two  lines gname* 
Ijy  of  the  fide  of  an  hexagon  figure^  and  of the fide  of  a  decagon  figure  be* 
ing  both  defer ibed  in  the fielfe  fame  circle. 

Vppofe  that  the  circle  be  A  B  C .  And  let  the  fide  of  an  equi later 
Pentagon  deferibed in  the  circle  AB  C,bcB  C .  And  (  by  the  i.of 
the  third )  take  the  centre  of  the  circle, and  let  the fame  be  D.And 
(by  the  1 2.  of the  fir  si  )  from  the  point  D  draw  vnto  the  line  B  C 
a  perpendicular  line  D  E .  And  extend  the  right  line  D  E  direff- 
ly  to  the  point  F.  T  hen  lfay,that  the  line  D  E  (  whkh  is  drawen 
I  from  the  centre  to  B  C  the fide  of the  pentagon  )  is  the  halfe  of  the 
\  fdes  of  an  hexagon  and  of  a  decagon  taken  together  and  defert- 
1  bed  in  the  fame  circle .  Draw  thefe  right  lines  D  C  and  C  F.And 
vnto  the  line  E  F put  an  equall line  G  E.  And  draw  a  right 
line  from  the  point  G  to  the  point  € .  Nowforafmucb  as  the 
circumference  of  the  whole  circle  is  quintuple  tothecircu- 
ference  BFC(  which  is fubtended  of  the fide  of  the  penta¬ 
gon  )  and  the  circumference  A  C  F  is  the  halfe  of  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  the  whole  circle ,  and  the  circumference  C  F 
(  which  is fubtended  of  the  fide  of  the  decagon  )  is  the  halfe 
of  the  circumference  BCF:  therefore  the  circumference 
AC  F  is  quintuple  to  the  circumference  CF  (by  the  is. of 
the  f ft)  .Wherefore  the  circumference  AC  is  qradruple 
to  the  circumference  F  C .  But  as  the  circumference  AC  is 
to  the  circumference  F  Cfo  is  the  angle  A  D  C  to  the  an  fie 
F  D  C,by  the  lafi  of  the fixt  .Wherefore  the  angle  ADC  is 
quadruple  to  the  angleF  DC.  But  the  angle  ADC  is  double  to  the  angle  E  F  C,by  the  20. 
of  the  third :  Wherefore  the  angle  EF  C  is  double  1 0  the  angle  G  D  C.But  the  angle  E  F  C  is 
equall  to  the  angle  EGC,  by  the  4.0ft  he firfi .  Wherfore  the  angle  EGC  is  double  to  the  an- 
fie  E  DC.  Wherefore  the  line  DG  is  equall  to  the  line  G  C  (by  the  32.  and  if  .ofthefirB  ) . 
But  the  line  G  C  is  equall  to  the  line  C  F,by  the  4. of  the firft.  Wherfore  the  line  D  G  is  equall* 
to  the  line  C  F .  And  the  line  G  E  is  equall  to  the  line  EF  (by  conBruclion ) .  Wherefore  the 
line  D  E  is  equall  to  the  lines  E  E  and  FC  added  together.  Vnto  the  lines  EF  and  FC  addt 
the  line  D  E .  Wherefore  the  lines  D  F  and  FC  added  together ,  are  double  to  the  line  D  E. 

But  the  line  DF  is  equall  to  the  fide  of the  hexagon  ;  and  F  C  to  the  fide  of the  decagon. 

Wherefore 


ofSuclides  Elementes .  FoU\  ij. 

Wherefore  the  line  D  E  is  the  halfe  of the fide  of the  hexagon,  and  of  the fde  of the  decagon 
being  both  added  together  and  deferibedin  one  and  the  felfe  fame  circle. 

It  is  manifest  *  by  the  Propofitions  of  the  thirtenth  booke,  that  a  perpendicular  line 
drawen  from  the  centre  of  a  circle  to  the  fde  of an  equi  later- triangle  deferibed  in  the fame 
circle ,  is  halfe  of  the femtdiameter  of  the  circle  .  therefore  by  this  Propcfition,  a  perpendicular  dra¬ 
wers  from  the  centre  of  a  circle  to  the fde  of a  Pentagon,  is  e  qaall  to  the  perpendicular  drawers from  the  centre  to 
the  fde  of the  triangle ,  and  to  halfe  of  the fde  of the  decagon  deferibed  in  the  fame  circle. 

if  The  2.  The  dr  erne.  The  2.  Tropofition. 

One  and  the  felfe  fame  circle  comprehendeth  both  the 'Tent  agon  of  a  (Do* 
decahedron,  and  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron,  deferibed  in  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  Sphere . 

Bis  Theorems  is  deferibed  of  Arifleus  in  that  booke  iv.hofe  title  is.  The 
companion  of  the  hue  figures,  and  is  deferibed  ^/"Apollonius  in  his f- 
cond  edition  of the  coparifon  of  a  Dodecahedron  to  an  Icofahedron ,  which  is, 

*  that  as  the  fuperfeies  of  a  Dsdecahedro  is  to  the fuperfeies  of  an  icofahedron,  fo  ts  the  Dode¬ 
cahedron  to  an  icofahedron,  for  that  a  perpendicular  line  drawen  from  the  centre 
of 'a ff  here  to  the  pentagon  of  a  dodecahedron  and  to  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron  is  one 
and  the  felfe  fame .  Now  must  we  alfoproue  that  one  and  the  felfe  fame  circle  comprehendeth 
both  the  pentagon  of  a  Dodecahedron,  and  alfo  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron  deferibedin 
one  and  the'  felfe  fame  Jphere, first  this  being proued : 

If  in  a  circle  be  deferibed  an  equtlater  pentagon, the  [quarts  which  are 
made  of the fde  of  the pentagon,  and  of that  right  line  which  ts  ftb- 
t ended  ‘bnder  two  fdes  of  the  pentagon ,  are  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of 

Shefemidiameter  of  the  circle.  Suppofethat  A  5  C  be  a  circle. 

And  let  the fide  ofi a  pentagon  in  the  circle  ABC, be  AC. 

And  take  ( by  the  i  .ofi the  third  )  the  centre  ofi  the  circle 
and  let  the  fame  be,D .  And  (by  the  i2.ofthefrfi )  from 
the  point  D  draw  vnto  the  line  A  C  a  perpendicular  line 
D  F  .  Crfhd  extend  the  line  D  F  on  either  fide  to  the 
point  es  B  and  E  .  And  draw  aright  line from  the  point 
A  to  the  point  B  .  Now  1 fay,  that  the fquares  of  the  lines 
B  A  and  A  C  are  quintuple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  E. 

Dr  awe  a  right  line  from  the  point  A  to  the  point  E. 

Wherefore  the  line  A  E  is  the  fide  ofi a  decagon  figure. 
x^Andforafmuch  as  the  line  B  E  is  double  to  the  line  D  E  •  therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line 
B  E  is  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of  D  E  (by  the  20. of  the fixt )  .  But  vrito  the fquare  of the 
line  B  E,  are  e  quail  the fquares  of  the  lines  B  A  and  A  Ffbpthef-j.ofthc  frfi,for  the  angle 
B  A  E  is  a  right  angle,  by  the  31. of  the  third ) .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of the  lines  B  A  and 
A  E,  are  quadruple  to  the fquare  of  the  line  D  E.Wberfore  the  fquares  of the  lines  A  B,AE, 
and  D  E,  are  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  E .  But  the  fquares  of  the  lines  D  E  and 
A  E,  are  e  quail  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C  (by  the  10.  of  the  thirtenth  )  .  Wherefore  the 
fquares  oft  he  lines  B  A  and  >^A  C,  are  quintuple  to  the fquare  of the.  line  D  E. 

T his  being  thus  proued,  now  is  to  be  demonfir ated  that  one  and  the felfie  fame  circle  co- 
prehendeth  both  the  pentagon  of  a  dodecahedron ,&  the  triangle  of an  Icofahedron  deferibed 
in  one  &  the  felffame  circle.  T ake  the  diameter  of  the fiber e,& let  the  fame  beAB.  And  in 
the fame  fiber e  deferibe  a  dodecahedron,  &  alfo  an  Icofahedron  .  And  let  one  ofthefetagons 
of  the  dodecahedron  be  CD  E  FG,<fi  let  one  of  the  triangles  of  the  Icofahedron  be  KLH . 
Now  I  fay  that'the femidiameters  of  the  circles  which  are  deferibed  about  them  are  e  quail. 


*  This  is  matt i* 
fef  by  the  iz. 
propoftto  of  the 
thtrtenh  books 
as  Camtane 
well  gathereth 
its  a  Corollary 
of  the  fame. 


The  4. popoftsi 
after  Huff  as. 


*  This  is  after¬ 
ward  proued  its 
the \.propofi« 

tlOfl. 


This  Jffumpt  h 
the  3  .preposi¬ 
tion  after 
Ilufas. 

Cmfiru&ien  of 
the  Affumpt . 


Demon/} ration 
of the  Affumpts 


Csn fruition  of 
the  propoftion » 


) 


7 he four  tenth  cBooks 

that  is -fib  at  we  and  the felfe fame  circle  contayneth  both  the  pentagon  CDEFG ,  and  the 
triangle  K  L  H.Draw  a  right  line from  the  point  D  to  the  point  G.Wherfore  the  line  DGis 
the fide  of  a  cube(  by  the  corollary  of the  17. of the  thirteth )  .Take  a  certayne  right  line  M  N. 
And  let  the fqtiarc  of  the  line  A  B  be  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of the  line  M  N,by  the  ajfumpt 
put  after  the  6  .prepoftio  of  the  teth.But  the  diameter  of a Jphere  is  in  power  quintuple  to  the 
fquare  of  thefemidtameter  of  the  circle  which  is  deferibed  the  Icojahedro  (by  the  corolla- 

ry  of the  16  .of the  thirtenth)  .Wherefore  the  line  M  N  isthefemidiameter  of  the  circle  on 
which  is  deferibed  the  Jcofahedron.  Diuide  (  by  the  30.  of  the  fixth  )  the  line  UN  by  an 
extreame  and  meant proportion  in  the  poynt  X .  And  ■g 
let  the  greater  fegment  thereof  be  M  X .  Wherefore  the 
Ime  M  X  is  the  fide  of  a  decagon  deferibed  in  the fame 
Vemonftra-  circle(  by  the  corollary  of  the  9.  of  the  thirtenth ) .  And 
forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  Bis  quintuple  to 

*  *  '*  the  fquare  of  the  line  M  N  :But  the fquare  of the  line 

B  A  is  treble  to  the  fquareqf the  line  D  G  (by  the  co¬ 
rollary  of  the  is >  of  the  thirtenth  ).  Wherfore  three 

*  Here  u  regiti-  fquare  s  of  the  line  D  G  are  e quail  to  fine  fquares  of 

the  line  M  N.*But  as  thre fquares  of  the  line  D  G  are 
v rjrJ  proved  in  to  fue  fquares  of  the  ImeMNfo  are  three  fquares  of 
tG  4.  props//-  ffje  [wee  G  to  fue fquares  of  the  line  M  X. Wherfore 

*  family flif  '  three  fquares  of J>  line  C  Gare  equlltofiue fquares  of 
lines  deAded  by  the  line  MX. But  fue  fquares  of the  line  CG  unequal 

extreme  tof  ue jquares  ofthe  line  MN  dr  to  fue fquares  of the 

M  X.  For  (by  the  so.  of  the  thirtenth )  one  fquare  °f  ^4  yft 
the  li  neCG  is  e  quail to  one  fquare  ofthe  line  MN  & 

to  one fquare  of  the  line  M  X.  Wherfore  fue  fquares  of the  line  C  G  are  e  quail  to  thre fquares 
of  the  line  D  G  and  to  three fquares  of the  line  C  G  (as  it  is  not  hard  to  proue,  marking  what 
hath  before  bene  proued )  .But  three fquares  ofthe  line  T>  G,  together  with  three fquares  of 
Tor  the  line  M-.  the  line  C  G,  are  equall  to fftene fquares  of the femidiameter  ofthe  circle  deferibed  about  the 
n  tshj  pentagon  CDEFG  (for  it  was  before proued  in  the  ajfumpt  put  in  this  proportion )  that  the 
extreme  and  ffuaresof  D  G  and  G  C  taken  once,are  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of  the  femidiameter  of  the 
means  preport  t-  circle  deferibed  about  the  pentagon  CDEFG).  And  fue fquares  ofthe  line  K  Lore  equall 
tn,  &  hisgrea-  f0ffene fquares  ofthe femidiameter  ofthe  circle  deferibed  about  the  triangle  K  L  H.  (For 
f/ifll/Tx,  h  12. of the  thirtenth -pone fquare  of  the  line  L  K  is  triple  to  one  fquare  of the  linedrawnt 

and  the  line  D-  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference)  .  Wherefore  fftene  fquares  of  the  line  drawnefom 
g  deuided  by  t[je  ccr>tn  to  the  circumference  ( ofthe  circle  which  contayneth  the  pentagon  CDEFG  )are 

*andmelZ*pro-  tquall  to  fftene fquares  of the  line  drawnefom  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle 
portion,  his  which  contayneth  the  triangle  KLH)  wherefore  one  of  the  fquares  which  is  drawnefom 
greater  fegmtt  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  one  circle ,  is  equall  to  one  of  the  fquares  which  is 
'h'tbeTofth*  drawnefom  the  centre  to  the  circumference  ofthe  other  circle. Wherefore  the  diameter  is 
thirtenth.  equall  to  the  diameter ,  wherefore  one  and  the felfe fame  circle  comprehcndetk  both  the  pen¬ 

tagon  of  a  dodecahedron  and  the  triangle  of  an  Uofahedron  deferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  circle:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


means  proper - 

titnptrt  every 
Way  proper  Sto¬ 
vall:  which 
grasented  then 
followeth  the 
reafon  aptly 


f  The 3.  Theorems. 


The  .3  Tropofition. 


Tho  ^..pr'ipa- 
fiuan  after 
Fiufas, 


If  there  he  an  equi  later  and  equiangle  pet  agon  ^ud  about  it  be  deferibed  a 
circle ,  and  from  the  centre  to  one  of  the  fides  be  drawne  a  perpendicular 
line ,t  hat  lohich  is  contained  Vnder  one  of  the fides  and  the  perpendicular 

line 


ofEuclulhs  Elementes.  Fol.\  18. 

line  thirty  times  fis  equall  tb  the  fuperficies  of  the  dodecabedr  on. 


vsnm 


Vppofe  that  A  S  CD  be  an  fqnihter  .find,  equi angle  pentagon .  And  about  the 
fame  pentagon,  defer ib'e(  by  the  1 4 .  of  the fo  urth )  a  circle.  And  let  the  centre  ther- 
|  of  be  thepoynt  F .  And  from  the  poynt  F  draw  (  by  the  12.  of  the  first )  vnto  the 
line  C  D  a  perpendicular  line  F  G .  Flow  1 fay  that  that  which  is  contayned  vn* 


Cctiilruclkth 


der  the  lines  CD  and  G  F  thirty  times,  is  equall  to  12.  pentagons  of  the  fame  quani title  that 
the  pentagon  ABC  D  is .  Draw  thefe  right  lines  C  F  and  F  D  .  Fgow forafmuch  as  that 


which  is  contayned  vnder  the,  lines  C  D  and  FG  is  double  to 
the  triangle  CDF  (by  the  41  .  of thefrfi )  •  therefore  that 
which  is  contayned  am  der  the  lines  C  D  and  F  Gfiue  times 
is  equall  to  ten  ofthofe  triangles .  But  ten  of  th of e  triangles 
are  twopentagos,and fixe  times  ten  ofthofe  triangles  aye  all 
the  pentagons  Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the 
lines  C  D  and  F,  G  thirty  times  is  equall  to  12, pentagons 
But  12  pentagons  are  the  fuperficies  ofi dodecahedron .  Wher 
fore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  C  D  and  F  G 
thirty  times  is  equall  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  dodecahedron. 

In  like fortalfo  may  weproue  that  if  there  be  an  equilatcr  triangle ,  as for  example,  the 
triangle  A  B  C,and  about  it  be  deferibed  a  circle,  and  the  centre  of  the  circle  be  the  point  D, 
and  the  perpendicular  line  be  the  line  D  E:  that  which  is  contay¬ 
ned  vnder,  the  lines  B  C  and  D  E  thirty  times, is  equall  to  the  f it- 
perficies  of  the  Icofahedron.  F  or  agayne forafmuch  as  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  E  and  B  C  is  double  to  the  trian¬ 
gle  D  B  C  (  by  the  41.  of the  fir fi)  '.therefore  two  triangles  are  e- 
quall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  thy  lines  D  E  and  B  C, 
and  three  ofthofe  triangles  contayne  the  whole  triangle.  Where¬ 
fore  fixe  fiuch  triangles  as  D  BC  is,  are  equall  to  that  which  is B 
contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  E  and  B  Cthrife.But  fixe  fuch  tri¬ 
angles  as  D  B  C  is ,  are  equall  to  two  fuch  triangles  as  A  B  C  is. 

Wherefore  that  which  is  containedvnderthe  lines  D  Eand  B  C  thrife,is  equall  to  two  fiuch 
triangles  as  ABC  is. But  two  ofthofe  triangles  take  ten  times  contayneth  the  whole  Icofabe- 
dron.Wherfore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D:E  &  BC  thirty  times, is  equall  tot 
twenty  fiuch  triangles  as  the  triangle  ABC  is, that  is, toy  whole  fuperficies  of  the  Icofahedro , 

*  Wherefore  as  the  fuferpeies  of  the  dodecahedron  ts  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Icofahedron  fie  is  that  which  iscon-r 
iajned  Ssnder  the  lines  C  D  and  F  G  to  that  which  ts  Contayned  'vnder  the  lines  B  C  and  D  £. 


ff  Corollary . 


V anon  Hr *- 
tkn. 


7 he  y.  props- 
fition  after 
Fluff  as. 


Vemcnff ra¬ 
tion. 


‘Bythis.it  ismanifejly  that  as  the fuperficies  of  the  (Dodecahedron  is  to  the 
fuperficies  of  the  Icofahedron,  fo  is  that  ioiich  is  contained  'tinder  the fide 
of  the  Bent  agon,  and  the  per  pedicular  dine  1 xhich  is  draivenfrom  the  cen* 
tre  of  the  circle  deferibed  about  the  Pentagon  to  the  fame  fide,  to  that 
which  is  contained  Tsnder  the fide  of the  Icofahedron  and  the  perpendicular 
line  Ivbich  is  drawen  from  the  centre  of  the  circle  deferibed  about  the  tri * 
angle  to  the fame  fde  :fo  that  the  Icofahedron  and  Dodecahedron  be  both •  - 
dej crihed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  S phere. 

ILJL.  q-j-  nThe 


*  This  is  the 
reafn  of  the 
Corollary 
following. 


*A  Corollary 
'Which  alfo 
Flufoas  put - 
teth  as  a  Co¬ 
rollary  after 
they  propor¬ 
tion  in  his 
order. 


Jf&e  6.  pofopti* 
*ft<r  Blujfau 


Zoufirutthn. 


Dmonffoa- 

tioru 


*  T bis  is  srot 
hard  to  fraue 
bj  the  if  A&. 
and  iq.of  the 
fxetb. 

f  In  the  Coral '- 
iarj  of  the  17. 
of  the  thsrteth . 
'*  Here  egasne 
is  required  the 
Jjfvnrft  which 
is  nftersrard 
frosted  trs  this 
fy.prepofstion. 

% 


\  Bat  fir  ft  the 
rtfiumpt follow - 
iug,  t  he  con- 
fiiyt&iow 
whereof  here 
beginneth,  ts 
fo  be  pressed. 


'Thefourtenth  ‘Boothe 

f  The  4.  Tbeoreme.  The  4.  tPropo/ition. 

This  being  done,  now  is  to  be  proved,  that  as  the  fuperficies  of  the  5)o» 
decahedron  is  to  the  fuperficies  of the  Icofabedron  yfo  is  the fide  of the  cube 
to  tlye fide  of  the  Icofabedron. 

(  by  the 2 .  Theorem  of this  booke)a  circte  containing  both  the  penta¬ 
gon  of  a  Dodecahedron,  and  the  triangle  of  an  Icofabedron,  being  both  de- 
1  fcribed  in  one  and  the fdfefamej}  here  ^md  let  the  fame  circle  be  DB  C.And 
in  the  circle  D  BC  defcribe  the  fide  of  an  equilater  triangle ,  namely, C  D, 
and  the  fide  of  an  equilater  pent  agon, namely,  A  C.  And  take  (by  the  1.  of the 
third  )  the  centre  ofthecircle ,  and  let  the fame  be  E .  And  from  the  point  E  dr  awe  •unto  the 
lines  D  C  and  A  C,  perpendicular  lines  E  F  and  E  <1 .  And  extend  the  line  E  G  directly  to 
the  point  B  ■  Anddrawe  a  right  line  from  the  point  B  to  the  point  C .  And  let  the fide  of  the 
cube  be  the  line  H .  'Tficw  I  fay  ,t hat  as  the  fuperficies  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  fuperficies 
of the  Icofabedron, fo  is  the  line  H  to  the  line  CD  .  Forafmuch  as  the  line made  of  the  lines 
E  B  and  B  C  added  together  ( namely, of  the  fide  of  the  hexagon, and  of the fide  of  a  decagon ) 
is  ( by  the  p  .of the  thirtenth )  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meant  proportion,  and  his  greater 
fegment  is  the  line  B  E  :  and  the  line  EG  is  alfo  (  by  the  i.of  the  four etenth)  the  half e  of 
the fame  line ,  and  tire  line  E  F  is  the  halfe  of  the  line  BE  (by  the  Corollary  of the  12. of  the 
thirtenth ) .  Wherefore  the  line  E  G  being  diuided  by 
an  extreme  and  meane  proportion ,*  his  greater  fig¬ 
ment  fall  be  the  line  E  F .  And  the  line  H  alfo  being 
diuided  by  an  extreme -&  meane  proportion,  hisgrea - 
ter  fegment  is  the  line  C  A,  as  it  was  proved  t  in  the 
Dodecahedron.  *  Wherefore  as  the  line  His  to  the  line 
C  A,fo  is  the  line  EG  to  the  line  E  F .  Wherefore  (by 
the rtf. ofthefixt)  that  which  is  contained  vnderthe 
lines  H  and  E  F,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained 
'under  the  lines  C  A  and  E  G.  And  for  that  as  the  line 
His  to  the  line  CD,  fits  that  which  is  contained  'un¬ 
der  the  lines  H  and  E  F,  to  that  which  is  contained 
•under  the  lines  C  D  and  EF  (by  the  1  .of  the  fixt ) . 

But  •unto  that  which  is  contained  < under  the  lines  H  ^  _ 

and E  F,  is  equall  that  which  is  contained  •under  the  w 

lines  C  A  and  E  G .  Wherefore  (by  then,  of  the fift)  as  the  line  H  is  to  the  line  CD,  fits  that 
which  is  contained vnder  the  lines  C  A  and  E  G,  to  that  which  is  contained  •under  the  lines 
C  D  and  E  F,  that  is  ( by  the  Corollary  next  going  before  )  as  the fuperficies  of the  Dodeca¬ 
hedron  is  to  the fuperficies  of  the  Icofabedron,  fo  is  the  line  H  to  the  line  C  D. 


j(n  other  demonfiration  to  prone  that  as  the  fuperficies  of  the  tDodecdhe* 
dr  on  is  to  the fuperficies  of  the  Icofabedron  Jo  is  the fide  of  the  cube  to  the 
fide  of  the  Icofabedron.  t 

Et  there  be  a  circle  ABC.  And  in  it  defcribe  two fides  of an  equilater  pen¬ 
tagon  (by  the  n.oftbe fift)  namely,  A  B  and  A  C :  and  draw  a  right  line 
from  the  point  B  to  the point  C .  And  ( by  the  1. of  tty;  third)  take  the  centre 
of the  circle,  and  let  the fame  be  D  .  And  draw  a  right  line from  the  point 
A  to  the  point  D,  and  extend  it  dircBly  to  the  point  E,and  let  it  cut  the  line 
BC  in  the  point  G .  And  let  the  line  D  F  be  halfe  to  the  line  D  A,  and  let 

the  line 


o/Euclides  Ekmentes, 

the  line  GC  be  treble  to  the  line  H  C,  by  the  9. of  the  fixt .  ifiy,  that  that  which  is  'contained 

9nder  the  lines  A  F  and  B  H, is  equall  to  the  pentagon  infer  shed  sn  the  circle  A  B  C .  JDrdWd  right  liflC from 

the  point  B  to  the  point  D  .  Nowforafmuoh  as  the  line  A  D  is  double  to  the  line  D  E,  there¬ 
fore  the  line  A  F  is  fefquialter  to  the  line  vA  D„. 

Againcforafmuch  as  the  line  GC  is  treble  to  the 
line  C  B,  therefore  the  line  G  H  is  double  to  the 
line  C  H .  Wherefore  the  line  G  C  is  fefquialter 
to  the  line  H  G .  Wherefore  as  the  line  F  A  is  to 
the  line  A  D,fo  is  the  line  G  C  to  the  line  G  It. 

Wherefore  (  by  the  1 6.0 f the  fixt )  that  which  is 
contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F  fr  H  G,  is  equall 
to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  D  A 
and  G  C .  But  the  line  G  C  is  equall  to  the  line 
B  G (by  the  3  .of  the  third)  .Wherfore  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  B  G,  is  e- 
quall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  F  and  G  H .  But  that  which  is  contained  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  A  D  and  B  G,  is  equall  to  twofuch  triangles  as  the  triangle  ABB  is  (  by  the 
41  .of the  fir f  )  .Wherefore  that  which  is  Contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F  and  GH,  is  equall 
to  two  fuch  triangles  as  the  triangle  A  B  D  is .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
lines  A  F  and  G II  fue  times,  is  equall  to  ten  triangles .  But  ten  triangles  are  two  pentagons . 
Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AF  and  G  H fue  times ,  is  equall  to  two 
pentagons  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  G  H  is  double  to  the  line  H  C,  therefore  that  which  is 
contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F  and  G  B,  is  double  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  F  and  H  C  (by  the  1  .of the fixt )  .Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F 
and  C II  twife,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F  and  G II  once.  T ake 
eche  ofthofe  parallelogrammes fue  times.  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
A  F  and  H  C  ten  times,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F  &GH  fue 
times,  that  is,  to  two  pentagons.  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F  and 
H  Cfiue  times,  is  equall  to  one  pent  agon .  But  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AF 
and  H  C  fue  times,  is  equall  (  by  the  1.  of the fixt)  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
AF  and  HB, for  the  line  HB  is  quintuple  to  the  line  H  C  (  as  it  is  eafie  to  fee  by  the  con - 
Jlru5Hon)and  they  are  both  vnder  one  &  the  felfe  fame  altitude, namely  ,< vnder  A  F .  Wher-  > 
fore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  A  F  and  B  H,  is  equall  to  one  pentagon . 

T his  being pr one d plow  let  there  he  drawne  a  Circle  comprehending  both 
the  Pentagon  of  a  Dodecahedron,  and  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron , 
being  both  defer i bed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  S fiber  e* 

fiEt  the  circle  be  ABC.  And  in  it  deferibe  as  before ,  two fides  of  an  equilater 
fLpentagon, namely  BA  and  A  Ctand  dr  aw  a  right  line  from  the  point  B  to  the 
'  )\pointC:  and  take  the  centre  of  the  circle  and  let  the fame  be  E.  And from  the 
) point  A  to  the  point  E  draw  a  right  line  A  E:  and  extend  the  line  A  E  to  the 
Sprint  F.  And  let  it  cut  the  line  B  C  in  the  point  K.  And  lei  the  line  A  E  be  do - 
ble  to  the  line  EG,fir  let  the  line  C  I<  be  treble  to  the  line  CH,by  the.  9  .of the fxth.  And  fro 


the  point  G  raife  vp  (by  the.  1 1 . of  the  fir fl )  vnto  the  line  AF  a  perpendicular  line  G  M  .-and 
extend  the  line  G  M  directly  to  the  point  D .  Wherfore  the  line  CM  D  is  the fide  of  an  equi- 
liter  triagle,by  the  corollary  of  the. 12. of the  thirtenth'.draw  thefe  right  lines  A  D  and  AM. 
Wherfore  A  D  M  is  an  equilater  triangle.  And  for  as  much  as  that  which  is  contained  vn¬ 
der  the  lines  A  G  and  B  H  is  equal  to  thepentagort  [by  the former  ajfumpt)  and  that  which 

"■  ■  '  JlSLH'P 


The  yijfumft, 

which  alfv  Blufi 
gas  putteth  cm  ati 

Jfi'utnpt  after 
the  C.propcfittOi 
Demcftli  rat  ton 
of  the  j 


CoftfiruclioK 
pertaining  rf 
the  fecondde - 
nionftratton  of 
the  q.prcpofifiS* 


Second  demons 
fir  at  ion  of  the 
4 -frog  option. 


7k  7,  prop®' 

fimn  after 
Elufas» 


Couibruftm, 


Dmmttra 

*««• 


is  chained  under  the  tines  A  G  and  GDIs  equal 
to  the  triangle  A  D  M:  therefore  as  that  which  is 
contained  under  the  lines  A  G  and  H  Bis  to  that 
which  is  contained  Under  the  lints  A  G  and G  D, 
fo  is  the  pentagon  to  the  triagle.But  as  that  which 
is  contained  under  the  lines  BH& AG  is  to  that 
which  is  con  tained  under  the  lines  A  G  and  G  D, 
fo  is  the  line  B  H  to  the  line  D  G  (by  the.  i. of  the 
fixth  )  wherefore  (by  the. is. of  the fifth)  aha. 
fuck  lines  as  B  His,areto.2o  fuch  lines  asDG  is, 
fo  are  12. pentagons  to  20. triangles,  that  is  the  fu- 
perficies  of the  Dodecahedron,to  the fuperjkies  of 
the  Icofahedron. And  i2.fuchelines  as  B  His, are 
eqnall  to  tcnne  fuche  lines  as  B  C  is  (for  the 
line  HB  is  quintuple  to  the  line  HC):and  the  UncBC  is  fextuple  to  the  line  C  H- 
Wherfore fix Juch  lines  as  B  H  is, are  equal  tofue  fuch  lines  as  B  Care:  and  in  the fame  pro¬ 
portion  are  their  doubles  .*  and  2  0  fuch  lines  as  the  line  D  G  is,  are  equal  to.  1 0  fuch  lines  as 
the  line  D  Mis  for  the  line  D  M  is  double  to  the  line  D  G.  Wherfore  as  10. fuch  lines  asBC 
is, are  to  10  fuch  lines  as  D  Mis, that  is, as  the  line  B  C  is  to  the  line  D  Mfo  is  the fuperficies 
of  the  Dodecahedron  to  the fuperfcies  of  the  Icofahedron.  But  the  line  BC  is  the  fide  of  the 
cube, andihe  line  B  Mthe  fide  of the  Icofahedron.'  wherefore  (by  the  11  .of the  ffth )  as  the 
fuperfcies  of the  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  fuperfcies  of the  Icofahedron ,  fois  the  line  BCto 
the  line  B  M,that  is, the  fide  of  the  cube  to  the  fde  of  the  Icofahedron. 


'Ho'tye  loill  we  prone  that  a  right  line  being  deuided  by  an  extreme  and 
meane  proportio  ftohat  proportio  the  line  chaining  in  power  the fqtiares 
of  tl>e  Tvbole  line  and  of  the greater  figment jbatb  to  the  line  containing 
in  po^oer  the  fquares  of  the  lohole  line  and  of  the  lejje  figment, the  fame 
proportion  hath  the  fide  of the  cube  to  the  fide  of the  Icofahedron,  being 
both  deferibed  in  one  and  the  filfe  famefpbere. 


^j]  Vppofe  that  A  B  be  a  circle  conta  ning  both  the  pentagon  of  a  Dodecahedron  dl* 
1  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron  deferibed  bothe  in  one  and  the  filfe  fame  fphere. 
T ake  the  centre  oft  he  circle, and  let  the fame  be  C.And from  the point  C  extend 
I  to  the  circumference  a  right  line  at  all auentures,and  let  the  fame  B  C .  And  (by 
the  30. of the fixth  )deuide  the  line  BC  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  D, 
and  let  the  greater fegment  therofhe  C  D  .Wherfore  the  line  CD  is  the fide  of  a  Decago  de¬ 
feribed  in  the  fame  circle  (  by  the  corollary  of  the  9. of  the  thirtenth  ).Take  the  fide  of an  Ico¬ 
fahedron, and  let  the  fame  be  the  line  E,and  the fide  of  a  Dodecahedron,  and  let  the  fame  be 
the  line  E,and  the fide  of  a  cube  dr  1st  the fame  be  the  line  G.  Wherfore  the  line  E  is  the fide 
of  an  equilater  triangle,  and  F  of  an  equaliter pentagon  deferibed  in  one  and  the  filfe  fame 
circle.  And  the  line  G  being  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,  his  greater  fig¬ 
ment  is  the  line  E,  by  the  corollary  of  the  if. of  the  thirteth.  Now  forasmuch  as  thelineE 
is  the  fide  of  an  equilater  triangle,  but  (by  the  12. of  the  thirtenth)  the fide  of an  equilater 
triangle  is  in  power  treble  to  the  line  BC,  ( which  is  drawne  from  the  center  to  the  circum¬ 
ference )  therefore  the fquare  of  the  line  E  is  treble  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  BC:  but  the 
fquares  of the  line  B  C  and  BD  are  ( by  the  4.ofthe  thirtenth)treble  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
C  D.  Wherfore  as  the fquare  of the  line  E  is  to  the fquare  of  the  line  C  B,Jo  are  the  fquares 
of  the  Urns  C  B  and  B  D  to  the fquare  of  the  line  C  D .  Wherefore  alternately  ( by  the  t6.of 
-  '  the 


of Ettclides  Elementes* 


F0I.410. 


the  fifth)  As  the  fquare  if  the  tine  E  is  to  the f quarts 
of  the  lines  C  B  and  B  D,fois  the  fquare  of  the  lint 
C  B  to  the fquare  of  the  line  C  D*But  as  the f quart 
of  the  line  B  C  is  to  the fquare  of  the  line  CD,  fo  is 
the  fquare  of  the  Une  G  (the fide  of  the  cube )  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  F  ,t  he  fide  of  Dodecahedron.  For 
the  line  F  is  the  greater  fegmet  of  the  line  G  (as 
was  before  proued.)Wherfore(by  the.n.  of  the fift ) 
as  the  fquare  of  the  line  E  is  to  the  fquares  C  B  and 
B  D,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  G,  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  F.  Wherefore  alternately  (by  the  16. of  the 

ffth)&alfo  by  conuerfion(  by  the  corollary  of  the  4.  * — ““ — ; ^ - « — <  C 

of the f ft  )as  the fquare  of  the  line  G,is  to  the fquare  r-  . -  ( p 

of  the  line  E,fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  F,  to  the  t . .  ...  .....  E 

fquares  of  the  lines  CB&BD.  But  'unto  the fquare 

of  the  UneF  are  equal  the fquares  of the  lines  BC  &  CD  for  the fde  of a  pentagon  cotaineih 
in  power  both  the fide  of a fixe  angled figure, and  the fide  of  a  ten  angled figure(by  the  10. of 
the  thirtenth .)  Wherfore  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  G,is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E,fo  are  the 
fquares  of the  lines  B  C  and  CD  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  C  B  and  B  D .  But  as  the  fquares 
of  the  lines  C  B  and  CD  arc  to  the  fquares  of the  lines  C  B&BD,t  fo  ( any  right  line  what 
fo  euer  it  be  .being  dtuided  by  an  extreme  and  meant proportion)  is  the  line  containing  in 
power  the  fquares  of  the  whole  line, and  of the  greater fegmet, to  the  line  containing  in  power 
the  fquares  of  the  whole  line, and  of  the  leJfefegment:wherfore(  by  the  n.of  the  fifth  )as  the 
fquare  of  the  line  G  ( the fide  ofthecube)is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  E,fo(any  right  line  being 
deluded  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion)  is  the  line  containing  in  power  the  fquares 
made  of the  whole  line, and  of  the  greater fegmet, to  the  line  containing  in  power  the  fquares 
made  of the  whole  line, and  of the  leffe fegment:  but  the  fine  G  is  the fide  of the  Cube,  and  the 
line  E  of  the  lcofahedron(by  fuppofition.)  Iftherfore  aright  line  be  deuided  by  an  extreeme 
and  meane  proportion^  the  line  cot ainingin  power  the fquares  of  the  whole  line, and  of the 
greater  fegment, is  to  the  line  containing  in power  the  fquares  of  the  whole  line  and  of  the 
leffe fegment. Jo  is  the fide  of  the  cube  to  the fide  of  the  Icofahedron, being  both  deferibed  in 
one  and  the  fe/fe  fame  ( fhere . 


Now  1 \>ift  we  prone  that  as  the  fide  of  the  Cube  is  to  the fide  of  the  Ico* 
jahedronjo  is  thefolide  of  the  Dodecahedron  to  the  folide  of  the  Icofa* 
hedron. 

YOrasmuche  as  equal  circles  comprehend  both  the  pentagon  ofaD  odecahe- 
dron,and  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron,  being  both  deferibed  in  one  and 
•  the felfe fame  fphere,  by  the  2. of  this  bookeibut  in  a fphere  equal  circles  are 
!  equally  difiant from  the  centre  (for  the  perpendicular  lines  drawn  from  the 
|s,  ^  centre  of  the fphere  to  the  plaine fuperficieces  of  the  circles  are  equal, and  do 

"  "T  fall  •upon  the  c  entres  of  the  circles,  \whtrfore  perpendicular  lines  drawne 

from  the  centre  of the  fphere, to  the  centre  of  the  circle, comprehending  bothe  the  triangle  of 
an  Icofahedron, and  the  pentagon  of  a  Dodecahedron  are  equal :  wherefore  the  pyr amides, 
whofe  bafes  are  the  pentagons  of  the  D  odecahedron,are  of equal  altitude  with  the fir  amides 
whofe  bafes  are  the  triangles  of  the  Icofahedron.  But  piramids  of  equal  attitude,  are  in  that 
proportion  the  one  to  the  other, that  their  bafes  are  (by  the  $.ofthetwelfth )  wherefore  as  the 
pentagon  is  to  the  triangle,  fo  is  the  pyr  amis  whofe  bafe  is  the  pentagon  of  the  Dodecahe¬ 
dron  and  toppe  the  centre  of the fphere, to  the  pyr  amis  whofe  bafe  is  the  triangle  and  top  the 

JLw-  centre 


*  Here  again  e 
is  required  the 
AJZumpt  af¬ 
terward  pro¬ 
ne  din  this  ^ 
proportion. 


f  As  Washy 
the  Afiumpc 
afterward  in 
this  prcpo/itiS 
be  piaively 
print  d. 


the  8.  profi- 
tion  after 
Flujfas, 


f  By  the  Co¬ 
rollary  added 
by  Fluff  as  af¬ 
ter  his 

fumpt  put  af¬ 
ter  the  17.  pro 
portion  of  tie 
11.  bookf. 


Corolltry  of  the 
%.xfter  Fhtjf.is. 


’This  Jslffumpt  is 
the  3 .  proyefitfo 
after  F  Ingas, 
andts  it  which 
diners  times 
hath  bene  taken 
as gr, iimted  in 
tins  book*, .rad 
once  alfo  -in  the 
lajl  proftftnen 
«>f  t'he  13  .boo  he: 
as  we  haue  be¬ 
fore  noted. 

Demonjlra - 
fion . 


centre  alfo  ofthejj>here.Wherfore(by  the  is -of the  fifth)  as  12-petagons  are  tdi  0^  triangles, 
fi  are  1 2  yyrarfEfdfhimng  pentagons  to  theyr  hafts  to  2.0  pyramids  hauing  tMagles  to) heir 
hafes.  But  12  pentagons  are  the  fuperfeies  of  the  Dodecahedron,  and 20  .triangles  are  the 
fuperfci.es  of  the  Icofahedron.  Wherefore  as  the fuperfeies  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  to  the fit - 
perfeies  of  the  Icofahedron, fare  12  .pyramids  hauing pentagons  to  their  hafes  to  20.  pyra¬ 
mids,  hauing  triangles  to  their  hafes.  But  12. pyramids  hauingpentagons  to  their  hafes,  are 
thefolide  of  the  Dodecahedron,  and  20  .pyramids  hauing  triangles  to  their  hafes  are  the  fo - 

lide  of  the  Icofahedron .  IV  he  fore  ,(  hy  the  t 1  .ofthefifthe )  as  the  fuperfeies  of  the  Dodecahedron  IS  to 
the  fuperfeies  of  the  Icofahedron  fo  isfhe  foltde  of  the  Dodecahedron  to  t  he f slide  of  the  Icofahedron.Bilt  as  the 

fuperficies  of  the  D  odecahedron,  is  to  the  fuperf  eies  of  the  Icofahedron,  fo  haue  we proved 
that  the fide  of  the  cube  is  to  the fide  of  the  Icofahedron. Wherf  ore, by  the  xi.of  the  fifth,  as 
the fide  of  the  cube  is  to  the fide  of  the  Icofahedron ,  fois  the \  folide  of  the  Dodecahedron  to 
thefolide  of  the  Icofahedron. 


If  two  right  lines  he  diuided  by  an  exfreamtand  meane  proportion fthey 
jhfilcu&y  way  he  in  like proportionrphjcb  thmgis  thus  demonjlrated. 


Ft  the  line  A  B  he  {by  they  02  of the  fixth )  diuided  by  an  extream'e  and  meane  pro* 
portiomnthe  foyntC ,  and  let  the  greater  fegment  thereof  be  the  line  C  A  .And 
|  hkewife  alfo  let  ihe  line  D  E  be  diuided  hy  an  extreame  and meane proportion  in 
'  ihe  fdynt  F,nnd let  the greater  fegment  thereof he  the  line  D  F.T hen  I  fay  that  as 
the  whole  line  A  B  is  to  t  he  greater fegment  thereof A  C,fo  is  the  whole  line  D  E  to  the  grea¬ 
ter  fegment  thereofD  F .  F  crforafnnich  as  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Band 
BC  is  icquall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  <JAC  (by  the  diffinition  of  aline  diuided  he  an  ex¬ 
treame  and  meane  proportion )  : and  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F  is 
alfo  equal!  to  the fquare  of the  line  D  F  (by  the fame  diffinition ) :  therefore  as  that  which  is 
contayned  vnder  theiines  AB  and  B  C  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  AC ,  fois  that  which  is 
contayned  vnder  the  lines  D  Band  E  F  to  the fquare  of  the  line  DF .  For  in  eche  is  the  pro¬ 
portion  ofequalitie.  Wherf  ore  as  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C former 
times,  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 

AC, fois  that  which  is  contaynd  y{  Jc  5 

vnder  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F  '  '  '  r~  ' 


fower  times  to  the  fquare  of  the  (  p  ,  F  E 

line  D  F  ( by  the  T$.  of the  fifth).  H  '  -  '  ■  *  ’■  -  :r-  *  7  *"  ~ 

Wherf  ore  by  compofition  ( by  the 

1 S .  of  the  fifth )  as  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  and  B  C fower  times,  together 
with  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C,is  to  the fquare  of  the  line  A  G,fo  is  that  which  is  contayned 
vnder  the  lines  D  E  and  E  F  fower  times  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  F,to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  D  F.  Wherefore  as  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  lints  A  B  and  B  C  ad¬ 
ded  together  and  made  one  line  ( which  fquare  hythc  S.  of  the fiecond  is  equall  to  that  which 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  B  andB  C fower  times  together  with fquare  of  the  line  A  C) 
is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  C  ,fo  is  the  fquare  made  of  the  lines  D  E&EF  added  together 
and  made  one  line  (which fquare  is  alfo, hy  the fame, equal  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder 
the  lines  D  E  and  E  F  fower  times  together  with  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  F)  tofhe  fquare  of 
the  lineDF. Wherefore  alfo  as  the  lines  A  B&B  C  added  together  are  to  the  line  AC,fo  are 
the  lines  D  E&  E  F  added  together  to  the  line  D  F(hy  the  22.ofthefixt )  Wherefore  hy  co- 
po fit  ion  (by  the  lS.of the  fifth)  as  both  the  lines  A  Bfiy  B  C  added  the  one  tothe  other, toge¬ 
ther  with  the  line  A  C,that  is, as  two  filch  lines  as  AB  is ,  are  to  the  line  A  C,  fo  are  both  the 
lines  D  E  and  E  F  added  the  one  to  the  other  together  with  the  line  D  F ,  that  is  twofucb 


ofSuclides  Elementes. 


lines  as  D  E  is  to  the  line  D  F.And  in  the fame  proportion  are  the  halues  of the  antecedents 
by  the  15.  of the fifth .  Wherefore  as  the  line  A  Bis  to  the  line  AC  ^fo  is  the  line  D  E  to  the 
line  D  F.  ( And  therefore  by  the  ip.of the  fifth, as  the  line  A  B  is  to  the  line  B  C,fo  is  the  line 
D  F  to  the  Ime  F  E  Wherefore  alfo  by  diuifion  by  the  ip.of  the  fifth, as  the  line  AC  is  to  the 
line  CB,fo  is  the  line  D  F  to  the  line  D  E). 

Ngw  that  we  haue prouedfi that, any  right  line  whatfoeuer  being  diuided by  an  extreame  *  In  t!ie  *fee~ 
and  meane  proportion  ,what  proportion  the  line  contayning  in  power  the f quarts  made  of  the 
whole  line  and  of  the  greater  fegment  added  together, hath  to  the  line  contayning  in  power 
the f quarts  made  of  the  whole  line  and  of the  lefie fegment  added  together ,  the fame  proper-, 
tion  hath  the  fide  of  the  cube  to  the fide  of  the  Icofahedron:  Now  alfo  that  we  haue  proued,  f  In  t;,e  x  _  and 
\ that  as  the fide  of the  cube  is  to  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  ,fo  is  the fuperficies  of  the  Dode-  3  .feihon  of  the 
cahedron  to  the  fuperficies  oftheJcofiahedron,beingbothdefcribedin  one  and  the fielfie  fame  fl™e 
fphere  rand  moreouer feing  that  we  haue  proued, "[that  as  the fuperficies  of  the  Dodecahedron  0flLflI?n° 
is  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Icofahedro,fo  is  the  Dodecahedro  to  the  Icofahedron, for  that  both  proportion . 
the  pentagon  of  the  Dodecahedron,  and  the  triangle  of  the  Icofahedron  are  comprehended 
in  one  and  the felfe fame  circle :  All  thefe  thinges  l fay  being  proued,it  is  manifeft ,  thntifi*  «/£  Corollary* 

one  and  the  felfe fame  fphere  be  deferibed  a  Dodecahed?on,and  an  Icofahedron ,  they  jhall  be  in  proportion 

the  one  to  the  other, as, a  right  line  whatfoeuer  being  diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  pro- 
portion,the  line  contayning  in  power  the fquares  of the  whole  line  and  of the  greater fegment 
added  together, is  to  the  line  containing  in  power  the fquares  of  the  whole  line  and  of the  lejfe 
fegment  added  together .  Forfar  that  as  the  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  Icofahedron,  fo  is 
the  fuperficies  of  the  Dodecahedron  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Icofahedron,  that  is ,  the 
fide  of  the  cube  to  the fide  of  the  Icofahedron but  as  the fide  of  the  cube  is  to  the fide 
of  the  Icofahedron  fo, any  right  line  what  footer  being  diuided  by  an  extreame 
and  meane  proportion's  the  line  contayningin  power  the fquares  of the  whole 
line  and  of the  greater fegment  added  together, to  the  line  contayning  in  pow¬ 
er  the  fquares  of  the  ivholc  line  and  of  the  lejfe  fegment  added  together  % 

Wherefore  as  a  Dodecahedron  is  to  an  Icofahedron  deferibed  in  one 
and  the  felfe  fame  fphere,  fo,  any  right  line  what  footer  being 
diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion's  the  line 
contayning  in  power  the fquares  of  the  whole  line  & 
of  the  greater  fegment  added  together, to  the 
line  contayning  in  power  the fquares  of  the 
whole  line  ana  of  the  lejfe fegment 
added  together . 

(U) 


Theende  of  the  fourtenth  Booke 


Ihefirjl  pro - 
pofition  after 
Campane . 


Conflrttction. 


T>  cm  infrac¬ 
tion. 


Euclides  Elementes  after  Fluflas. 


■u  $  \ 


Or  that  the  fouretenth  Booke,as  it  is  fet  forth  by  Fluf- 
fas ,containeth  in  itrnoe  Propofitions  then  are  found, 
in  Hypficles,  &  alfo  foihe  of  thofe  Propofitions  which 
Hypficles  hath, are  by  him  fomewhat  otherwife  de- 
monftrated-,  I  thought  my  labour  well  bellowed*  for 
the  readers  fake  to  ttirne  it  alfo  all  whole,norwichftan- 
ding  my  trauaile  before  taken  in  turning  the  fame 
booke  after  Hypficles  .  Where  note  ye,thathercjn  this 
14. booke  after  Flulfas,  and  in  the  other  bookes  foilo- 
wing.namely,  the  1 5. and  16. 1 haue  in  alleadgingof 
the  Proportions ’of the  fame  i4.?booke, followed  the 
order  and  number  ofthe  Propofitions,  as  Flulfas  hath 
placed  them. 

f  The  fir B  Prop  ofition . 

A  ferpmdkularlim  drawen  from  the  centre  of  a  circle,  to  the  fide. of  a 
{Pentagon  m/crihed  in  the  fame  circle :  is  the  halfe  of thefe  two  lines  taken 
together  piamely  ^  of  the fide  of  the  hexagon ,  and  of  the fide  office  decagon 
injcribedin  the fame circle.  • 

Ake-  a  circle  A  B  C,  and  inleribe  in  it  the  fide  ofa  pentagon,  which  let  be 
B  C,  and  take  the'  centre  of  the  circle,  which  let  be  the  point  D  ;  and  fro 
it  draw  veto  the  fide  B  C  a  perpendicular  line  D  E  -  which  produce  to  the 
point  F  >  And  veto  the  line  E  F  put  the  line.E  G  equall .  And  draw  thefe 
)  right  lines  C  G,C  D,and  C  F  .Then  I  fay , that  the  right  line  D  E  (which 
•  is  drawen  from  the  centre  to  B  C  the  fide  of  the  pentagon  )  is  the  halfe 
j  ofthe  fides  ofthe  decagon  andhexagon,  taken  together .  Forafmuchas 
i  the  line  D  Eis'a  perpendicular  vnto  the  line  B  C  :  therefore  the  fedions 
|  BE  and  EC  lhall  be  equall  (by  the  3. of  the  third)  :  and  the  line  EFis 
11  common  vnto  them  both,  and  the  angles  F  E  C  and  F  E.B,  are  rightan- 
gks,by  fuppofition .  Wherefore  the  bafes  B  F  and  F C  are  equall  (by  the 
4.  of  the  firft ) .  But  the  line  B  C  is  the  fide  of  a  pentagon,  by  conllrudi- 
on  .  Wherefore  F  C  which  fubtendefh  the  halfe  of  the  fide  of  the 
pentagon,  is  the  fide  of  the  decagon  iuferibed  in  the  circle  ABC. 

But  vnto  the  line  F  C  is,  by  the  4-of  the  firft,  equall  the  line  C  G, 
for  they  fubcend  right  angles  C  E  G,  and  C  E  F,  which  are  con¬ 
tained  voder  eauallficfes .  Wherefore  alfo  the  angles  CGE,  and 
C  F  F.,of  the  triangle  C  F  G,are  cqqall,-by  the  y.of  the  firjl .  Arid 
forafmuchas  the  arke  F  C  is  fubtended  of  the  fide  of  a  decagon, 
the  arke  C  A  fhall  be  quadruple  to  the  arke  C  F  :  Wherefore  aho 
the  angle  C  D  A  lhall  be  quadruple  to  the  angle  C  D  F  (  by  the 
lalt  of  the  fix  t) .  And  forafmuch  as  the  fame  angle  C  D  A,  which 
is  fet  at  the  centra, is  double  to  the  angle  C  F  A,  which  is  fet  at  the 
circu  m  feren  ce,by  the  20. of  the  third^  therefore  the  angle  C  F  A, 
or  C  F  D,  is  double  to  the  angle  CDF,  namely,  the  halfe  of  qua¬ 
druple  .  But  vnto  the  angle  C  FD  or  C  F  G,  is  proued  equall  the 
anofe'C  G  F  :  Wherefore  the  outward  angle  C  G  F,  is  double  to 
the  angle  CDF.  Wherefore  the  angles  C  D  G  and  DOG,  lhall 

be  equall.  For  vnto  thofe  two  angles  the  angle  C  G  F  is  equall,by  .  ir 

jiie  3  2  .of  the  firft .  Y/h  e  refore  the  fides  G  G  and  G  D,  are  equall,  by  the  tf  .of  the  firft  ,  Wherefore  alia 


ofSuclides  Element? softer  Flufias* 

the  line  G  D  is  equall  to  the  line  F  C,(  which  is  thefide  of  the  decagon  .  But  vtlto  the  right  line!  F  E  is  e~ 
quail  the  line  E  G,  by  conftruction  .  Wherefore  the  whole  line  D  E  is  equall  to  the  two  lines  C  ¥  and 
F  E  .Wherefore  thofe  lines  taken  together  (namely,  the  lines  D  F  and  F  C  )  fhall  be  double  to  the  line 
D  E.  Wh  erefore  the  line  DE  (which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  perpendicularly  to  the  fide  of  the  pen- 
tagon)fhal  be  the  halfe  of  both  thefe  lines  taken  together,namely,Qf  D  F  the  fide  of  the  hexagon,  and 
C  F  the  fide  of  the  decagon  .  For  the  line  D  F  which  is  drawfen  from  the  centre,  is  equall  to  die  fide  of 
the  hexagon,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  if. of  the  fourth  .Wherefore  a  perpendicular  line  drawen  from 
the  center  of  a  circle,  to  the  fide  ofa  pentagon  inferibed  in  the  fame  circle  :  is  the  halfe  of  thefe  two 
lines  taken  together,  namely,of  the  fide  of  the  hexagon,  and  of  the  fide  of  the  decagon  infreibed  in  the 
fame  circle:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

t  '  » •.  1  .....  .  '  jJ- f  1 

#  A  Corollary.  r.  -  vs-.-.u 

.  •  , 

If  a  right  line  drawen  perpendicularly  from  the  Centre  of a  circle  to  the  fide 
of a  pentagon }  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion.:  the  greater  fig* 
ment f?all  be  the  line  n thick  is  drawen  from  the  fame  centre  to  the  fide  of  an 

ecpalater  triangle  inferibed  in  the fame  circle .  For,  that  line  ( drawen  to  the  fide  of  the 
triangle  )  is  (  by  the  Corollary  of  the  n.of  the  thirtenth  )  the  halfe  of  the  line  drawen  from  the  centre 
to  the  circumference,  that  is,  of  the  fide  of  the  hexagon :  Wherefore  the  refidue  fhall  be  the  halfe  of  the 
fide  of  the  decagon  .  For  the  whole  line  is  the  halfe  of  the  two  fides,  namely,  of  the  fide  of  the  hexagon, 
and  of  the  fide  of  the  decagon.But  of  the  fide  ofa  decagon  and  of  an  hexagon  taken  together,the  greater 
fegment  is  the  fide  of  the  hexacon  (by  the  of  the  thirtenth  )  .  Wherefore  the  greater  fegment  of  their 
halfes  fhall  be  the  halfe  of  the  hexagon, by  the  ty  .of  the  fife :  which  halfe  is  the  perpendicular  line  draw¬ 
en  from  the  centre  to  die  fide  of  the  mangle,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  n.of  the  thirtenth. 

f  The  fecondPropofition. 


If  two  right  lines  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion :  they 
fhall  be  diuided  into  the felfe fame  proportions . 

Vppofe  that  thefe  two  right  lines  A  B  and  D  E  be  eche  cut  by  an  extremeand  meane  pro¬ 
portion  in  the pointes  F and  Z.  Then  I  fay,  that  thefe  two  linesare  diuided  into  the  felfe 
lame  proportions,thatis,that  the  line  A  Bis  in  the  point  F  diuided  in  like  fortas  the  line 
D  E  is  in  the  point  Z. For  if  they  be  not  in  like  fort  cut,  let  One  of  them,namely,D  E,be  cut 


A  i- 


P 

— H- 


i  B 


cZj 


tion)  the  line  D 

line  D  Z  is  to  the  line  Z  E ,  Wherefore  the 
right  line  DE  is  diuided  by  an  extreme 
and  meane  proportion  in  two  pointes  C 
andZ  .  But  the  proportion  of  D  E  to  D  C 
the  lefle  line,  is  greater  then  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  fame  D  E  to  D  Z  the  greater  line, by  the  a. part  of  the  8.of  the  lift .  But  as  D  E  is  to  DC.To  is 
DC  toCE  :  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  DC  to  C  E,  is  greater  then  the  proportion  of  D  Z  to  ZE. 
And  forafmuch  as  D  Z  is  greater  then  D  C,  the  proportion  of  D  Z  to  C  E  fhall  be  greater  then  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  DC  to  CE,  by  the  8.of  the  fift.  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  DZ  to  CE,  is  much  greater 
then  the  proportion  ofD  Z  to  Z  E  .  Wherefore  one  and  the  felfe  fame  magnitude,namelv,  D  Z,  hath  to 
C  E  the  greater  line,  a  greater  proportion  then  it  hath  to  Z  E  the  lefle  line,  contrary  to  the  fecond  part 
of  the  8. of  the  fift:  which  is  impoflible.  Wherfore  the  rightlines  A  B  Sr  D  E,arenot  cut  vnlike.Wher- 
fore  they  are  eutlike,and  into  the  felfe  fame  proportions.  And  the  fame  demonftration  alfo  will  ferue,if 
the  point  C  fall  in  any  other  place  .  For  alwaies  fome  one  of  them  fhall  be  the  greater  .If  therefore  two 
right  lines,  be  cut  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportiori  :  they  fhall  be  cut  into  the  felfe  fame  propor¬ 
tions  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued.  r  - 


f  T he  third  Propofition.  •  -  u 

If  in  a  circle  be  deferibed  an  equi  later  Pentagon :  the fquares  made  of the 
Jide  of  the  Pentagon  and  of  the  line  ‘which  fubtendeth  two  fides  of  the 

Pentagon^ 


The  i,  props* 
ption  after 
Campar.e. 


DemonPrati- 
on  leading  t& 
an  hnpeffibi- 
title* 


7 be  ^.propo¬ 
rtion  after 
Camfane* 


CmttrHcfoon. 


Dewonflra- 
Hon , 


Thh  Corolla¬ 
ry  Cawpane 
filfo  putteih 
ter  the  4. 
proportion  in 
hit  order. 


7 he  ip,  propo¬ 
rtion  after 
Qimpane. 


Conttr  hfthn. 


Vcwtiffra- 

tion. 


Pentagon,  thefe  two  fquares(  I  fay  )  taken  together,  are  quintuple  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  drawen from  the  centre  of the  circle  to  the  circuference, 

Vppofe  that  in  the  circle  B  C  G  the  fide  of  a 
Pentagon  be  B  G  :  and  let  the  line  B  C  fub- 
tend  two  fides  thereof.  And  le,t  the  line  B  G 
be  daiided  into  two  equall  partes  by  a  right 
line  drawen  from  the  centre  D  :  namely,  by 
the  diameter  CDE  produced  to  the  point 
Z.  And  draw'e  the  rightline  B  Z  .  Then  I  fay, that  the  right 
lines  B  C  and  B  G ,  are  in  power  quintuple  to  the  right  line 
D  Z, which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference. 

Tor  forafniuch  as  (by  the  47 .of  the  firft  )  the  fquares-of  the 
lines  C  B  and  B  Z,  arc  equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  diameter 
C  Z  :  therefore  they  are  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line 
D  Z,  by  the  3.0.0'f  the  fixt  (  for  the  line  C  Z  is  double  to  the 
line  D  Z )  .  Wherefore  the  right  lines  C  B,B  Z,and  Z  D,are  in 
power  quintuple  to  the  line  Z  D.But  the  right  line  B  G  con¬ 
taineth  in  power  the  two  lines  B  Z  and  Z  D,by  the  io.of  the 
thirtenth-  ForDZ  is  the  fide  of  an  hexagon,  &B  Z  the  fide 
of  a  decagon.  Wherefore  the  lines  BC  and  BG(whofe  powers  are  equall  to  the  powers  of  the  lines 
C  B,  B  Z,  ZD  )  are  in  power  quintuple  to  the  line  D  Z  .  If  therefore  in  a  circle  be  defcribed  an  equilater 
Pentagon  :  the  fquares  made  of  the  fide  of  the  Pentagon  and  of  the  line  which  fubtendeth  two  fides  of 
the  Pentagon,  thefe  two  fquares  ( I  fay  )  taken' together,  are  quintuples  the  fquare  of  the  line  drawen 
from  the  centre  of  the  circle  to  the  circumference. 

^  A  Corollary. 

If  a  Cube  and  a  (Doderahedron  he  contained  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
Sphere :  the fide  of  the  Cube,  and  the  fide  \of  the  {Dodecahedron,  are  in  power 
quintuple  to  the  line  which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  of the  circle *  which  contai * 

neth  the  Pentagon  of  the  (Dodecahedron  .  For  it  was  proued  in  the  i7.of  the  thirtenth, 
that  the  fide  of  the  Cube  fubtendeth  two  fides  of  the  Pentagon  of  the  Dodecahedron,  where  the  fayd 
folides  are  contained  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  Sphere  .  Wherfore  the  fide  of  theCube  fubtending  two 
fides  of  the  Pentagon,  and  thefide  of  the  fame  Pentagon, are  contained  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  circle. 
Wherefore, by  this  Fropofition  ,they  are  in  power.quin tuple  to  the  line  which  is  drawen  from  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  fame  circle  which  containeth  the  Pentagon  of  the  Dodecahedron. 


The  4fPropofitiori, 

_  _  -  -A  v  -  j,  z "  . 

One  and  the  felfe  fame  circle  containeth  both  the  Pentagon  of  a  lDodeca* 
hedron^and  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron  defcribed  in  one  and  the  felfe 


10m 


Et  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  geuen  be  A  B,  and  let  the  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron  and  Do¬ 
decahedron  defcribed  in  it,  be  the  triangle  MNR,  and  thejpentagon  FKH,  and  a- 
bout  them  let  there  be  defcribed  circles.by  the  jr.and  i4.of  the  fourth.  And  let  the  lines 
drawne  from  the  centres  of  thofe  circles  to  the  circumferences  be  L  N  and  O  K.  Then  I 
\ fay  that  the  lines  L  N  and  O  K  are  equal,and  therfore  one  and  the  felfe  fame  circle  contai¬ 
neth  both  thofe  figures.  Let  the  right  line  A  B,  be  in  power  quintuple  to  fome  one  right  line,  as  to  the 
line  C  G(by  the  Corollary  of  the  6. of  the  tenth.)And  making  the  cetre  thepoyntC,&thefpaceC  G, 
deferibe  a  circle  D  Z  G.  And  let  thefide  ofap.entagon  inferibed  in  that  circle  (by  then. of  the  fourth) 
be  the  line  Z  G.  And  let  E  G  (fubtending  halfe  of  the  arke  Z  G)  be  the  fide  of  a  Decagon  inferibea 
in  that  circle.  And  by  the  3o.ofthefixt,diuide  the  line  C  G  by  an  extreme  &  meane  proportion  in  the 
poynt  I.Nowforafmuche  as  in  the  rn.of  thq  thirten  th,  it  was  proued,that  this  line  C  G  (vnto  whome 
the  diameter  A  B  of  the  fphere  is  in  power  quintuplets  the  line  which  is  drawne  from  the  centre  oi 
t|te  circle,  which  containeth  fiue  angles  of  the  Icofahedron,  and  the  fide  of the  pentagon  defcribed 


ofEuclides  Elementes  after  Fkfiat.  Fol,$  %  j. 

in  that  circle  D  Z  G,namely  the  line  Z  G 

is  fide  of  the  Icofahcdron  defcribed  in  .  (  -■  ■  — - ""*• - -  U 

the  Sphere,whofe  diameter  is  the  line  A  ^ 

B :  therefore  the  right  line  Z  G,is  equal  to 
the  line  MN,which  was  put  to  be  the  fide 
of  the  Icofahedrojor  of  his  triagular  bafe. 

Moreouer,by  the  i7.of  the  thirtenth,  it 
was  manifelf  that  the  right  line  fh (which 
fubtendeth  the  angle  of  the  pentagon  of 
the  Dodecahedron  infcribed  in  thcfore- 
fayde  fphere)  is  the  fide  of  the  Cube,  in¬ 
fcribed  in  thefelf  fame  fphere. (For  vpon 
the  angles  of  the  cubeywere  made  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  Dodecahedron.) Wherefore 
the  diameter  A  B  is  in  power  triple  to  F- 
H,the  fide  of  the  Cube  (by  the  if .  of  the 
thirtenth).  But  the  fame  line  A  Bis  (by 
fuppofition)  in  power  quintuple  to  the 
line  C  G.  Wherefore  fiucfquares  of  the 
line  C  G,are  equal  to  thre  fquares  of  the 
line  F  H, ;  (for  eche  is  equal  to  one  and 
the  felf  fame  fquare  of  the  line  A  B) .  A  nd 
forasmucheasEGthefide  of  the  Deca¬ 
gon,  cutteth  the  right  line  C  G  by  an  ex¬ 
treme  and  meane  proportion  (by  the  co¬ 
rollary  of  the  9  .of  the  thirtenth)  :  Like- 
wife  the  line  H  K,  cutteth  the  line  F  H, 
the  fide  of  the  Cube  by  an  extreeme 
and  meane  proportion  ( by  the  Co¬ 
rollary  of  the  17. of  the  thirtenth) :  therfore  the  lines  C  G  and  F  H,  are  deuided  into  the  felf  fame  pro¬ 
portions/by  the  fecond  of  this  booke:and  the  right  lines  C I  and  E  G,which  are  the  greater  fegmentes 
of  one  and  the  felfc  fame  line  C  G,are  equal :  And  forasmuche  as  flue  fquares  of  the  line  C  G  are  equal 
to  thre. fqnares  of the  lines  F  H  ;  therefore  fine  fquares  of  the  line  G  E,  are  equal  to  thre  fquares  of  the 
line  H  K  (for  the  lines  G  E  and  H  K  are  the  greater  fegm  ets  of  the  lines  C  G  and  F  H) -Wherefore  flue 
fquares  of  the  lines  CG  &  GE  are  equal  to  thre  fquares  of  the  lines  FH  &  HK,by  the  11  of  the  fife.  But 
vnto  thefqufixs  of  the  lines  C  G  and  G  E,is  equal  the  fquare  of  theline  Z  G,by  the  io.of  the  thirteth : 
and  vnto  theline  Z  G  the  line  M  N  was  equal  rwherfore  fiue  fquares  ofthc  line  M  N,are  equall  to  three 
Iquare's  of  the  lines  F  H,H  K  .  Butthc  fquares  of  the  lines  F  H  and  H  K,are  quintuple  to  the  fquare  of 
the  line  OK  (which  is  drawne  from  the.  centre )  bythethirdof  thisbooke.  Wherfbre  thre  fquares  of 
the  lines  F  Hand  H  K  make  iy.  fquares  of  the  line  O  K  .  And  forasmuch  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  M  N  is 
triple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  LN  (which  is  drawne  from  the  centre)  by  the  12.  of  the  thirtenth,  ther¬ 
fore  fiue  fquares  of  the  line  M  N  are  equal  to  t  y.  fquares  of  the  line  LN.But  fiue  fquares  of  the  line  M  N 
are  equal  vnto  thre  fquares  of  the  lines  FHandH  K  .  Wherefore  one  fquare  of  the  line  LN  is  equall 
to  one  fquare  of  the  line  OK  (being  eche  the  fiuetenth  part  of  equal  magnitudes)  by  the  iy.  of  the 
fifth,  Whcrfore  the  lines  L  N  and  O  K, which  are  drawne  from  the  centers,  are  equal.  Wherefore  alfo 
the  circles  N  R  M,and  F  K  H  which  are  defcribed  of  thofe  lines,  are  equal.  And  thofe  circles  contayne 
(by  fuppofition)  the  bafesof  the  Dodecahedron  and  of  the  Ico&hedron  defcribed  in  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  fphere .Wherfore  one  and  the  felfe  fame  circle.  &c.  as  in  the  propofition:  which  was  required  to 
be  probed.' 

,  , _  .  ,  ..  The  s&ropofition. 

If  in  a  circle  he  infcribed  the  pentagon  of a  ID  o  decahedron,  and  the  trian* 
gle  of an  Icofahcdron  ,and from  the  centre  to  one  of theyr fides,  he  dr  alone  u  ***  ® 

a perpendicular  liiie:T hat  Tobich  is  contained 30. times  "tinder  the fide jitionsaftef 
the  perpendicular  line  falling  Topon  it,  is  equal  to  the Juper  fries  of  that fo -  Campane, 
lidejopon  lohoje  fide  the  perpendicular  linefalleth. 

Vppofe  that  in  the  circle  A  G  E,be  defcribed  the  pentagon  of  a  Dodecahedron,  which 
let  be  AB  G  D  Ejand  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron  defcribed  in  the  fame  fphere,which 
let  be  A  F  H. And  let  the  centre  be  the  poyntC.  From  which  draw  perpendicularly  the  CcnjlrfUtUlH* 
line  C I  to  the  fide  of  the  Pentagon,and  the  line  C  L  to  the  fide  of  the  triangle  .  Then  I 
fay  that  the  redangle  figure  contained  vnder  the  lines  C I  and  G  D  jo.times,  is  equal  Co 

RRr.ij.  the 


Demnjiu- 

tion. 


Thit  Centu¬ 
ry  Catnpane 
atfo  addetb 
after  the  7. 
proportion  i  t 
hit  order. 


The  $.  propo¬ 
rtion  after 
Campane. 


Qonftrttttiw, 


Ventonffra- 

thn. 


Tbefourtenth  <Boo%e 

the  fuperficies  of  the  Dodecahedron  :  and  that  that 
which  is  cotained  vnder  the  lines  C  L  &  A  F  30.  time* 
is  equal  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Icofahedro  deferibed 
in  die  fame  fph ere  .Draw  thefe  right  lines  CA,CF,CG 
andCD.Now  forasmuch  as  that  which  is  cotained  vn 
der  the  bafe  G  D  &  the  altitude  I C,  is  double  to  the 
triangle  GCD,bythe4i.ofthe  firft:  And  fiue  triangles 
like  and  equal  to  the  triangle  G  C  D  do  make  the  pen¬ 
tagon  ABGDE  of  the  Dodecahedron:  wherfore  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  G  D  and  I C  fiue 
times  is  equal  to  two  pentagos.  Wherfore  that  which 
is  contained  vnder  the  lines  G  D  and  I C  30.  times  is 
equal  to  the  1  z.pentagons,  which  containe  the  fuperfi- 
ties  of  the  Dodecahedron. 

Againe  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lynes 
C  L  and  A  F,  is  double  to  the  triangle  A  C  F:  where¬ 
fore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  C  Land 
A  F  three  times  is  equal  to  two  fuche  triangles  as  A  F- 
H  ijjwhich  is  one  of  the  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron  (for 
the  triangle  A  C  F,is  the  third  pare  of  the  triangle  A  fi¬ 
ll, as  it  is  eafie  to  proue,by  the  4.of  the  firft.)  Wherfore  thit  which  is  cotained  vnder  the  lines  CL 

and  A  F.30  times  times,  is  equall  to  lo.fuch  triangles  as  A  FH  is,  which  containe  the  fuperficies  of  the 
Icofahedron.  And  forasmuch  as  one  and  thefelfe  lame  ipherecontaineth  the  Dodecahedron  of  this 
peutagon,and  the  Icofahedron  ofthis  triangle  (by  the  4.of  this  booke :  )  and  the  lineC  L  falleth  per¬ 
pendicularly  vpon  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,  and  the  line  Cl  vponthefideof  the  Dodecahedron  : 
that  which  is  3o.times  contained  vnder  the  fide,  and  the  perpendicular  line  falling  vpon  it,  is  equal  to 
the  fuperficies  of  that  folide,  vpon  whofe  fide  the  perpendicular  falleth.  If  therefore  in  a  circle  &c.asin 
the  propofition  -.which  was  required  to  be  demonftrated. 


A  Corollary. 

The fuperficieces  of a  {Dodecahedron  and  of  an  Icofahedron  deferibed  in  one 
and  thefelfe fame fiber  e  3  are  the  one  to  the  other ,as  that 1 vhich  is  contained 
der  the  fide  of the  one  and  the  perpendicular  line  dra^ne  imto  it  from  the  cen * 
tre  of  his  bafe ,tq  that  which  is  contained  lender  the  fide  of  the  other,  and  the 

perpendicular  line  dralene  to  it from  the  centre  of  his  bafe.  For  as  thirtye  times  is  to 
thirty  times,fo  is  once  to  once  by  the  if  .of  the  fifth. 

The  6. (propofition. 

T  he  fuperficies  of  a  Dodecahedron ,  is  to  the  fuperficies  of  an  Icofahe* 
dron  deferibed  in  one  and  thefelfe  fame fihere,  in  that  proportion,  that 
the  fide  of the  Cube  is  to  the fide  of the  Icofahedron  contained  in  the j elf 
fame fiber e. 


Vppofe  that  there  be  a  circle  A  B  G,&  in  it  (by  the  4.of  this  boke)  let  there  be  inferibed  the 
es  a  Dodecahedron  and  of  an  Icofahedron  contained  in  one  and  the  felfe  famcfphere. 

And  lct  the  the  Dodecahedron  be  A  G,and  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  be  D  G.  And 
j 1  let  the  centre  be  the  poy nt  E : from  which  draw  vnto  thofe  fides,perpendicular  lines  E I  and 
E  Z.And  produce  the  line  E I  to  the  poynt  R,.and  draw  the  line  B  G.  And  let  the  fide  of  the  cube  con¬ 
tained  in  the  felffame  fphere  be  G  C.  Then  I  fay  that  the  fuperficies  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  fu¬ 
perficies  of  the  Icofahedron, as  the  lineC  G,is  to  the  line  GD.  For  forasmuche  as  the  line  E I  being 
diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion, the  greater  fegment  therof  fhall  be  the  line  E  Z,  by  the 
corollary  of  the  firft  of  this  booke:  and  the  line  C  G  being  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  pro¬ 
portion,  his  greater  fegment  is  the  line  AG,  by  the  corollary  of  the  17.  of  the  thirtenth  ;  Where¬ 
fore  the  right  lines  El  and  CG  are  cut  proportionally  by  the  fecond  of  this  booke.  Wherefore 
as  the  line  C  G, is  to  the  line  A  G,  fo  is  the  line  El  to  the  line  EZ.  Wherefore  that  which  is  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  extreames  C  G  and  E  Z,  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  meanes 
AGandE  I. (by  thci^.of  thefixth.)  But  as  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  CG  and  EZ  is  to 
that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  D  G  and  E  Z,fo(by  the  firft  of  the  fixth)  is  the  line  C  G  to  the 

line 


cfEuclides  Elementes  after  Flufias.  Fol. 4 14. 

line  D  G,for  both  thofe  parallelogrames  haue  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  altitude}namely  the  line  E  Z.  Wherforeas  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  E  l  and  A  G  (which  is 
proued  equal  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
C  G  and  E  Z)  is  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the 
lines  D  G  and  E  Z,  fo  is  the  line  CG  to  the  line  DG. 

But  as  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  El  and  AG 
is  to  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  D  G  and  E  Z,  - 
fo  (by  the  corollary  of  the  former  propofition)  is  the  fu¬ 
perficies  of  the  Dodecahedron,  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  f- 
colahedron  .Wherfore  as  the  lUperficiis  of  the  Dodecahe¬ 
dron  is  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Icofahedron.fo  is  C  G  the 
fide  of  the  cube,  to  G  D  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron.  The 
fuperficies  therefore  of  a  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  fuperfi- 
cies.&c.  asm  the  propofition,  which  was  required  to  be  vi 

proued.  ' 

Anafliimpt. 

T he  'Pentagon  of  a  {Dodecahedron ,is  equall  to  that  lohich  is  contained  hn*  This  Afampt 
der  the  perpendicular  line  lohich falleth  J>pon  the  bafe  of the  triangle  of the  forth 

Icofahedron  }and  fiue  fixth  partes  of  the  fide  of  the  cube  3  the  fayd  three  fo *  8. propofition \ 
tides  being  deferibed  in  one  and  the felfe  fame fphere.  in  his  order. 

Suppofe  that  in  the  circle  ABE  G,the  pentagon  of  a  Dodecahedron  be  A  B  C I G  ,  and  let  two 
fidesthereofABand  AG  be  fubtendedof  the  right  line  BG.  And  let  the  triangle  of  the  Icofahedron  . 

inferibed  in  the  felfe  fame  fphere ,  by  the  4.of  this  booke,be  A  F  H .  And  let  the  centre  of  the  circle  be  tJonSiruchott. 
the  poynt  D,and  let  the  diameter  be  A  D  E, cutting  F  H,the  fide  of  the  triangle  in  thepoynt  Z,and  cut¬ 
ting  the  line  B  G  in  the  poynt  K .  And  draw  the  right  line  B  D .  And  from  the  right  line  K  G  cut  of  a 
third  part  T  G,by  the  ^.of  the  fixth.Now  then  the  fine  BG  fubtending  two  fides  of  the  Dodecahedron,  n  „ 
fhalbe  the  fide  of  the  cube  inferibed  in  the  lame  fphere,by  the  17.  of  the  thirtenth :  and  the  triangle  of  fwtmflrd- 
the  Icofahedron  of  the  fame  fphere  fhalbe  A  F  H  by  the  4.  of  this  booke .  And  the  line  A  Z  which  paf  tion% 
fethby  the  centre  D  fhall  fall  perpendicularly  vpon  the 
fide  of  the  triangle.For  forafmuch  as  the  angles  G  A  E  & 

B  A  E  are  equall  (  by  the  17.  0/ the  third ,  for  they  are  fee 
vpon  equall  circumferences) :  therefore  the  bafes  B  K  and 
K  G  are(by  the  4.of  the  firft)  equall Wherefore  the  line 
B  T  bpntayneth  y.  fixth  partes  of  the  line  B  G  .  Then  I  fay 
that  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z  and  B- 
T,is  equall  to  the  pentagon  A  B  C I G,  For  forafmuch  as 
theiine  A  Z  is  fefquiaiter  to  the  line  AD  (for  the  line  D- 
E  is  diuided  into  two  equal!  partes  in  thepoynt  Z,  by  the 
corollary  of  the  iz .  of  the  thirtenth  )  .  Likewife  by  con- 
llrudion,the  line  K  G  is  fefquiaiter  to  the  line  K  T :  there¬ 
fore  as  the  line  A  Z  is  to  the  line  A  D,fo  is  the  line  K  G  to 
theiine  K  T .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder 
the  extreames  A  Zand  KT,is  equall  to  that  which  is  con¬ 
tayned  vnder  the  meanes  A  D  and  K  G ,  by  the  ifi.  of  the 
fixth .  But  vnto  the  line  K  G  is  theiine  B  K  proued  equall. 

Wherefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z 

and  K  T  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  D  and  B  K .  But  that  which  is  contayned 
vnder  the  lines  AD  and  BK  is  (by  the  4 1.  of  the  firll )  double  to  the  triangle  ABD  .  Wherefore  that 
which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z  and  K  T  is  double  to  the  fame  triangle  ABD.  And  forafmuch 
as  the  pentagon  AB  C I G  contayneth  fiue  triangles  equall  to  the  triangle  ABD,  and  that  which  is 
contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z  and  K  T  contayneth  two  fuch  triangles-,  therefore  the  pentagon  A  B  C I 
G  is  duple  fefquiaiter  to  the  reftangle  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z  and  K  T .  And 
forafmuch  as  by  conftruttion  the  line  B  T  is  duple  fefquiaiter  to  the  right  line  K  T :  but  by  x.  of  the 
fixthjthat  which  is  cotcyned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z  and  B  T  is  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines 
AsZaddKTjasthebafeBTiStothebafeKT:  therefore  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z 
and  B  Tis  duple  fefquiaiter  to  thatwhichis  contayned  vnder  theiine  A  z  &  KT. But  vnto  thatwhich 
is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  A  Z  and  K  T  the  pentagon  A  B  C I G  is  proued  duple  fefquiaiter .Wher 
fore  thepentagon  A  B  Cl  G  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  per- 

RRr.iii.  pcndicular 


JL 


They,  propo¬ 
rtion  after 
Campaue. 


CattUntBhtu 


VemsaSra- 


tim. 


ienw'&Qo%e 

pendicular  line  A  Z^and  vtidcr  the  line  B  T  which  is  hue  fixe  partes  of  the  line  B  G. 

~'"w  «f  $  L  vr.  '[  ,r  *,  V  J  J*  ^  ,  ■  „ 

fThe  7.  tPropofition. 

A  right  line  diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane proportion :  D that propor* 
tion  the  line  contayning  in  payer  the  yhole  line  an  d  the  greater  fegment, 
hath  to  the  line  contayning  in  power  the  "tybole  and  the  lejfe fegment :  the 
fame  hath  the  fide  of  the  cube  to  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  contayncd  in 
one  and  the  fame  fphere . 

jf^^ffiAbe-a  circle  ABE:  and  in  it(by  the  :  i  .of the  fourth)infcribe  an  equilater  pentagon  B  Z  E  C- 
j||£  H :  and(by  the  fecond  of  the  fame)an  equilater  triangle  A  B I .  And  let  the  centre  thereof  be 
p'thcpoyntG.  Anddrawea  line  from  G  to  B  .  And  diuide  the  line  GB  by  an  extreame  and 
£&  meane  proportion  in  thepoynt  D(by  the  30.  of  the  fixth  ) .  And  let  the  hne  M  L  contavne  in 
£cwer  both  the  whole  line  G  B  and  his  leffe  fegment  B- 
Df  by  the  corollary  of  the  13  .of  the  tenth )  .And  draw  the 
right  line  B  E  fubteJing  the  angle  of  the  pentagon,  which 
ihall.be  the  fide  of  the  cube  (  by  the  corollary  of  the  17. 
of  the' thirtenth)  :  and  the  line  B 1  fhail  be  the  fide  of  the 
IcofshedroB  ,  and  the  line  B  Z  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahe¬ 
dron  by  the  4.  of  this  booke .  Then  1  fay  thatB  E  the  fide  ^ 
of  the  cube  is  to  B I  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  ,  as  the 
line  contayning  in  power  the  lines  B  G  &  G  D  is  to  the 
line,  contayning  in  power  the  lines  G  B  and  B  D*  For  for- 
aamuch  as  (  by  the  12.  of  the  thirtenth  )  the  line  B  I  is  in 
power  triple  to  the  line  B  G ,  and  (  by  the  4.  of  the  fam  e) 
thefquares  of  the  line  G  B&B  D  are  triple  to  thefquare 
of  theline  G  D .  Wherefore  (  by  the  ij.  of  the  fifth  )  the 
fquare  of  the  line  B I  is  to  the  fquares  of  theiines  G  B  & 

B  D(namely, triple  to  triple),as  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G 
is  to  the  lquare  of  the  line  G  D(namely3as  one  is  to  one). 

But  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  G  is  to  the  fquare  of  the 

G  D ,  fo  is  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E  to  the  fquare  of  the  ___ 

line  B  Z .  (  For  the  lines  BG,GDS  and  B  E3  B  Z  are  in  one  and  the  fame  proportion  ,by  the  fecond  of 
this  booke.  Eor  B  Z  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  B  E,by  the  corollary  of  the  17.  of  the  thirtenth,). 
Wherefore  the  fquare  of  theline  B  E  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  Z  ,  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  B 1  is  to 
she  fquaresof-theiines  B  G  and-B  D .  Wherefore  alternately  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E  is  to  the  fquare 
of  the  line  B  I3as  the  fquare  of  the  lineB  Z  is  to  thefquares  of  the  itnesG  B  and  B  D.  But  thefquareof 
the  line B  Z  is  equall  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  G  and  G  D  (  by  the  io.ofthe  thirtenth  ) .  Fortheline 
B  G  is  equall  to  the  fide  of  the  hexagon,and  the  line  G  D  to  the  fide  of  the  decagon3by  the  corollary  of 
the  9. of  the  fame  .  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  B  G  and  G  D ,  are  to  the  lquares  of  the  lines  G  B 
and  B  D ,  as  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  I .  But  the  hne  Z  B  contayneth  in 
power  the  lines  B  G  and  G  D,and  the  line  M  L  contayneth  in  power  the  lines  G  B  and  B  D  by  conllruc- 
don  .  Wherefore  as  theline  Z  B  ('wnich  contayneth  in  power  the  whole  line  B  G  and  the  greater  feg¬ 
ment  G  D)is  to  theline  M  L  (  which  contayneth  in  in  power  the  whole  hne  G  Band  the  lefie  fegment 
BD  JfoisB  Ethefide  ofthecube  to  B I  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron;,  by  the  22.of  the  fixth  .Wherefore 
a  right  line  diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion  :  what  proportion  theline  contayning  in 
power  the  whole  line  and  the  greater  fegment,  hath  to  the  line  contayning  in  power  the  whole  fine 
and  thsieffe  fegment:  the  fame  hath  the  fide  of  the  cube  to  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  cotayned  in  one 
and  the  fame  fphere -which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


T  his  CmmprtHe 
putteth  M  &Ca- 
rolhkry  itt  the  9. 


fThe  8.  Tropofition. 

T  hefolide  of a  (Dodecahedron  is  to  the folide  of m  Icofahedron :  as  the  fide 
of  a  Cube  is  to  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron,  all  thofe  folides  being  deferibed 
in  one  and  the  fielfe  fame  Sphere. 


ter  his  order. 


Forafinuch 


ofEudides  Elementes  after  Flufias,  Fohq  25. 

/  ^Orafmuch  as  in  the  4.of  this  booke,  it  hath  bene  proued,  that  one  and  the  felffame  ext- 
cle  containeth  both  the  triangle  of  an  Icofahedron,  and  the  pentagon  of  a  Dodecahe- 
dron  defcribed  in  one  and  the  felfe  lame  Sphere  :  Wherefore  the  cncles,  which  cotaine 
thofe  bafes,  being  equall,  the  perpendiculars  alfo  which  are  drawen  from  the  centre  of 
-N^*yrj  the  Sphere  to  thofe  cirefes,lhatt  be  equal!  (by  the  Corollary  of  the»Aflumpt  of  the  16  of 

the  twelfth) .  And  therefore  the  Pyramids  fet  vpon  the  bafes  of  thofe  folides  haueone 
an-d  the  felfe  lame  altitude  :  For  the  altitudes  of  thofe  Pyramids  concurre  in  the  centre. 
Wherefore  they  are  in  proportion  as  their  bafes  are, by  the  j.and  tf.of  the  twelfth;  .  And  therefore  the 
pyramids  which  compofe  the  Dodecahedron,  are  to  the  pyramids  which  compofe  the  Icofahedron, 
as  the  bafes  are,  which  bafes  are  the  fuperficieces  of  thofe  folides  .  Wherefore  their  folides  are  the  one 
to  the  other, as  their  fuperficieces  are .  But  the  fuperficies  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  fuperficies  of 
the  Icofahedron,  as  the  fide  of  the  cube  is  to  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,by  the  6, of  this  booke.  Wher- 
fore  by  the  1 1  .of  the  fifth,  as  the  folide  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  folide  of  the  Icofahedron,  fo  is 
the  fide  of  the  cube  to  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,  all  the  faid  folides  being  inferibed  in  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  Sphere  .  Wherefore  the  folide  of  a  Dodecahe  dron  is  to  the  folide  of  an  Icofahedron  :  as  the 
fide  of  a  cube  is  to  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron,  all  thofe  folides  being  defcribed  in  one  and  the  felf  fame 
Sphere  :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

#  A  Corollary. 

The folide  of a  (Dodecahedron  is  to  the folide  of  an  Icofahedron ,  as  the  fit * 
perficieces  of the  one  are  to  the fuperficieces  of  the  other, being  defcribed  in  one 
and  the felfe fame  Sphere  .*  Namely,  as  the  fide  ofthe  cube  is  to  the  fide  ofthe  Icofahedron, 
as  was  before  manifeft  :  for  they  are  refolued  into  pyramids  of  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude. 

f  The  p.  (propofition . 

If  the  fide  of an  equilater  triangle  he  rational l:  the fuperficies fhall  be  irra * 
tionall,  of  that  kinde  Tohich  is  called Medialh 


Vppofe  that  A  B  G  be  an  equilater  triangle :  and  from  the  point  A  draw  vnto  the  fide  B  G 
a  perpendicular  line  A  D  :  and  let  the  line  A  B  be  rationall .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  fuperfi¬ 
cies  A  B  G  is  mediall .  Forafmuch  as  the  line  A  B  is  in  power  fefquitertia  to  the  line  A  D 
(by  the  Corollary  of  the  12. of  the  thirtenth  )  :  of  what  partes  the  line  A  B  containeth  in 
power  12,  of  the  fame  partes  the  line  A  D  containeth  in  power  9  :  wherefore  the  refi- 
due  B  D  con  taineth  in  power  of  the  fame  partes  3 .  (Eor  the  line  A  B  cotaineth  in  power 
the  lines  A  D  and  B  D,by  the  47 .of  the  firft  )  .  Wherfore  the 
lines  A  D  and  D  B  are  rationall  and  commenfurable  to  the 
rationall  line  fet  A  B,  by  the  6.  of  the  tenth  .  But  forafmuch 
as  the  power  of  the  line  A  D  is  to  the  power  of  the  line  D  B 
in  that  proportion  that  9.  a  fquare  number  is  to  3. a  number 
not  fquare  :  therfore  they  are  not  in  the  proportion  offquare 
numbers,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  2*  .of  the  eight.  And  ther¬ 
fore  they  are  not  commenfurable  in  length,  by  the  9.  of  the 
tenth  .  Wherefore  that  which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines 
AD  and  DB,  which  are  rationall  lines  commenfurable  in 
power  oneiy,  is  mediall,  by  the  22.  of  the  tenth  .  Butthat 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AD  and  DB,  is  double 
to  the  triangle  A  B  D,  by  the  41  .of  the  firft .  Wherefore  that 
which  is  contained  vnder  the  lines  AD  and  D  B, is  equall  to 
the  whole  triangle  A  B  G  (  which  is  double  to  the  triangle 
A  B  D,by  the  1  .of  the  fixt ) .  Wherefore  the  triangle  AEG  B 
is  mediall .  If  therfore  the  fide  of  an  equilater  triangle  be  ra¬ 
tionall  .  the  fuperficies  fhall  be  irrationall,  of  that  kindc  which  is  called  Mediall  1  which  was  required 
to  be  proued.  * 


#  A  Corollary. 

If  an  O&ohedron  and  aTetrahedron  be  inferibed  in  a  Sphere  lebofedia* 

■meter  is  rationall:  their  fuperficieces /hall  he  mediall.  For thofe  fuperficieces  confifte 
of  equilater  triangles,  whofe  fides  are  commenfurable  to  the  diameter  which  is  rationality  the  13  .and 

H-of 


This  Corolla-* 
ry  is  the  ?. 
proportion 
after  Cam- 
pane. 


Then,  pro* 

pofttm:  after 
Cam  fails:, 

ConttruBion* 

Vemonjlri- 


Thei^pnptb> 
Jition  after 
Campam, 


Tben.pn- 
pojition  after 
Campans ♦ 


Fettto'iftra- 
twt  of  the 
fir  &  part. 


IDmonftrati- 
on  of  thefts - 

conk  part. 


The  ij. pro- 
pofitioft  after 
Campane. 


Fir^part  of 
the  ccnffr  ac¬ 
tion. 


Fir  ft  part  of 
the  Demon- 
Jlration . 


7 he four  tenth  <Bool{e 

w.of  the  thirtenth,  and  therefore  they  are  rationall.But  they  are  commenfurable  in  power  onely  to  the 
perpendicular  line,  and  therefore  they  containe  a  mediall  triangle,  as  it  was  before  manifeft. 

nr  he  io.  (Proportion. 

If  a  Tetrahedron  and  an  Oflohedron  be  inferibed  in  one  and  the felffame 
Sphere  :  the  bafe  of  the  Tetrahedron  fhall  be  fefquitertia  to  the  bafe  of  the 
Q  ffohedron,and  the  fuperficieces  of the  Offobedron  fhall  be  fefquialtera  to 
the  fuperficieces  of  the  Tetrahedron. 

teSuZAV*  Orafmuch  as  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  is  in  power  fefquialtera  to  the  fide  of  the  Tetrahe- 
dron  (by  the  13  .of  the  thirtenth)  and  the  fame  diameter  is  in  power  duple  to  the  fide  of  the 
M  .  e' (hy  the  i4.of  tnefame  booke) :  therefore  of  what  partes  the  diameter  contai- 

ri  *n  power  fixe,of  the  lame  the  fide  ofthe  Tetrahedron  contayneth  in  power  4,andof  the 

fame  the  fide  of  the  O&ohedron  containeth  in  power  3 .  Wherefore  the  power  ofthe  fide  of 
the  Tetrahedron,  is  to  the  power  ofthe  fide  ofthe  O&ohedron  in  the  fame  proportion  that  4.isto  3  : 
which  is  fefquitertia .  And  like  triangles  (which  are  die  bafes  ofthe  folides )  deferibed  of  thofe  fides, 
fhall  haue  the  one  to  the  other  the  fame  proportion  that  the  fquares  made  of  thofe  fides  haue.For  both 
the  triangles  are  the  one  to  the  other,  and  alfo  the  fquares  are  the  one  to  the  other, in  double  proporti¬ 
on  of  thafin  which  the  fides  are,  by  the  io.of  the  fixth  .  Wherefore  of  what  partes  one  bafe  ofthe  Te- 
trxhedronwas  4:  ofthe  fame  are  fower  bafes  ofthe  Tetrahedron  rtf :  likewife  of  what  partes  ofthe 
fame  one  bafe  of  the  O&ohedron  was  3 :  of  the  fame  are  S.bafes  ofthe  O&ohedron  14.  Wherfore  the 
bafes  of  the  O&chedron  are  to  the  bafes  of  the  Tetrahedron,in  that  proportion  that  74. is  to  16:  which 
is  fefquialtera .  Iftherefore  a  Tetrahedron  and  an  O&ohedron  be  inferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
Sphere  :  the  bafe  of  the  Tetrahedron  fhall  be  fefquitertia  to  the  bafe  ofthe  O&ohedron, and  the  fuper¬ 
ficieces  or  the  O&ohcdron  fhall  be  fefquialtera  to  the  fuperficieces  of  the  Tetrahedron;  which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  beproued. 

f  The  11.  Propojition. 


A  T etrahedron  is  to  an  Ollohedron 
inferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
Sphere >  in proportion ?as  the  re  Flan - 
gle parallelogram  contained  lander 
the  line y  "tybich  containeth  in  power 
27  .fixty fower  partes  ofthe  fide  of 
the  T etrahedron ,  Imder  the  line 

*tohich  is fubfefquioClaua  to  the fame  v 
fide  of  the  Tetrahedron y  is  to  the 
fquare  ofthe  diameter  of the  Sphere. 


Et  vs  fuppofe  a  Sphere,  whole  diame¬ 
ter  let  be  the  line  A  B,  and  let  the  cen- 
‘tre  be  the  point  H.  And  in  it  let  there  be  inferibed  a 
jTetrahedron  A  D  C ,  and  an  O&ohedron  A  E  K  B  G. 
Andlet  the  line  N  L  containe  in  power  of  AC  the 


■*  64 

--  - -  -  Jlde  oftheTetrahedron.Andlet  the  line  ML  be  in  I£gth 

fubfefquio&auato  the  famefide.TheIfay,thatthe  Tetrahedron  ACD 
is  to  the  O&ohedron  AEB,  as  the  re&angle  parallelogramme  contay- 
nedvnder  the  lines  NL  and  LM,  is  to  the  fquare  ofthe  line  A  B.Foraf- 
much  as  the  line  drawen  fro  the  angle  A  by  the  centre  H  perpedicular- 
ly  vpon  the  bafe  of  the  Tetrahedron,fallethvpon  the  ceterT  of  the  cir¬ 
cle  which  containeth  that  bafe, and  maketh  the  right  line  H  T  the  fixth 
part  ofthe  diameter  A  B  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  13  .of  the  thirtenth)  : 
therefore  the  line  H  A  (  which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  dreu- 
ference  )  is  triple  to  the  line  HT;  and  therefore  the  whole  line  A  T  is 


to  -/d' 


to  the  line  A  H,as  44s  to  3 .  Let  the  Tetrahedron  ADC  be  cut  by  a  plains  G  H  K  paffing  by  the  centre? 
H,and  being  parallel  vnto  the  bafe  DTC,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  14. of  the  eleuenth .  Now  then  the 
triangle  A  D  C  of  the  Tetrahedron,  fhall  be  cut  by  the  right  line  K  G,  which  is  parallel  to  the  line  D  C, 
by  the  i6.oftheeleiienth.Wherforeastheline  AT  is  to  the  line  A  H,fo  is  the  line  AC  to  the  line  A  G 
(by  the  2  .of  the  fixth) .  Wherefore  the  line  A  C  is  to  the  line  A  G  fefquitertia,  thatis,as  4.  to  3  .  And 
forafmuch  as  the  triangles  A  DCj  A  KG,  and  the  reft  which  are  cut  by  the  plaine  K  H  G,  are  like  the 
one  to  the  other,  by  the  y  .of  the  fixth  :  the  pyramids  ADC  and  A  K  G,  fhall  be  like  the  One  to  the  q- 
ther,  by  the  7  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  .Wherefore  they  are  in  triple  proportion  of  that  in  which  the 
fides  A  C  and  A  G  are,  by  the  8.  of  the  twelfth  .  But  the  proportion  of  the  fides  A  C  to  A  G  is,  as  the 
proportion  0f4.ro  3  .  Now  then,  if,  bythei.oftheeight,yefindeout4.oftheleftnumbcrsincontinu- 
all  proportion,  and  in  that  proportion  that  4.is  to  3  :  which  fhall  be  64.48.36.  and  27  :  it  ismanifeft> 
by  the  if  definition  of  the  fifth,  that  the  extremes  64.  to  27.  are  in  triple  proportion  of  that  in  which 
the  proportion  geuen  4.  to  3 .  is  :  Or  the  quantitie  of  the  proportion  of  4.  to  3 .  (which  is  1 .  and  —j 
being  twife  multiplied  into  it  felfe,  there  fhall  be  produced  the  proportion  of  6440  27.  Wherefore  the 
Pyramis  Or  Tetrahedron  A  D,C  is  to  the  pyramis  A  K  G,  as  64ns  to  27  :  which is  triple  to  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  4.to  3 .  And  forafmuch  as  theline  A  C  is  vnto  the  line  A  G  in  length  fefquitertia:  of  what  partes 
thelineACeontainethinpower64  :  of  the  fame  partes  doth  theline  AG  containe  in  power  36.  For 
(by  the  2  .of  the  fixth)  the  proportion  of  the  powers  or  fquares,  is  duple  to  the  proportion  of  the  fides 
which  are  as'64.isto  48. 

Now  then  vpon  the  line  R  S  which  let  be  equall  to  the  line  A  G  ,  let  there  be  an  equilater  triangle 
QJ*  S  defcribed(by  the  firfl  of  the  firft)  .And  from  the  angle  Q_,  draw  to  the  bafe  R  S  a  perpendicular 
line  QJT.And  extend  the  line  R  S  to  thepoyntX.Andas  274s  to  64.  (fo  by  the  corollary  ofthe6.ofthe 
tenth)let  the  line  RS  be  to  the  lineRX.  And  diuide  the  line  RXinto  two  equall  partes  in  the  poyntV, 
and  draw  the  line  Q_V  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  R  S  is  equall  to  the  line  A  G,  of  what  partes  the  litre 
A  C  contavneth  in  power  64.  of  the  fame  part  the  line  R  S  contayneth  in  power  36.for  it  is  proued  that 
theline  AG  contayneth  in  power  36.  of  thofe  partes  :  And  ofwhat  partes  the  lineRS  contayneth  in 
power  36  of  the  fame  partes  theline  QJT  contayneth  in  power  27.' by  the  corollary  of  the  12.  of  the 
thirten  th .  W  hcrforc  of  what  partes  the  line  A  C  contayneth  in  power  64,of  the  fame  par  ts  the  line  Q^ 
T  contayneth  in  power  27  .  Wherefore  the  right  line  QJT  fhall  be  equall  to  the  right  line  L  N  by  fup- 
pofition.  Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  line  R  S  is  put  equall  to  the  line  A  G :  and  of  what  partes  the  line  R- 
S  contayneth  in  length  27.  of  the  fame  parts  is  the  lineRX  put  to  eontayne  in  length  64.  and  of  what 
partes  the  lineRX  contayneth  in 
length  64.  of  the  fame  the  line  A- 
C(which  is  in  length  fefquitertia 
to  the  line  A  G  or  R  S  )  contay¬ 
neth  36  .  Wherefore  the  lineR  V 
(  which  is  the  halfe  of  the  lineR- 
X)containeth  in  legth  of  the  fame 
partes  32.  of  which  the  line  AC 
contayned  in  length  36.AVhere- 
fore  the  line  RV  is  to  the  line  A- 
C  fubfefquiodaua:  and  therefore 

the  line  R  V  is  equall  to  the  line  '~yr  5  T 

L  M  which  is  alfo  fubfefquiodaua 
to  the  lame  line  A  C .  And  forafmuch  as  tile  line  N  L  is  equall  to  the  line  QJT ,  and  the  line  LMto  the 
line  R  V  (as  before  hath  bene  proued  )  the  redangle  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  lines  QJT 
and  R  V ,  fhall  be  equall  to  the  redan  gle  parallelogram  me ,  contayned  vnder  the  line  N  L  which  is  in 

power  £  to  thefide  A  C,and  vnder  the  line  L  lyl, which  is  in  length  fubfefquiodaua  to  the  fame  fide  A- 

C. But  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  QJT  and  R  Vis  double  to  the  triangle  QV  R  by  the  41, 
of  the  firft: and  to  the  fame  triangle  Q_V  R  is  the  triangle  QJ*  R  duple  by  the  firft  of  the  fixth.  Where¬ 
fore  the  whole  triangle  QJt  R  is  equall  to  that  which  is  contayned  vnder  the  lines  QJT  and  R  V ,  and 
therefore  is  equall  to  the  parallelogramme  M  N.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  R  X  by  fuppofition  contay- 
neth  in  length  64.of  thofe  partes  of  which  the  line  R  S  contayneth  27 :  and  the  triangles  QJ*  X,and  Q- 
R  S  arc, by  the  firft  of  the  fixth,in  the  proportion  of  their  bafes,  that  is, as  644s  to  27:  but  as  644  s  to  27I 
fo  is  the  pyramis  or  tetrahedron  A  D  C  to  the  pyramis  A  K  G :  wherefore  as  the  parallelogramme  N  M 
or  the  triangle  QJR  Xjs  to  tire  triangle  QJ*  S,fo  is  the  pyramis  A  D  C  to  the  pyramis  A  K  G.  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  the  femidiameter  A  H  is  the  altitude  of  the  pyramis  A  K  G  ,  andalfo  of  the  two  equall  and 
like  pyramids  of  the  odohedron  which  haue  their  common  bafe  in  the  fquare  of  the  odohedron  (  by 
the  corollary  of  the  i4.of  the  thirtenth) ;  therefore  as  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis  A  K  G  (which  is  the  tri¬ 
angle  Qjl  S)is  to  two  fquares  of  the  odohedron,  that  is,  to  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  A  B,which  is  e- 
quall  to  thofe  fquarcs(by  the  47.of  the  firft), fo  is  the  pyramis  A  K  G  to  the  odohedron  A  E  B,by  the  6. 
of  the  twelfth.  And  forafmuch  as  the  parallelogramme  M  N  is  to  the  bafe  QJ*  S,as  the  pyramis  ADC 
is  to  the  pyramis  A  K  G,and  the  bafe  QJ*  S  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  B  E ,  as  the  pyramis  A  K  G  is  to 
the  odohedron  A  E  B :  therefore  by  proportion  of  equality  taking  away  the  meases  (  by  the  22 .  of  the 
fifth)as  rhe  parallelogramme  N  M  is  to  the  fquare  of  theline  B  E ,  fo  is  the  pyramis  A  D  C  to  the  odo- 

SSs.i,  hedrott 


Secondpaft 
of  the  con- 
flrhtt  ioU» 

S  econd pan 

oftheVe- 

mnHratkn* 


fcdron  A  E  B  infcribe^  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fpheire .  But  the  parallelogramme  N  M  is  contayned 
vnder  the  line  N  L  which  by  fuppofition  is  in  power  -g- to  A  C  the  fide  of  the  tetrahedron  A  DC,  and 

vnder  the  line  L  M  which  is  alfo  by  fuppofition  in  length  fubfcfquioftaua  to  the  fame  line  A  C.Wher- 
fore  a  tetrahedron  Sc  an  odtohedron  inferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  feme  fphere,are  in  proportions  the 
re&angie  parallelogramme  contayned  vnder  the  line,which  contayneth  in  power  *7.fixty  fower  part* 
of  the  fide  of  the  Tetrahedron, and  vnder  the  line  which  is  fubfefquio&aua  to  the  feme  fide  of  the  Tc- 
«rahedron,is  to  the  fquarc  of  the  diameter  of  the  Iphere :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


The-  pro*  V a  Cu^e  be  contayned  in  a  fphere:thefquare  of the  diameter  doubled js  e* 

pafiuan  after  quail  to  all  the  fuperficieces  of  the  cube  taken  together,  jfnd  a perpendicu • 

tampans,  lay  line  drawnefrom  the  centre  of  the  fphere  to  any  bafe  of  the  cube  ?  is  e* 

■quail to  halfe  the  fide  of  the  cube . 


T)emt>n8r»- 
tipn  vfthe 
fir  ft  part. 


Dmonftra - 
turn  of  tbs 
fecondpart , 


Or  forafm  uch  as(by  the  if  .of  the  thirtenth)  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  is  in  power 
triple  to  the  fide  of  the  cube :  therefore  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  doubled  is  fex- 
tuple  to  the  bafe  of  the  fame  cube. But  the  fextuple  of  the  power  of  one  of  the  fide* 
contayneth  th*  whole  fuperficies  of  the  cube .  For  the  cube  is  compofed  of  fixe 
fquarefi*perficieces(by  theai.diffinition  of  the  cleuenth)whofcfides  therefore  are 
equall:  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  doubled  is.  equall  to  the  whofe  fuper¬ 
ficies  of  the  cube .  And  forafmuch  as  the  diameter  of  the  cube ,  and  the  line  which 
falleth  perpendicularly  vpo  the  oppofite  bafes  of the  cube,  do  cut  the  one  the  other 
into  two  equall  partes  in  theceutre  of  the  fphere  which  containeth  the  cube  (by  the  a  .corollary  of  the 
if.of  the  thirtenth)and  the  whole  righdine  which  coapleth  thecentres  of  the  oppofite  bafes,is  equall 
to  the  fide  of  the  cube  by  the  33  .of  the  full, for  it  coupleth  the  equal!  and  parallel  femidiameters  of  the 
bafes ;  therefore  the  halfe  thereof  fliall  be  equall  to  the  halfe  of  the  fide  of  the  cube  by  the  if.  of  the 
fifth. If  therefore  a  cube  be  contayned  in  afphere:  the  fquare  of  the  diameter  doubled  is  equall  to  all 
the  fitperficieces  of  the  cube  taken  together .  And  a  perpendicular  line  drawnefrom  the  centre  of  rhe 
Iphere  to  any  bafe  of  the  cube, is  equall  to  halfe  the  fide  of  the  cube:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 


A  Corollaty. 


The  Corolla- 
ry  of  if  el. 
proportion 
after  Cam- 
pane* 


If  two  thirds  of the  poioer  of the  diameter  of the fphere  be  multiplied  into 
the  perpendicular  line  equall  to  halfe  the fide  of the  cubejthere Jhall  be  produced 

a folids  equall  to  the  folide  of  the  Clibe.y  or  it  is  before  manifeftthat  two  third  partes  of  the 
power  of  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  are  equall  to  two  bafes  of  the  cube.If  therefore  vnto  eche  of  thole 
two  thirds  be  applyed  halfe  the  altitude  of  the  cube ,  they  (hall  make  eche  of  thofe  folides  equall  to 
halfe  of  the  cube,by  the  3  x.of  the  eleuenth:for  they  haue  equall  bafes.Whercforc  two  of  thofe  folides 
are  equal!  to  the  whole  cube. 


You  (hall  vnderftand(gentle  reader) that  Campane  in  his  14.  booke  ofEuclides'Ele- 
mentes  hath  1 8 .  ppopofitios  with  diuers  corollaries  following  of  them.Some  of  which 
proportions  and  corollaries  I  haue  before  in  the  twelfth  and  thirtenth  bookes  added 
out  ofFiufifas  as  coroUaries(which  thing  alfo  I  haue  noted  on  the  fide  of  thofe  corol¬ 
laries,  namely,  with  what  propofitioa  or  corollary  of  Campanes  14.  booke  they  doo 
agree)  .The  reft  of  his  1 8  .propofitions  and  corollaries  are  contained  in  the  twelue  for¬ 
mer  proportions  and  corollaries  of  this  14.  booke  after  Fluflas:  where  ye  may  fee  on 
the  fide  of  eche  propofition  and  corollary  with  what  propofition  and  corollary  of 
Campanes  they  agree.  But  the  eight  proportions  following  together  with  their  corol- 
laries.Fluftas  hath  added  of  him  felfe,  as  he  him  felfe  afiirmeth. 

The 


ofEuclides  Elementes  after  Flu  fas.  Fol.\%  7. 

The  13/Propoftion. 

One  and  the f elf  fame  circle  containeth  both  the fquare  of  a  cube)  and  the 
triangle  of  an  Octahedron  defcribed  in  one  and  the  felfe fame  f  there. 

^jVppofe  that  there  be  a  cube  AB  G,  and  an  O&ohedronDEF  defcribedincneandthe 
felfe  famefphere, whofe  diameter  let  be  AB,orD  H.And  let  the  lines  drawne  from  the 
cetres(that  is  the  femidiameters  of  the  circles  which  ctoaine  the  bafes  of  thole  folides) 
beC  AandID.Then  I  fay  that  the  lines  C  A  and  I D  are  equal .  Forafmuche  as  A  B  the 
r4C ;  diameter  of  the  fphere  which  containeth  the  cube,  is  in  power  triple  to  B  G  the  fide  of 
the  cubefby  the  iy  .of  the  thirtenth)  vnto  which  fide, A  G  the  diameter  of  thebafeof  the  cube,  isin 
power  double  (by  the  47. of  the  firft):  which  line  AG  is  alfo  the  diameter  ofthecircle,whichc6tai- 
neth  the  bafe  (by  the  9  -  of  the  fourth : )  therfore  A  B  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  is  in  power  fefquiaiter 
to  the  line  A  G :  namely, of  what  partes  the  line  A  B,containeth  in  power  .12  .of  the  fame  the  line  A  G, 
fh  al  containe  in  pow¬ 
er  8.  And  therfore  the 
right  line  A  C  whiche 
is  drawn  from  the  ce- 
tre  of  the  circle  to  the 
circumference, contei- 
neth  in  power  of  the 
fame  partes  2 .Where¬ 
fore  the  diameter  of 
the  fphere  is  in  power 
fextuple  to  the  lyne 
which  is  drawne  from 
the  centre  to  the  cir¬ 
cumference  of  the  cir¬ 
cle  whiche  containeth 
the  fquare  of  the  cube 
But  the  Diameter  of 
the  felfe  fame  Sphere 
whych  containeth  the 
G&ohedron  ,  is  one 

and  the  felfe  fame  with  the  diameter  of  the  cube,  namely, DH,  is  equall  to  AB  :  and  the  fame 
diameter  is  alfo  the  diameter  of  the  fquare  which  is  made  of  the  fides  of  the  O&ohedron  :  wherefore 
the  faide  diameter  is  in  power  double  to  the  fide  of  the  fame  O<5tohedron,by  the  i4.of  the  thirtenth. 
But  the  fide  D  F  is  in  power  triple  to  the  line  drawne  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  cir¬ 
cle  which  containeth  the  triangle  of  the  o&ohedron  (namely to  the  line  I  D)by  the  11. of  the  thirtenth. 
Wherfore  the  felfe  fame  diameter  A  B  or  D  H,  which  was  in  power  fextuple  to  the  line  drawne  from 
the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle  which  containeth  the  fquare  of  the  cube,  is  alfo  fextuple 
to  the  line  I D  drawne  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle,  which  containeth  the  trian¬ 
gle  of  the  O&ohedron  :  Wherefore  the  lines  drawne  from  the  centres  of  the  circles  to  the  circumfe¬ 
rences  which  containe  the  bafes  of  the  cube  and  of  the  odlohedron  are  equal.  And  therfore  the  circles 
are  equal,by  the  firlf  definition  of  the  third.  Wherfore  one  and  the  felfe  fame  circle  containeth  &c.a« 
in  the  propofition :  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

Corollary . 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft ,that  perpendiculars  coupling  together  in  a fthere,  the 
centres  of  the  circles  lohich  containe  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  cube  and  of  the 

0  StohedrOU  3ar  e  equals  or  the  circles  are  equal, by  the  fecond  corollary  of  the  afiumpt  of  the  16. 
of  the  twelfth :  and  the  lines  which  palling  by  the  centre  of  the  fohere,  couple  together  the  centres  of 
the  bafes,are  alfo  equal, by  the  firfr  corollary  of  the  fame.Whcrfore  the  perpendicular  which  coupleth 
together  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  O<frohedron,is  equal  to  the  fide  of  the  cube.  For  either  of  them  is 
the  altitude  ere&ed. 


m . 


The  1  propofition. 


An  Ofiohedron  is  to  the  triple  of  a  T etrahedron  contained  in  one  and  the 

SSfij.  felfe 


V  mitt  ff ra¬ 
tion. 


The fourtmb  TZooke 

felfe fame  Sphere  jn  that  proportion  that  t  heir fides  are. 


Conftruftion. 


Vemwftra~ 
t'm . 


j?»  Vppofe  that  there  be  an  odohedron  ABC  D,and  a  Tetrahedron  E  F  G  H:  vpon  whofe  bafe 
FGH  cred  a  Prifme,  which  is  done  by  ereding  from  the  angles  of  the  bafe  perpendicu- 
£  lar  lines  equal  to  the  altitude  of  the  Tetrahedron  :  which  prifme  fhalbe  triple  to  the  Tetra- 
^  hedron  E  F  G  H,by  the  firft  corollary  of  the  7  .of  the  twelfth  .Then  I  fay  that  the  odohedron 
A  B  C  D  is  to  the  prifme  which  is  triple  to  the  Tetrahedron,E  F  G  H,as  the  fide  B  C  is  to  the  fide  FG. 
For  forafmuchas  the  fides  of  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  odohedron,  are  right  lines  touching  the  one 
the  other,and  arc  parallels  to  other  right  lines  touching  the  one  the  other,  for  the  fides  of  the  fquares 
Which  are  copofed  of  the  fides  of  the  odobedr6,are  oppofite:  Wherfore  the  oppofite  plaine  triangles* 
nam  ely,  A  B  C  &  K I  D,lhalbe  parallels,  and  fo  the  rail 
bytheiy.of  thecleuenth.  Let  the  diameter  of  the  Oc- 
tohedron,be  the  line  A  D.  Now  then  the  whole  Odo¬ 
hedron  is  cutinto  foure  equal  andlike  pyramids  fet  vp¬ 
on  the  bafes  of  the  odohedron,and  hauing  the  fame  al¬ 
titude  with  it,  &  beingabout  the  Diameter  AD :  name¬ 
ly  the  pyramis  fet  vpon  the  bafe  BID,  and  hauing  his  ® 
toppethepoynt  A,  and  alfo  the  pyramis  fetvpponthe 
bale  B  C  D,hauinghis  cop  the  famepoync  A.  Likewife 
the  pyramis  fet  vpo  the  bafe  I K  D,  &  hauing  his  toppe 
the  lame  povnc  Aland  moreouer  the  pyramis  fet  vpon 
the  bafe  C  K  D,  and  hauing  his  toppe  the  former  poynt 
A:  which  pyramids  fhalbe  equal  by  the  S.djffinition  of 
theeleuenth  (for  they  eche  confili  of  two  bafes  of  the 
■odohedron,  and  of  two  triangles  contained  vnder  the  I 
‘diameter  A  D  and  two  fides  of  the  odohedro).  Wher¬ 
fore  the  prifme  which  is  fet  vpon  the  bafe  of  the  Odo¬ 
hedron,  and  hauing  the  lame  altitude  with  it,namelye, 
the  altitude  of  the  parallel  bafes,  as  it  is  manifeft  by  the 
former,is  equal  tothreof  thofe  pyramids  of  the  Odo¬ 
hedron  ,by  the  firll  corollary  of  the  feueth  of  the  twelft. 

Wherefore  that  prifme  lhall  haue  to  the  other  prifme 
vnder  the  fame  altitude,compofed  of  the  4  pyramids  of 
the  whole  odohedron,the  proportion  of  the  triangular 
bafes, by  the  3  .corollary  of  the  lame.  And  forasmuch  as 
4.pyramids  are  vnto  3  .pyramids  in  fefquitercia propor¬ 
tion,  therefore  the  trianguler  bafe  of  the  prifme  which 
contained!  4.pyramids,  is  in  fefquitercia  proportion  to 
the  bafe  of  the  prifme  which  containerh  thre  pyramids 
ofthe  fame  odohedron,and  are  fet  vpon  thebafeofthe 
Odohedron  and  vnder  the  altitude  thereof:  that  is, in 
fefquitercia  proportion  to  the  bafe  of  the  Odahe- 
dron.  But  the  bafe  of  the  fame  odohedron  is  in  felqui- 
tertia proportion  to  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis,  by  the 
tenth  of  this  booke:  Wherefore  the  triangular  bafes, 
namely,of  the  prifme  which  cotaineth  four  pyramids  F 
of  the  odohedron,and  is  vnder  the  altitude  thereof,are 
equal  to  the  triangular  bafes  of  the  prifme,  which  con- 
taineth  three  pyramids  vnder  the  altitudeof  the  pyra¬ 
mis  E  F  G  H.But  the  prifme  ofthe  odohedron  is  equal 
to  the  odohedron  :  and  the  prifme  of  the  pyramis  EF- 
G  H  is  proued  triple  to  the  fame  pyramis  EFGH.  Now 
then  the  prifmes  fet  vpo  equal  bafes,  are  the  one  to  the 
otheras  their  altitudes  are  (by  the  corollary  of  the2f. 
of  the  eleuenth)  namely,  as  are  the  parallelipidedons  their  doubles,  by  the  corollary  of  the  3 1. of  the 
eleuenth.  But  the  altitude  of  the  Odohedron  is  equal  to  the  fide  of  the  cube  contained  in  the  fame 
fphere,  by  the  corollary  of  the  13  .of  this  booke.  And  the  fide  of  the  cube  is  in  power  to  the  altitude  of 
the  Tetrahedonin  that  proportion  that  12. is  to  it>,by  the  iS.ofthe  thirtenth  .-And  the  fide  ofthe  odo¬ 
hedron  is  to  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  in  that  proportion  that  18. is  to  24.(by  the  fame  i8.of  the  thirceth) 
which  proportion  is  one  &  the  felf  fame  with  theproportioof  12.  to  1  <5.  Wherfore  that  prifme  which 
is  equal  to  the  Odohedron,  is  to  the  prifme  which  is  triple  to  the  Tetrahedron,  in  that  proportio  that 
the  altitudes, or  that  the  fides  are.  Wherfore  an  odohedro  is  to  the  triple  of  a  Tetrahedron  cotained  in 
o  n  e  an  d  th  e  felfe  fam  e  fphera,  in  that  proportion  that  their  fides  are  :  which  was  required  to  be  de~ 
monfirated. 


A  Corollary. 


T  he  {ides  of aT  etrahedron  <zjr  of  an  Offiohedro  are  proportionall  n>ith  their 

altitudes. the  fides  &  altitudes  were  in  power  fefquitercia.Moreouer  the  diameter  of  the  fphere 
is  to  the  fide  of  the  Tetrahedron,as  the  fide  of  the  O&ohedron  is  to  the  fide  of  the  cube,  namely,  the 
powers  of  cche  is  in  fefquialter  proportion,by  the  iS.ofche  thirtenth. 

T he  i  s.Tropofition. 

If  a  rational  line  containing  in  poster  two  lines >  make  the  lehole  and  the 
greater figment jand  again  containing  in  poster  ttyo  lines  junke  the  ~%>hole 
and  the  lefie figment :  the greater figment jhalbe  the  fide  of  the  Icofahe* 
dron,and  the  lejfe figment jhalbe  the fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  contained 
in  one  and  the  Jelfe  fame  jphere. 

Vppofe  that  A  G  be  the  diameter  of  the  Iphere  which  containeth  the  Icofahedron  A  B  G  C. 
And  let  B  G  fubtend  the  fides  of  the  pentagon  deferibed  of  the  fides  of  the  Icofahedron  (by 
the  itf.ofthe  thirteth.)Moreouer  vpon  the  fame  diameter  A  G,orD  F  equal  vnto  it,  let  ther 
be  deferibed  a  dodecahedron  D  E  F  H,by  the  17. of  the  thirtenth,  whofe  oppofites  fides  E  D 
and  F  H  let  be  cut  into  two  equal  partes  in  the  poynts  I  and  K, and  draw  a  line  from  I  to  IC.  And  let  the 
line  EF  couple  two  of  the  oppofite  angles  of  the  bafes  which  are  ioyned  together. The  I  fay  that  AB  the 
fide  of  the  Icofahedron  is  the  greater  fegment  which  the  diameter  A  G  containeth  in  power  together 
With  the  whole  iine,and  line  E  D  is  the  leffe  fegment,which  the  lame  diameter  A  G  or  D  F  containeth 
in  power  together  with  the  whole.  For  forafmuche  as  the 
oppofite  fides  A  B  and  G  C  of  the  Icofahedron  being  cou- 
led  by  the  diameters  A  G  and  B  C,are  equal  &  parallels, 
y  the  i. corollary  of  thereof  the  thirteth:  the  right  lines 
B  G  &  A  C  which  couple  the  together  are  equal  Sc  paral¬ 
lels  bv  the  33  .of  the  firlLMoreouer  the  angles  BAC&A- 
BG  being  lubtended  of  equal  diameters  ,fhall  by  the  8. of 
the  firll  be  equal,  &  by  theap  of  the  firll,  they  filial  be  right 
angles  .  Wherforejthe  righflineAG  cotaineth  in  power  the 
two  lines  AB  and  BG,by  the  47.of  the  firll.  And  lorjfmuch 
as  the  line  BG  fubtendech  the  angle  of  the  pentagon  com- 
pofed  of  the  fides  of  the  Icofahedron,  the  greater  fegment 
of  the  rightlineB  G,  ihalbe  the  right  line  A  B,by  the  8. of 
the  thirtenth  :  which  line  AB,  together  with  thewhole 
lineB  G, the  line  A  G  containeth  in  power . And  forafmuch 
as  the  line  IK  coupling  the  oppofite  and  parallel  fides  ED 
and  F  Hof  the  Dodecahedron,  maketh  at  thole  poyntes 
rightangles,  by  the  3. corollary  of  the  17  .of  the  thirtenth: 
the  right  line  EF  which  coupleth  together  equal  and  pa- 
rallel  linesE  I  &  F  K,fhalbe  equal  to  the  fame  line  I K,  by 
the  33. of  the  firll.  Wherfore  the  angle  D  E  F  Ihalbe  a  right 
angle  by  the  19  .of  the  firll.  Wherefore  the  diameter  D  F 
cotaineth  in  power  the  two  lines  ED  and  E  F.  But  thelelle 
fegment  of  the  line  IK  is  ED  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahe- 
dron,fcy  the  4. corollary  of  the  i7.of  the  thirtenth.  Wher¬ 
fore  the  fame  line  E  D  is  alfo  the  lelfe  fegment  of  the  line 
EF  (which  is  equal  vnto  the  line  I K). -wherfore  the  diame 
terDF  containing  in  power  the  two  lines  EDandEF  (by 
the  47-of  the  firft)containeth  in  power  E  D  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron,  the  lelfe  fegmenc,together 
with  the  whole.If  therfore  a  rational  line  AGorDF  containing  in  power  two  lines  A  B  and  B  G,doo 
make  the  whole  line  and  the  greater  fegment,  and  againe  containing  in  power  two  lines  E  F  and  E  D, 
do  make  the  whole  line  and  the  lelfe  fegment :  the  greater  fegment  A  B,fihall  be  the  fide  of  the  Icofahe¬ 
dron,  and  thelelle  fegment  ED  lhall  be  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  contained  in  one  and  the  felfe 
lame  fphere. 

The  id.Tropofition. 

If the  power  of the  fide  of  an  OSIohedron  be  exprefied  by  t^oo  right  lines 

SSfiiij .  ioyned 


-B  A 


Contfrufiim* 


tmu 


Consfruft'wu 


Vemonfoa- 

tion* 


T he  four  tenth  2?  oo^e 

ipyned  together  by  an  extreme  andmeane  proportiomthe fide  of  the  Ico 
fahedron  contained  in  the  fame fiber e  fib  albe  duple  to  the  lefie fegment. 


Et  A  B  the  fide  of  the  O&ohedron  A  B  G  containe  in  power  the  two  lines  C  and  H, which 
let  haue  that  proportion  that  the  whole  hath  to  the  greater  fegment  (  by  the  corollarye  of 
the  firft  propofition  added  by  rluffa  after  the  laft  propofitio  of  the  fixth  booke)  .And  let  the 
i  Icofahedron  contained  in  the  fame  fphere  be  D  E  F,whofe  fide  let  be  D  E,  and  let  the  right 
,i  line  fubtending  the  angle  of  the  pentagon  made  of  thefides  of  the  Icofahedron  be  the  line 
.  i  F. Then  I  fay  that  the  fide  E  D  is  in  power  double  to  the  line  H  the  lelfc  of  thofe  fegmentes.  Foras¬ 
much  as  by  that  which  was  demonfhated  in  the  rj. of  this  booke,  it  was  manifeft  that  E  D  the  fide  of 
the  Icofahedron  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  E  F,and  that  the  diameter  D  F  containeth  in  power 
the  two  lines  ED  and  E  F,namely,  the  whole  and  the  greater  fegment:  but  by  fuppofition  the  fide  AB 
cotaineth  in  po¬ 
wer  the  two  lines 
C  &'H  joined  to¬ 
gether  in  thefelf 
fame  proportio. 

Wherefore  the 
line  E  F  is  to  the 
line  ED,  as  the 
•line  C,is  to  the 
line  H,  by  the  i. 
ofthisboke.And 
•alternatly  bythe 
iiS.of  the-fiueth, 
the  line  EF  is  to 
the  line  C,as  the 
lineED,is  to  the 
line  H.  Andfor- 
.afmuche  as  the 

line  D  F  containethin  power  the  two  lines  E  D  and  E  F.,  and  the  line  A  B  containeth  in  power  the  two 
lines  C  and  H  :  therefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  E  F  and  E  D  are  .to  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  F,  as  the 
Squares  of  the  lines  C  and  H  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  B.And  alternately,  the  fquares  of  the  lines  E  F 
and  E  D,are  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  C  and  H,as  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  F  is  to  thefquare  of  the  line 
AB  ..But  DF  the  diameter  is  (bythe  i4.ofthe  thirtenth)  in  power  double  to  A  B  the  fide  of  the  o£!o~ 
hedron  infcribed  (by  fuppofition)  in  thefamefphere.  Wherefore  the  fquares  of  the  lines  E  Fand  ED, 
are  double  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  C  and  H.And  therfore  one  fquare  oftheline  EDis  double  to  one 
fquare  of  the  line  H  by  the  1 2  .of  the  fifth.  Wherfore  E  D  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  is  in  power  duple 
to  the  line  H,which  is  th  e  lefle  fegment.  If  therfore  the  power  of  the  fide  of  an  o&ohcdron  be  expref- 
fed  by  two  rightlincs  ioyned  together  by  an  extreme  and  naeane  proportion  :  the  fide  of  the  Icowhe- 
dron  contained  in  the  fame  fphere, flialbe  duple  to  the  lelfe  Segment. 


Demmjlra- 

tion. 


The  17. Propofition. 

If  the fide  of a  dodecahedron ,  and  the  right  line,  of trhome  the [aid fide  is 
tire  lejfe  fegment ,  be fio  fiet  that  they  make  a  right  angle :  the  right  line 
which  containeth  in poloer  halfe  the  line  fuhtending  the  angle,  is  the fide 
of  an  Of/ohedron  contained  in  the  fife fame fihere. 


Cexftmtien, 


Vppofe  that  A  Bbe  the  fide  of  a  Dodecahedron,  and  let  the 
rightline  of  which  that  fide  is  the  lefiefegment  be  A  G,name- 
ly  which  coupleth  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  Dodecahedron,  by 
the4.corollary  of  the  17. of  the  thirtenth  :  and  let  thole  lines 
_  befo  fet  thatthey.make  a  right  angle  at  the  point  A.  And  draw 
the  right  lineB  G.  And  let  the  line  D  containe  in  power  halfe 
the  line  B  G  (by  the  firil  propofition  added  by  Tlujfas  after  the  lafle  of  the 
fixth).  Thenliay thatthelineDisthefideof anOdlohedron contaynedin 
thefamefphere.  Forasmucheasthc  line  A  Gmaketh  the  greater  fegment 
G  C  the  fide  of  the  cube  contained  in  the  lame  fphere  (by  the  fame  4.corol- 
lary  of  the  17. of  the  thirtenth)  :and  the  Iquares  of  the  wholeline  A  G.  and 
of  the  lelfe  fegment  A  B  are  triple  to  thefquare  of  the  greater  fegment  G  C, 
by  the  ^..of  the  thirtenth:  Moreouer  the  diameter  of  the  fphere,  is  in  power 
triple  to  the.fameline  G  C  the  fide  of  the  cube  (by  the  iy.  of  the  thirtenth: 

Wherefore 


o/Suclides  Elementes  after  Flufas:  Foh\i% 

WherFore  the  line  B  G  is  equal  to  the  diameter.  For  it  containethin  power  the  two  lines  A  B  and  A  G 
(by  the  47  .of  the  firft,)  and  therefore  it  containeth  in  power  the  triple  of  thelineGC.  Butthelideof 
the  O  ftohedron  contained  in  the  fame  fphere,is  in  power  triple  to  halfe  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  by 
the  i4.of  the  thirtenth.  And  by  fuppofition  the  line  D  containeth  in  power  the  halfe  of  the  line  B  G. 
Wherefore  the  line  D  (containing  in  power  the  halfeof  thelamediameter)isthefideof  an  odtohe- 
dron.  If  therfore  the  fide  of  a  Dodecahedron  and  the  right  line  ofwhome  the  laid  fide  is  the  lefle  feg- 
ment,befofet  that  they  make  a  right  angle  :  the  right  line  which  containeth  in  power  halfe  the  line 
fubtending  the  angle,is  the  fide  of  an  O&ohedron  contained  in  the  felfefame  Iphere:  Which  was  re¬ 
quired  to  be  proued. 

#  A  Corollary. 

Vnto  'tohat  right  line  the fide  of  the  Ofiohedron  is  in porter  fifquialteri^nto 
the  fame  line  the  fide  of  the  (Dodecahedron  infcrihed  in  the  fame Jf  here ?  is  the 

greater  figment  Rouble  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  fegment  C  G,  vn¬ 
to  which  D  the  fide  of  the  O&ohedron  is  in  power  fefquialter,  that  is,  ishalfc  of  the  power  of  the  line 
B  G, which  was  triple  ynto  the  line  C  G. 


f  The  1 8.  Tropofition. 

If  the fide  of aTetrahedron  containe  in  power  two  right  lines  ioyned  to* 
gether  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion :  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron 
defer i bed  in  the  felfe  fame  Sphere  fis  in  power  fefquialter  to  the  lejfe 
right  line. 

o 

Vppofe  that  A  B  C  be  a  Tetrahedron,  and  let  his  fide  be  AB,  whofe  power  let  be  diuided  ConbltuUiM 
into  the  lines  A  G  and  G  B,  ioyned  together  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion :  name-  **  a 

ly,let  it  be  diuided  into  A  G  the  whole  line,and  G  B  the  greater  fegment  (by  the  Corolla¬ 
ry  of  the  firft  Propofition  added  by  Fluflas  after  the  laft  of  the  fixth  )  .  And  let  E  D  be  the 
fide  of  the  Icofahedron  E  D  F  contained  in  the  felfe  lame  Sphere .  And  let  the  line  which 
fubtendeth  the  angle  of  the  Pentagon  deferibed  of  the  fidcs  of  the  Icofahedron  be  EF. 


Then  I  lay,  that  ED  the  fide  of 
the  Icofahedron  is  in  power 
fefquialter  to  thelelfe  line  G  B. 

Forafmuch  as  (  by  that  which 
was  demonftrated  in  the  ijr.of 
this  booke)  the  fide  ED  ;sthe 
greater  fegment  of  the  line  EF 
which  fubtendeth  the  angle  of 
thePentagcn.Butas  the  whole 
line  E  F  is  to  the  greater  feg¬ 
ment  E  D,  fo  is  the  lame  grea¬ 
ter  fegtii ent to  the  lefle  (by the 
30. of  the  fixth  )  :  and  by  fuppo¬ 
fition,  A  G,was  the  whole  line, 
and  G  B  the  greater  fegment :  Wherefore  as  E  F  is  to  E  D,  Co  is  A  G  to  G  B,by  the  fecond  of  the  foure- 
tenth .  And  alternately,  theline  E  F  is  to  the  line  A  G,  as  the  line  E  D  is  to  the  line  GB.  And  forafmuch 
as(by  fuppofition)  the  hne  A  B  containeth  in  power  the  two  lines  A  G  and  G  B  :  therefore  (  by  the  48. 
of  the  full )  the  angle  A  GB  is  a  right  angle .  But  the  angle  D  E  F  is  a  right  angle,  by  that  which  was  de¬ 
monftrated  in  the  1 5  .of  this  booke .  Wherefore  the  triangles  A  G  B  and  F  E  D,are  equiangle,bv  the  S. 
of  the  fixth.  Wherefore  their  fides  are  proportionall :  namely, as  the  line  E  D  is  to  the  line  G  B,  lo  is  the 
line  F  D  to  the  line  A  B,  by  the  4.of  the  fixth  .  But  by  that  which  hath  before  bene  demonftrated,  F  D 
is  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  which  containeth  the  Icofahedron  :  which  diameter  is  in  power  fefqui¬ 
alter  to  A  B  the  fide  of  the  Tetrahedron  inferibed  in  the  fame  Sphere, by  the  13  .of  the  thirtenth.  Wher- 
fore  the  line  E  D  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,is  in  power  fefquialter  to  G  B  the  greater  fegment  or  lefle 
line.  If  therefore  the  fide  of  a  Tetrahedron  containe  in  power  two  right  lines  ioyned  together  by  an  ex- 
tremeand  meane  proportion  :  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron  deferibed  in  the  felfe  fame  Sphere,is  in  pow¬ 
er  fefquialter  to  the  lefle  right  line. 


Vmontfr*- 

tkn. 


fTI, 


9t 


The fourtenih  'Boofy 

flTbe  ip.  iPropoJition. 


Conftruttm* 


T)emonJl ra¬ 
tten. 


The  fuperficies  of  a  Cube  is  to  the fuperficies  of  an  Odohedron  infcribed 
in  one  and  the felfe fame  Sphere, in  that  proportion  that  the folides  are. 

Vp.pofe  that  A  B  C  D  E  be  a  Cube,whofe  fower  diameters  let  be  the  lines  A  C,B  C,D  C, 
pflxSPs  anc*  E  c  produced  on  ech  fide .  Let  alfo  the  Odohedron  infcribed  in  the  felfe  fame 
Sphere  beFGHK:  whofe  three  diameters  let  be  F  H,G  K,and  O  N .  Then  I  lay,  that 
1  '\JvX) pc  f"e  cuEe  ^  B  D  is  to  the  Odohedron  F  G  H,as  the  fuperficies  of  the  cube  is  to  the  fuper- 
ficies  of  the  Odohedron  .  Drawc  from  the  centre  of  the  cube  to  the  bafe  A  B  E  D,  a  per¬ 
pendicularline  C  R  .  And  from  the  centre  of  the  Odohedron  draw  to  the  bafe  G  N  H,  a 
perpendicular  line  IL  ,  And  forafmuch  as  thethree  diameters  of  the cube  do  paife  by  the  centre  C, 
therefore*  by  the  2  .Corollary  of  the  1 5  .of  the  thirtenth,  there  fhall  be  made  of  the  cube  fixe  pyramids, 
as  thys  pyratttis  ABDEC,  equall  to  thewholecube .  For  there  are  in  the  cube  fixe  bafes,vpon  which 
fall  equall  perpendiculars  from  the  centre,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  Alfumpt  of  the  16  .of  the  twelfth/or 
the  bafes  are  contained  in  equall  circles  of  the  Sphere .  But  in  the  Odohedron  the  three  diameters  do 
make  vpon  the  S  .bafes,  8.  pyramids,  hauing  their  toppes  in  the  centre,  by  the  3. Corollary  of  the  i4.of 
the  thirtenth  .  Now  the  bales  of  the  cube  and  of  the  Odohedron  are  contained  in  equall  circles  of  the 


Sphere,  by  the  13  .of  this  boolce .  Wherefore  they  {hall  be  equally  diftant  from  the  centre,  and  the  per¬ 
pendicular  lines  C  R  and  I L,  fhall  be  equall,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  Alfumpt  of  the  16.  of  the  twelfth. 
Wherefore  thepyramids  of  the  cube  fhall  be  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude  with  the  pyramids 
of  the  Odohedron,  namely,  vnder  the  perpendicular  line  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  bafes.  Wher- 
fore  fixe  pyramids  of  the  cube,  are  to  8  .pyramids  of  the  Odohedron  being  vnder  one  and  the  fame  al¬ 
titude,  in  that  proportion  that  their  bafes  are,  by  the  <S.of  the  twelfth :  that  is,onepyramis  fet  vpon  fixe 
bafes  of  the  cube,  and  hauing  to  his  altitude  the  perpendicular  line,  whichpyramis  is  equall  to  the  fixe 
pyramidsjby  thefame  £.of  the  twelfth,  is  to  one  pvramis  fet  vpon  the  8.bafes  of  the  Odohedron, being 
equall  to  the  Odohedron,  and  alfo  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude,  in  that  proportion  that  fixe 
bafes  of  the  cube,  whfehcontaine  the  whole  fuperficies  of  the  cube,  are  to  8.  bafes  of  the  Odohedron., 
which  con  taine  the  whole  fuperficies  of  the  Odohedron .  For  the  folides  of  thofe  pyramids  are  in  pro¬ 
portion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  their  bafes  are,  by  the  felfe  fame  6.  of  the  twelfth  .  Wherefore  the  1U- 
perficies  of  the  cube  is  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  Odohedron  infcribed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  Sphere, 
in  that  proportion,  that  the  foliaesare :  which  was  required  to  beproued. 

flThe  20.  (Propoftion. 

If  a  Cube  and  an  Odohedron  he  contained  in  one  &  the felfe fame  Sphere: 
they Jhall  be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other ,  as  tlx  fide  of the  Cube  is  to 

the 


cfEuclides  Elementes  after  Flufias, 

the  femidiameter  of the  Sphere . 


Vppofe  that  the  Odtohedron  A  E  CD  E  be  infcribed  in  the  Sphere  AB  C  D  :  and  let  the 
cube  infcribed  in  the  fame  Sphere  be  F  G  H  I M  :  whofe  diameter  let  be  HI,  which  is  e- 
quail  to  the  diameter  A  C,  by  the  ij.of  the  thirtenth  :  let  the  halfe  ol  the  diameter  be 
A E  .Then  I  fay, that  the  cube  F  G  H I M  is  to  the  Oclohedron  AECDB,as  the  fide 
M  G  is  to  the  femidiameter  A  E  .  Forafmuch  as  the  diameter  A  C  is  in  power  double  to 
B  K  the  fide  of  the  Odlohedron  ( by  the  14. of  the  thirtenth  )  and  is  in  power  triple  to 
M  G  the  fide  of  the  cube  (  by  the  i  j  .of  the  fariie  )  :  therefore  the  fquare  B  I(  D  L  fhali  be  fefquialter  to 
FMthe  fquare  of  the  cube  .  From  the  line  A  E  cut  ofa  third  part  AN,  and  fro  the  lineM  G  cut  oflike- 
wife  a  third  part  G  O,  by  they. of  thefixth .  Now  then  the  line  EN  ihall  be  two  third  partes  of  the 
line  A  E,  and  fo  alfo  fhali  the  line  M  O  be  of  the  line  M  G  .  Wherefore  the  parallelipipedon  fet  vpon 
the  bafe-B  K  D  L.and  hauing  his  altitude  the  line  E  A,  is  triple  to  the  parallelipipedon  fet  vpon  the  fame 
bafe,  and  hauing  his  altitude  the  line  AN,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  31.  of  the  eleuenth  :  but  it  is  alfo  tri¬ 
ple  to  thepyramis  AB  KD  L  which  is  fet  vpon  the  fame  bafe, and  isvnderthe  fame  altitude  (by  thefe- 
cond  Corollary  of  the  7. of  the  twelfth)  .  Wherefore  thepyramis  ABKDL  isequallto  the  parallelipi- 
pedon,  which  is  fet  vpon  the  bafe  3KD  L,and  , 

hath  to  his  altitude  the  line  AN.  But  vnto  thatpa- 
rallelipipedojis  double  the  parallelipipedon  which 
is  fet  vppon  the  lame  bafe  BKDL  ,  and  hath 
to  his  altitude  a  line  double  to  the  line  E  N,by  the 
Corollary  ofthe3  t.ofthefirlh  and  vnto  thepyra¬ 
mis  is  double  the  Odtohedron  ABKLDC,  by 
the  2,. Corollary  of  the  14 ,  of  the  thirtenth.  Where¬ 
fore  the  Odlohedron  A  B  K  D  L  C  is  equall  to  the 
parallelipipedon  fet  vpon  the  bafe  B  K  L  D,  &  ha¬ 
uing  his  altitude  the  line  EN  (by  the  154  of  the 
fifth).  But  the  parallelipipedon  let  vpon  the  bafe 
BKDL,  which  is  fefquialter  to  the  bafe  F  M,  and 
hauing  to  his  altitude  the  line  M  O,  which  is  two 
third  partes  of  the  fide  of  the  cube  M  G,  is  equall 
to  the  cube  F  G :  by  the  a. part  of  the  34-of  the  ele¬ 
uenth  .(For  it  was  before  proued  that  the  bafe 
BKDL  is  fefquialter  to  the  bale  F  M  )  .  Now  then 
thefe  two  parallelipxpedons,namely,the paralleli¬ 
pipedon  which  is  fet  vpo  the  bafe  BKDL  (which 
is  fefquialter  to  the  bafe  of  the  cube  )  and  hath  to 
his  altitude  the  line  M  O  (  which  is  two  third 
partes  ofMG  the  fide  of  the  cube)  which  paral- 
ielipipedon  is  proued  equall  to  the  cube,  and  the 
parallelipipedon  fet  vpon  the  fame  bafe  BKDL, 
and  hauing  his  altitude  the  line  E  N  (  which  paral¬ 
lelipipedon  is  proued  equall  to  the  O&ohedron): 
thefe  two  parallelipipedons  ( I  fay)  are  the  one  to 
the  other,  as  the  altitude  M  0,is  to  the  altitude 
EN  (  by  the  Corollary  of  the  31. of  the  eleuenth). 

Wherefore  alfo  as  the  altitude  M  O,  is  to  the  alti¬ 
tude  E  N,  fo  is  the  cube  F  G  H I M,  to  the  061 o- 
hedron  ABKDLC,  bythe7.ofthe  fifth  .Butas 
theline  MO  is  to  the  line  EN,  fo  is  the  whole 
line  M  G  to  the  whole  line  E  A,  by  the  18  .of  the  fifth .  Wherefore  as  M  G  the  fide  of  the  cube, is  to  E  A 
the  femidiameter,  fo  is  the  line  F  G  H  I M  to  the  Odtohedron  ABKDLC  infcribed  in  one  &  the  felfe 
fame  Sphere.  If  therefore  a  cube  and  an  O6tohedron  be  contained  in  one  and  the  felfe  fameSpherc. 
they  fhali  be  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other, as  the  fide  of  the  cube  is  to  the  femidiameter  of  the 
Sphere :  which  was  required  to  be  demonllrated. 

A  Corollary. 

(DiHinffly  to  notefie  the  powers  of the fides  of  the fine folides  by  the  po^er 
ofthediameterofthefphere. 

The  fides  of  the  tetrahedron  and  of  the  cube  doo  cut  the  power  of  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  in  - 
to  two  fquares  which  are  in  proportion  double  the  one  to  the  other.  The  odtohedron  cutteth  the 

TTt.j.  power 


Ccnfiruttm * 


VemontirA- 

tion. 


The  fburtenth'Boofy 

power  of  the  diameter  into  two  equall  fquares. The  Icofahedron  into  two  fquares,  whofe  proportion 
is  duple  to  the  proportion  of  a  line  diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion,\vhofe  leffe  fegmet 
is  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron.  And  the  dodecahedron  into  two  fquares ,  whofe  proportion  is  quadru¬ 
ple  to  the  proportion  of  a  line  diuided 
by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion, 
whofe  leffe  fegmenc  is  the  fide  of  the 
dodecahedron  .  For  A  D  the  diameter  of 
the  fphere, contayneth  in  power  A  B  the 
fide  of  the  tetrahedron,  and  B  D  the  fide 
of  the  cube,  which  B  D  is  in  power  halfe 
of  the  fide  A  B.  The  diameter  alfo  of  the 
fphere  contayneth  in  power  A  C  and  C- 
t>  two  equall  fides  of  the  odtohedron. 

But  the  diameter  contayneth  in  power 
the  whole  line-  A  E  and  the  greater  feg- 
ment  thereof  ED,  which  is  the  fide  of 
the  Icofahedron, by  the  if  .ofthis  booke. 

Wherfore  their  powers  being  in  duple  proportio  of  that  in  which  the  fides  are,  by  the  firfi  corollary  of 
the  io.ofthefixth,haue  their  proportion  duple  to  the  proportion  ofan  extreame  &  meane  proportio. 
Farther  the  diameter  cotayneth  in  power  the  whole  line  A  F,and  his  leffe  fegment  F  D, which  is  the 
fide  of  the  dodecahedron, by  the  fame  if. of  this  booke  V  Wherefore  the  . whole  hauing  to  theleffe,a 
double  proportion  ofthatwhich  the  extreame  hath  to  the  meane,  namely,  of  the  whole  to  the  greater 
fegment, by  the  io.  diffinition  of  the  fifth ,  it  folio  weth  that  the  proportion  of  the  power  is  double  to 
the  doubled  proportion  of  the  fides, by  the  fame  firfi  corollary  of  the  ic.of  the  fixth:  that  is, is  quadru¬ 
ple  to  the  proportion  of  the  extreame  and  of  the  meane,  by  the  diffinition  of  thefixth. 

An  acluertifincnt  added  by  Flufias. 

By  this  meanes  therefore,  the  diameter  of  a  fphere  being  geuen ,  there  fliall  be  ge- 
uen  the  fide  of  euery  one  of  the  bodies  infcribed.  And  forafinuch  as  three  of  thofe  bo¬ 
dies  haue  their  fides  commenfurable  in  power  onely,  and  notin  length,vnto  the  dia¬ 
meter  geuen  (  for  their  powers  are  in  the  proportion  of  a  fquare  number  to  a  number 
notfquare:  wherefore  they  haue  not  the  proportion  of  afquare  number  toa  fquare 
number,by  the  corollary  of  the  2  5.  of the  eight :  wherefore  alfo  their  fides  areincom- 
menfurabein  length  by  the  9.  of  the  tenth)  :  therefore  it  is  fufficient  to  compare  the 
powers  and  not  the  lengths  of  thofe  fides  the  one  to  the  other:  which  powers  are  con¬ 
tained  in  the  power  of  the  diameter  :namely,from  the  power  of  the  diamcter,let  there 
ble  taken  away  the  power  of  the  cube, and  there  fliall  remayne  the  power  cf  the  Tetra¬ 
hedron  :and  taking  away  the  power  of  the  Tetrahedron,there  remayneth  the  power  of 
the  cube  :  and  taking  away  from  the  power  of  the  diameter  halfe  the  power  thereof, 
there  fliall  be  left  the  power  of  the  fide  of  the  odohedron.But  forafmuch  as  the  fides  off 
the  dodecahedron  and  of  the  Icofahedron  are  proued  to  be  irrational!  ( for  the  fide  of 
the  Icofahedron is  a  leffe  line, by  the  i<5.ofthethirtenth:andthe  fide  of  the  dodecahe¬ 
dron  is  arefiduall  line,  by  the  1 7. of  the  fame)  wherfore  thofe  fides  are  vnto  the  diame¬ 
ter  which  is  a  rational!  line  fet,incommenfurable  both  in  length  and  in  power.  Where¬ 
fore  their  comparifon  can  not  be  diffined  or  defenbed  by  any  proportion  expreffed  by 
numbers,  by  the  8.  of  the  tenth  :  neither  can  they  be  compared  the  one  to  the  other: 
for  irrational  lines  of  diuers  kindes  are  incomefurable  the  one  to  the  other:for  if  they 
fhould  be  commenfurable, they  fhould  be  ofoneandthe  felfe  fame  kinde,by  the  103* 
and  io5.ofthetenth,whichisimpoffible ,  Wherefore  we  feking  to  compare  them  to 
the  power  of  the  diameter,thoughtthey  could  not  be  more  aptly  expreffed,  then  by 
fuch  proportions,which  cutte  that  rational  power  of  the  diameter  according  to  their 
fides:  namely, diuiding  the  power  of  the  diameter  by  lines  which  haue  that  proportio, 
that  the  greater  fegment  hath  to  the  leffe, to  put  the  leffe  fegment  to  be  the  fide  of  the 
Icofahedron:  &  deuiding  the  fayd  power  of  the  diameter  bybines  hauing  the  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  whole  to  the  ieffe  fegment,to  expreffe  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  by  the 
leffe  fegment:which  thing  may  well  be  done  betwene  magnitudes  inconimenfurable. 

The  ende  of  the  fourtenth  Booke 

ofEuclides  Elementes 

after  Fluffas. 


Euclides  Elementes, 


His  fiuetenth  arid  laft  booke  of  Euclide,  Orratherthe 
fecond  boke  of  Apollonius  or  Hypficles,  tcacheth  the  in-  **^2 
fcription  and  circuinfcriptio  of  the  fiue  regular  bodies  *,en?  9 

\  one  within  and  about  an  other:a  thing  vndoutedly  pie-  I^*  00 
fantanddele&ablein  minde  to  contemplate,  andalfo 
profitable  and  neceflary  in  a<5t  to  pra&ife,  For  without 
pradife  in  aft, it  is  very  hard  to  fe  and  conceiue  the  con- 
ftrudions  arid  demonflrations  of  the  propofitions  of 
(  this  booke, vnles  a  man  haue  a  very  depe,  fbarpe,&  fine 
imagination, Wherfore  I  would  wilh  the  diligent  ftudet 
in  this  booke, (to  make  the  ftudy  thereof  more  pleafant 
vntohim )  to  haue  prefently  before  hiseyes,thebodyes 
formed  &  framed  of  pafted  paper  (as  I  taught  after  the 
diffinitions  of  the  eleuenth  booke.)  And  then  to  drawe 
and  defcribe  the  lines  and  diuifions,  and  fuperficieces , according  to  the  conftrudions 
of  the  propofitions. In  whichdefcriptionsifhebewaryanddiligent,  he  fhall  findeall 
things  in  thefe  folide  matters,as  clere  and  as  manifeft  vnto  the  eye,  a  s  were  things  be¬ 
fore  taught  only  in  piaine  or  Superficial  figures .  And  although  I  haue  before  in  the 
twelfth  boke  admonifiied  the  reader  hereof,  yet  bicaufe  in  this  boke  chiefly  that  thing 
is  required,  I  thought  it  fhouidnotbeirkefomevntohim,againetobeputinminde 
thereof. 

Farther  this  is  to  be  noted,that  in  the  Greke  exemplars  are  found  in  this  1 5  .booke 
only  5.propofitions,which  5,arealfo only  touchedand  fet  forthe  by  Hypficles :  vnto 
which  Campane  addeth  8. and  fo  maketh  vp  the  number  of  13.  Campane  vndoubted- 
ly  al  though  he  were  very  well  lerncd,and  that  generally  in  all  kinds  of  learning,  yet  af- 
furedly  being  brought  vp  in  a  time  of  rudenes,  when  all  good  letters  were  darkned,  Sc 
barberoufnes  had  ouerthrowne  and  ouerwhelmed  the  whole  world,  he  was  vtterly 
rude  and  ignorant  in  the  Greke  tongue,  fo  that  certenly  he  neuer  redde  Euclide  in  the 
Greke, nor  (oflike)  tranflated  out  of  the  Greke :  buthadit  tranflated  out  of  the  Ara- 
bike  tonge. The  Arabians  were  men  of  great  ftudy,  andinduftry,  and  commonly  great 
Philofophers,  notable Phifitions,  andin  mathematical!  Artes  moft expert,  fothatall 
kinds  of  good  learning  flourilhed  and  raigned  amotigft  them  in  a  manner  only.  Thefe 
men  turned  whatfoeuer  good  author  was  in  the  Greke  tonge  (  of  what  Art  and  know¬ 
ledge  foeuer  it  were)into  the  Arabike  tonge.  Andfro  thence  were  many  of  the  turned 
into  the  Latine,and  by  that  meanes  many  Greeke  authors  came  to  thehandcsof  the 
Latities,and  not  from  the  firft  fountaine  the  Greke  tonge,  wherin  they  were  firft  writ- 
ten.As  appeareth  by  many  words  of  the  Arabike  tonge  yet  remaining  in  fuch  bokesjas 
are  Tljmth, nadir, b^lmmjn^elmuaripke^ndi  infinite  fuehe  other.  Which  Arabians  alfo  in 
tranflating  fuch  Greke  workes,were  accuftomed  to  adde,as  they  thought  good,&  for 
the  fuller  vnderftanding  of  the  author, many  thingsias  is  to  be  fene  in  diuers  authors, 
as,namely,in  Tkeodofius  de  Spberd,\v here  you  fee  in  the  olde  tranflation  (which  was  vn- 
doubtedly  out  of  the  Arabike)  many  propofitions,almoft  euery  third  or  fourth  leaf?. 

Some  fuch  copye  of  Euclide,  moft  likely,did  Campams  follow,  wherein  he  founde  thofe 
propofitios, which  he  hath  more&  aboue  thofe  which  are  found  in  the  Greke  fet  out 
by  Hypficles  :and  that  not  only  in  this  1 5.  boke, but  alfo  in  the  i4.boke,wherinalfoye 
finde  many  propofitions  more  the  are  founde  in  theGreeke,fet  out  alfo  by  Hypficles. 

Likewifein  the  bookes  before,ye  fhall  finde  many  propofitions  added,  andmanye  in- 
uerted,and  fet  out  of  order  farre  otherwife,  then  they  arc  placed  in  the  Greeke  exam- 
plars.  Flitffas  alfo  a  diligen  t  reftorer  of  Euclide,  a  man  alfo  which  hath  well  defer  ued  of 
the  whole  Art  of  Geometric, hath  added  moreouerin  this  booke(as  alfo  in  the  former 

TTt.ij.  iq-.boke 


The  fif tenths  oofy 

S4.boke  he  added  8,propofitios}p  .propofitios  of  his  owns,  touching  the  infcription, 
and  circumfcription  of  thefe  bodies, very  Angular  vndoubted!y,and  wittye.  All  which, 
for  that  nothing  Ihould  want  to  the  defirous  louer  of  knowledge,!  haue  faithfully  with 
no  fmall  paines  turned .  And  wherea  s  Flujfas  in  the  beginning  of  the  eleuenth  bookc, 
namely, in  the  end  of  the  diffinitions  there  fet,puttcth  rwo  diffinitions,  of  the  infcrip¬ 
tion  and  circumfcription  of  folides  or  oorporall  figures,  within  or  about  the  one  the 
other, which  certainely  are  not  to  be  reieftedryet  for  that  vntill  this  prefent  1 5  .boke, 
there  is  no  mention  made  of  the  infcription  or  circumfcription  of  thefe  bodyes  ,  I 
thought  it  not  fo  conuenient  there  to  place  them,  but  to  referre  the  to  the  beginning 
ofithis  1 5.bookc:where  they  areinmanerof  necefiitie  required  to  the  elucidation  of 
the  Propofitio  ns  and  demonftrations  of  the  fame.  The  diffinitions  are  thefe. 


IDijf tuition.  x» 

J[ folide  figure,  is  then  faidto  be  inferibed  in  a  folide figure,  if  hen  the  an* 
gles  of the  figure  inferibed  touche  together  at  one  time,  either  the  -angles  of 
the  figure  circumferibed, or  the juperficieces , or  the Jules. 

hDiffinitiona. 


A  folfde  figure  is  then fdid  to  be  circumferibed  about  a  folide  figure :  when 
together  at  one  time  either  the  angles, or  thefuperficieces  ,or  the  fides  of  the 
figure  circumferibed, touch  the  angles  of  the  figure  inferibed. 


thefourth  bookein  the  diffinitions  of  the  infcription  or -circumfcription  of  playne 
/'K.^rectiline  figures  one  with  in  or-about  an  other,  was  required  thatall  the  angles  of  the 

mVfli  «*<« hod  fh on of  aha  p  ton cK  oil  of  f4ip  a t fv*i  1  m //■*»•* hod  ■ 


— v^recmine  ngurc:5  one  wiui  in  wdwwcuu  urc  <ui^icb  oi  luc 

figure  infenbed, Ihould  atone  time  touch  all  the  fides  of  the  figure  circumferibed :  but 
*n  l'nc  fiue  tegular  folides  (to  whome  chefely  thefe  two  diffinitions  pertaine)  for  that 
fg.  rh  e  nomber  of  their  angles,fuperficieces,& fides  are  not  equal,one  compared  to  an  o- 
then  it  is  not  of  neceffitie,thatall  the  angles  of  the  folide  inferibed  Ihould  together  at 
one  time  touch  either  all  the  angles, or  all  the  fuperficieces,or  all  the  fides  of  the  folide  circumfcnbed: 
but  it  is  fufricient,tbat  thofe  angles  of  the  inferibed -folide  which  touch,doe  at  one  time  together  eche 
touch  Tome  one  angle  of  the  figure  circumfcribed,or  fome  one  bafe,or  feme  one  fideifo  thatif  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  inferibed  figure  do  at  one  time  touche  the  angles  of  the  figure  circumfcribed,nonc  of  them 
may  at  the  fame  time  touche  either  the  bafe-s  orthefidesof  the  lame  circumferibed  figure  :  andfoif 
they  touch  the  bafes,' they  may  touche  neither  angles  nor  fides  :  andlikewife  if  they  touche  the  fides, 
they  may  touch  neither  angles  nor-bafes.  And  although  fometimes  all  the  angles  of  the  figure  inferi¬ 
bed  can  nottouch  either  the  angles, or  the  bafes,  or  the  fides  of  the  figure  circumcribed,  by 
reafon  thenomber  of  the  angles,bafes-or  fides  of  thefaid  figure  circumfcri- 
bedjWanteth  crftheuomberof  the  angles  of  the  figure  inferibed 
yet  fhall  thofe  angles  of  the  inferibed  figure  which 
touch, fo  touch, that  the  void  places  left  betwene 
the  inferibed  and  circumferibed  figures  fhal 
oneuery  fide  be  equal  and  like.  As  ye 
•may  afterwarde  in  this  fiftenth 
booke  moll  plainely 


pcrcciue. 


fTh 


ve 


of EucMes  Elements 

V  The  /.  Tropojition.  The  i.^Probleme, 

r,  -vms  •  '‘I? <  T '  '  \  ,f  r»  •  -  i  .  v  •  \ 

In  a  Cubegeuen  to  defcribe  t  a  trilater  equilater  pyramis, 

Fppofe  that  the  %  ( 

cubegeuen  be  A  B- 
CDEFGfl'.  In 
the  fame  yube  it  is 
required  to  in  - 
fcribe  a  Tetrahe¬ 
dron  .Drarvethefe 
right  lines  kA  C, 

CE,^AE,  i^AH, 

E  HyHC.  How  it  is  manifefi,  that  the  trian-  D 
gles  AECy  A  HE,  AH  C,  and  C  HE,  aree- 
quilater,for  their  fides  are  the  diameters  of 
e quail fquares.  Wherfore  AECHisa  trilater 
equilater  pyramis, or  Tetrahedron, &  it  is  in-  -® 

fcribed  in  the  cubegeue(by  thefrsi  definition  of  this  booke)  .-which  was  required  to  be  done. 

ff  T he  2.  Tropojition.  The  2.(Probleme. 

In  a  trilater  equilater  Tyramis  geuen  to  defcribe  an  OSiohedron . 

Fppofe  that  the  trilater  equi¬ 
later  pyramis  geue  be  A  BC- 
D,whofe fdes  let  be  diuided 

_ _ into  two  equall  partes  in  the 

pointesE,Z,I,K,L,T  .And  drawthefe  12. 
right  lines  E  Z,Z  1,1  E,K  L,  LT,T  K, 

E K,K  Z,Z  L,LI,1  T,  and  T  E  Which 
12.  right  lines  are,  by  the  4. ofthefrjl ,  e- 
quall.  F or  they  fubtend  equall plaine  an - 
gles  of  the  bafes  of  the  pyramis,  and  thoft 
equall  angles  are  contained  vnder  equall 
fides, namely,  vnder  the  halfes  of  the  fides 
of  the  pyramis .  Wherefore  the  triangles 
TKL,  TLI,  TIE,  T  E  K,  Z  K  L, 

ZLl,ZlE,ZEK,are  equilater  :  and 
they  limit  ate,  andcontaine  the folide  T  K- 
LE  Z 1 .  Wherefore  the folide  T  K  LE  Z  Its  an  OHohedron  -  by  the  23.  definition  of  the 
eleuenth .  And  the  angles  of  the fame  oHohedron  do  touch  the fides  of  the  pyramis  ABC  D 
in  thepointes  E,Z,I,T,K,L .  Wherefore  the  Oclohedron  is  infcribedin  the  pyramis  (by  the 
1. definition  of  this  booke)  .Wherefore  in  the  trilater  equilater  pyramis  geuen,  is  in  fcribed 
an  oHohedron :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

#  A  Corollary  added  by  Flufias. 

Hereby  it  is  manifefi  y  that  a  pyramis  is  cut  into  two  equall  partes Jby  euery 

TTt.itj.  one 


t  In  this  props* 
ftiouasalfb  im 
*11  the  other 
following  ,by  th« 
name  of*  py- 
ramisStnder- 
ftand  a  tetra¬ 
hedron's  / 
haste  before 
adznontftcd, 

Confiruction * 

Vmcndta- 
tion . 


ConftruBfon* 


Vmonflra* 


(onltruttm* 


Demnffra- 
tm . 


¥hefiftenthcBookg 

one  of  the  three  equall fqmrbsfohich  diuide y  O&ohedrm  into  two  e quail partes 

and  per pendicularly .  For  the  three  diameters  of  thofe  fquares  do  in  the  centre  cut  the  one  the 
other  into  two  equall  partes  and  perpendicularly,  by  the  third  Corollary  of  the  14.  of  the  thirtenth, 
which  iquares,  as  for  example,  the  fquare  EKlI,  do  diuide  in  funder  the  pyramids  and  the  prifmes, 
namely, the pyramis  KL TD  andtheprifme  KLTEIA  from  the  pyramis  EKZB,and  the  prifme 
E  K  Z I L  G ,  which  pyramids  are  equall  the  one  to  the  other,;  and  fo  alfo  are  the  prifmes  equall  the  one 
to  the  o  ther  :  by  the  3  .of  the  twelfth .  And  in  like  fort  do  the  reft  of  the  fquares,  namely,  K  Z I T  and 
Z  L  T  E  :  which  fquares,  by  thefecond  Corollary  of  the  i4.of  the  thirtenth,  do  diuide  the  O&ohedron 
into  two  equall  partes, 

f  T he  3  •  Tropofition.  T he  3 -  Trohleme, 

In  a  -cubegeuen,  to  deferibe  an  Offohedron. 

cAke  a  Cube,  namely,  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H .  And  diuide  euery  one  of  the 
/ides  thereof into  two  equall  partes .  And  dr  awe  rightjmes  coupling  together 
the  fictions,  as  for  example ,  thefe  right  lines ,  P  jfjnd  R  S,  which  full  be 
equallvnto  the  fide  of  the  cube  (  by  the  33.ofthefirfi  )  and  /hall  diuide  the 
one  the  ot her  into  two  equall  parts  in  the  middefi  of  the  diameter  A  G  in  the 
point  I  ( by  the  Corollary  of  the  3  4.. of  the 
firfi )  .  Wherefore  the  point  I  is  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  bafe  of  the  cube .  And  by  the 
famereafon  may  be  found  out  the  cen¬ 
tres  of  the  ref  of  the  bafes ,  which  let  be 
thepointes  K,L,0,N,M  •.  And  drawe 
thefe  right  lines  L  I,IM,M  0,0  L,K  I, 

KL,I(M,K  0,NI,NL,NM,&N0. 

And  now  forafmuch  as  the  angle  I  P  L 
is  a  right  angle  (by  the  10.  of  theele- 
uenthyfor  the  lines  1 P  and  P  L  are  pa¬ 
rallels  to  the  lines  R  A  and  A  B  )  .  And 
the  right  line  I L  fubtendeth  the  right 
angle  IP  L,  namely,  it  fubtendeth  the 
halfe  fides  of  the  cube  which  containe 
the  right  angle  IP  L,  and  likewife  the 
right  line  I  Old  fubtendeth  the  angle 
1  fUd  which  is  equall  to  the  fame  an¬ 
gle  IP  L,  and  is -contained  vnder  right 
lines  equall  to  the  right  lines  which  containe  the  angle  IP  L.  Wherefore  the  right  line  I M 
is  equall  to  the  right  line  I L  (by  the  g.ofthefirH  )  .  And  by  the fame  reafon  may  weproue , 
that  euery  one  of  the  right  lines  CM  0,0  L,K  I,K  L,K  M,K  0,N  I,N  L,N  M,  and  N  O, 
which  fubtend angles  equall  to  the  felfe  fame  angle  I P  L,and  are  cotained  vnder  fides  equall 
to  the fides  which  containe  the  angle  IP  L,  are  equall  to  the  right  line  1L.  Wherefore  the 
triangles  K  L  1,K  L  0,K  M  1,K  M  O,  and  I,N LO,N  M I,N M  0,  are  equilater 
and  equall :  and  they  containe  the folide  1 K  LO  NM .  Wherefore  IK  Lo  N  Mis  an  Olilo- 
hedron,bythe  23  .definition  of  the  eleuentb ,  And forafmuch  astheangles  thereof  do  alto¬ 
gether  in  the  pointes  /,  K,  L,  o,  N,  CM,  touch  the  bafes  of  the  cube  which  containeth 
jt,  it  followeth  that  the  Octohedron  is  infcribed  in  the  cube  (  by  thefrfi  definition  of 
ibis  booke)  .Wherefore  in  the  cube  geuenys  deferibed  an  Oclohedron :  which  was  required 
to  be  done. 

•  •  *1  .  A  •  •  '  V  '  .  *  '  i  '  % 

,V  *  i  A  Corollary 


ofEuclides  Elementes.  FoL\q* 

Corollary  added  by  Fluff  as. 

Hereby  it  is  manifeft 3  that  right  lines  iojning  together  the  centres  of  the 
oppofite  bafes  of  the  cube, do  cut  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  parts ,and 
perpendicularly,  in  the  centre  of  the  cube, or  in  the  centre  of  the  Sphere 
’tybich  containeth  the  cube . 

F or fora fmnch  as  the  right  lines  LM  and  10  which  knit  together  the  centres  of  the 
oppofite  bafes  of  the  cube,  do  alfo  knit  together  the  oppofite  angles  of  the  O  clohedron  infcri- 
bed  in  the  cube,  itfolloweth  ( by  the  3  .Corollary  of  the  14.0ft he  thirtenth  )  that  thofe  lines 
L  M  and  10,  do  cut  the  one  the  other  into  two  e  quail partes  in  a  point .  But  the  diameters  of 
the  cube  do  alfo  cut  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  partes, by  the  3  p. of  the  eleuenth .  Wher- 
fore  that  point  pall  be  the  centre  of  the jjhere  which  containeth  the  cube .  For  making  that 
point  the  centre ,  and  the face fome  one  of  the femidiameters,  deferibe  a  fphere,  and  it  Jhall 
paffe  by  the  angles  of the  cube :  and  likewife  making  the fame  point  the  centre,  and  the face 
halfe  of  the  line  L  M,  deferibe  a fhere ,  and  it  Jhall alfo paffe  by  the  angles  of  the  O  clohedron. 

tf'The  4.  Uropofitio n.  The  4.  JProbleme* 

In  an  0  cdohedrongcuen  fo  deferibe  a  Cube. 

Vppofe  that  the  0  clohedron  geuen  be  AB  G D  F Z .  And  let  the  two  pyramids 
thereof  be  AB  G  D  E,and  ZB  G  D  E .  And  take  the  centres  of  the  triangles 
of the pyr amis  AB  G  D  E,  that  is,  take  the  centres  of  the  circles  which  containe 
thofe  triangles :  and  let  thofe  centres  be  the  pointes  T,  1,  K,  L  .And  by  thofe 
centres  let  there  be  dr awen  parallel  lines  to  the  fides  of  the 
fquare  BGD  E :  which  parallel  right  lines  let  be  c M  T  N, 

NLX,XK0,(f01M.  And forafmuch  as  thofe  parallel 
right  lines  do  (  by  the  2.ofthefixth)cutthe  equall  right 
lines  A  B,A  G,A  D,and  A  E,  proportionally,  ther fore  they 
concur  re  in  the pointes  <JM,  N,X,  O  :  Wherefore  the  right 
lines  lM  N,  NJX,  X  O,  and  O  M, which fubtend  equall  an¬ 
gles fet  at  the  point  A, dr  contained  vnder  equall  right  lines,  1 
are  equall  (  by  the  4. of  the firfi  )  .  And  moreouer  ffeing  that 
they  areparallels  vnto  the  lines  BG,G  J>,  D  E,E  B,  which 
make  a  fquare,  therefore  c M  NX  O  is  alfo  a fquare,  by  the 
10  .of the  cietienth  .Wherefore  alfo,  by  the  i$.of the fame, the 
fquare  MNfX  O  is parallelto  the  fquare  BG  D  E  .  For  all 
the  right  lines  touch  the  one  the  other  in  the  pointes  of  their  a 
feciions .  From  the  centres  T,1,K,L,  dr  awe  thefe  right  lines 
T  1,1  K,K  L,L  T .  And  drawe  the  right  line  AIC .  And 
forafmuch  as  1  is  the  centre  of the  equilater  triangle  ABE, 
therefore  the  right  line  A  l  being  extended,  cutteth  the  right 
line  B  E  into  two  equall  partes  ( by  the  Corollary  of the  12. of 
the  thirtenth  )  .  Andforafmuch  as  M  0  is  a  parallel  to  B  E, 
therefore  the  triangle  Caio  is  like  to  the  whole  triangle 
ACE  (by  the  Corollary  of  the  2. of  the  fixth ) .  And  the  right 
line  cM  O  is  diuided  into  two  equall  partes  in  the point  1  (by  the  4. of the fixth )  .  And  by  the 
fame  reafin  may  we  prone,  that  the  right  lines  MN,N  X,XO,are  diuided  into  two  equall 

partes 


A 


ConSiruftion • 


Vmtmftfa- 

tion. 


Contfruftfan* 


Vemotiflra- 
tioit . 


Thefiftenth'Booke 

fortes  in  thepointes  T,L,K.  Wherefore  alfo  againe,  the  bafes  T  I, I  K,K  L,  L  T, which fiub- 
tmd  the  angles  fet  at  thepointes  M,0,X,N, which  angles  are  right  angles ,  and  are  contained 
under  equall fides, thofie  bafes ,  1 fay, arc  e quail .  Andforafmuch  as  7 l M  is  an  ifiofceles  tri¬ 
angle,  therefore  the  angles  fet  at  the  bafe, namely, the  angles  CMTlandtJMl  T,are  equal 
( by  the  $  of the firfi)  .  But  the  angle  M  is  a  right  angle :  therefore  eche  of  the  angles  Ml  T 
and  MT  I,  is  the  halfe  of  a  right  angle .  And  by  the fame  rcafon  the  angles  O  IK &0  Kl, 
are  e quail .  Wherefore\the  angle  remay ning,  namely ,  T I  iT, 
is  a  right  angle  (  by  the  13  .of  the  first ) .  For  the  right  lines 
T  l  and  I K  are  fet  upon  the  line  M  O  .  And  by  the  fame  rea- 
fon  may  the  rest  of  the  angles,  namely,  I K  L,  KL  T,L  T  I, 
be  proued  right  angles ,  and  they  are  in  one  and  the  fejffame 
plaine  fuperficies, namely, M  2\ {X  O  {by  the  j.oftheeleueth ) . 

Wherefore  the  right  lines  which  ioyne  together  the  centres  of 
the plainefnperficiall  triangles  which  make  the  folide  angle  B, 

A, do  make  the  fquare  IT  K  L.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may 
be  proved,  that  the  plaine fuperficiall  triangles  of  the  ref  of 
thefiue  foltde  angles  of  the  Oclohedron  fet  at  the pointes  B , 

€,Z,D,E,  do  in  the  centres  of  their  bafes  receaue  fquares, 

So  that  there  are  in  number  fixe  fquares,  for  euery  Ociohe- 
dron hath fixe folide angles ;  and  thofie  fquares  are e quail: c 
for  their  fide s  do  containe  e quail  angles  of  inclinations  con¬ 
tained  under  e quail  fides ,  namely  ,vnder  thofie fides  which 
are  drarvenfrom  the  centre  to  the  fide  of  the  e  quail  triangles 
( by  thed.  Corollary  of  the  1 8. of  the  thirtenth  )  .  Wherefore 
IT  K  L  BP  VS- is  a  cube  (  by  the  21.  definition  of  theele- 
tienth  )  and  hathhis  angles  in  the  centres  of  the  bafes  of  the 
O  ffiohedron,  and  therefore  is  infcribed  in  it  (  by  the  firfi  de¬ 
finition  ofthisbooke )  .Wherefore  in  an  0 Bohedron geuen 
is  defer ibed a  cube :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


The  s.  Trofofition. 


The  s.  Trobleme . 


In  an  Icofahedron  geuenfio  deferibe  a  H dodecahedron . 

Ake  an  Icofahedron  one  of  whofe  folide  angles  let  beZ .  N owfor ajfmuch  as 
{by  '-thofe  t hinges  which  haue  bene proued in  the  1 6 .of  the  thirtenth)the  ba¬ 
fes  of  the  triangles  which  contayne  the  angle  of  the  Icofahedron  doo  make  a 
’ pentagon  infcribed  in  a  circle ,  let  that  pentagon  be  ABG D  E,  which  is 
[made  of  the fine  bafes  of  the  triangles ,  whofe  playne  fuperfciall angles  re¬ 
may  ning  make  the  folide  angle getten, namely,  Z.  t^And  take  the  centres  of  the  circles  which 
contayne  the forefaid  triangles, which  centers  let  be  the  poyntes  I,T ,K,M,L;  and  dr aw  theft 
right  lines  I  T,f  K,I(  MyM  L,L  I.  Hmv  then  a  perpendicular  line  drawne  from  the  poynt 
Z  to  the  playne fuperficies  of  the  pentagon  ABG  D  E,jhallfallvpen  the  centre  of  the  circle 
which  contayneth  the  pentagon  AB  G  D  E(by  thofe  thtnges  which  haue  beneprouedin  the 
felfe fame  id.  of  the  thirtenth ) .  CMoreouer  perpendicular  lines  dr awne  from  the  centre  to 
the fides  of  the  pentagon  AB  G  DE  pall  in  the  poyntes  C,N,  O  when  they fall  cut  the  right 
lines  A  B,B  G,G  D  intotwo  e  quail  partes  (by  the  3.  of the  third).  Draw  theft  right  lines  CN 
and  N  O.Andforafmuch  as  the  angles  C  B  Island  N  GO  are  equall,and  are  contained  un¬ 
der  equall fides, therefore  the  bafe  C  N  is  equall  to  the  bafe  2 %J)  (by  the  4-of the  firfi )  .More- 


ofEuclides  Elementes 


Fol.  454; 


\? 

/  Nr— 

L 

yC  \ 

\ 

v\ 

ie  \\ 

0 

ouer perpendicular  lines  dr awne  from  the  poynt  Z  to  the  bafes  of  the pentagon  ABG  D  E, 
fhall  likemfe  cutte  the  bafes  into  two  e  quail partes  ( by  the  3  .of the  third)  .  Tor  the  perpendi¬ 
culars  pajje  by  the  centre  (  by  the  corollary 
ofthei2.ofthethirteth):Wherfore  ihofe 
perpendicular  lines Jhall fal  vpo  the  points 
C,N,0  .  And  now  forafmuch  as  the  right 
lines  Z  1, 1C  are  e quail  to  the  right  lines 
ZT,TN,&  alfo  to  the  right  lines  ZK,KO^ 

(byreafonof  thelikenes  of  theequall  tri¬ 
angles  ) :  therefore  the  line  I T  is  aparallell 
to  the  line  C  N ,  and  fo  alfo  is  the  line  T  K 
to  the  line  NO  ( by  the  2. of the  fixt).Wher- 
fore  the  angles  I T  K,and  C  NO  are  equal  \  "N 
(by  the  n.of  the  eleuenth ) .  Agayneforaf 
much  as  the  triangles  CBN,  and  N  G  O 
are  if of  cels  triangles ,  therefore  the  angles 
,  BC N  and  BNC  are  equall  (  by  the  $. 
of  thefrf  )  .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  the 
angles  G  N  0,and  G  O  N  are  equall .  And  more  ouer  the  angles  B  CN  and  BNC  are  equall 
to  the  angles  G  No  ,  and  GO  N ,  for  that  the  triangles  CBN  and  N  GO  are  equall  and 
like .  But  the  three  angles  B  N  C,C  N  0,0  N  G,are  equall  to  two  right  angles  ( by  the  13.  of 
thefrsl )  for  that  'upon  the  right  line  B  G  are fet  the  right  lines  C  N  &  O  N.  And  the  three 
angles  of  the  triangle  CBN,  namely,  the  angles  B  TfC,B  C  N^or  G  2 \0  (for  the  angle  G- 
Nj)  is  equall  to  the  angle  B  C  T{jis  it  hath  bene  proued )  and  NJB  C  are  alfo  equall  to  two 
right  angles ( by  the  3  2.0ft he firfi) .  Wherefore  taking  away  the  angles  B  N(C  &GNJ),  the 
angle  remaymng,namely,  CNO  is  equall  to  the  angle  remayning, namely,  to  CBN.  Wher- 
fore  alfo  the  angle  1 T  K(  which  is  proued  to  be  equall  to  the  angle  C  N  0)is  equall  to  the  an¬ 
gle  C  B  N Wherefore  IT  K  is  the  angle  of  a  pentagon .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  be  pro¬ 
ued  that  the  rest  of  the  angles, namely  the  angles  T I  L,IL  M,L  M  K,M  KT  ,are  equall  to 
the  ref  of  the  angles, namely  to  B  A  E,A  E  D,E  D  G,D  G  B.V/herefore  IT  K  M  Lis  an  e- 
quilater  and  equiangle  pentagon  (by  the  4.  of  the  frit )  For  the  equall  bafes  of  the  pentagon 
IT  KM  L  doo  fubtend  equall  angles  fet  at  the  point  Z, and  comprehended  ‘under  equall 
fdes .  lM ore  ouer  it  is  manifest  that  the  pentagon  IT  K  M  L  is  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
playne  fuperfcies .  For  forafmuch  as  the  angles  O  NC  and  N  CP  are  in  one  and  the  felfe 
fame  playne fuperfcies, namely  in  the fuperfcies  ABGD  E:But  ‘unto  the fame  playne fuper¬ 
fcies  the  playne  fuperfcieces  of  the  angles  KT I  and  T I L  are  parallels  (by  the  t$.ofthe  ele¬ 
uenth  ) .  i^ylnd  the  triangles  KT  I  and  TIL  concurre :  wherefore  they  are  in  one  and  the 
felfe fame  playne fuperfcies  ( by  the  corollary  of  the  16. of  the  eleueth ) .  And  by  the  fame  reaf 9 
fo  may  weproue  that  the  triangles  I LM,  LM  K,M  K  T  are  in  the  felfe fame  playne fuper- 
fcies  wherein  are  the  triangles  KT  I  and  TIL.  Wherefore  the  pentagon  IT  K  ML  is  in 
one  and  the  felfe fame  playne fuperfcies.Wherefore  the folide  angle  of the  lcofahedron,name 
ly  the  folide  angle  at  thepoynt  Z  fubtendeth  an  equilater  and  equiangle  pentagon plaine fu¬ 
perfcies  ,  which  pentagon  hath  his  plaine  fuperfciall  angles  in  the  centres  of  the  triangles 
which  make  the  folide  angle  Z .  ifdnd  in  like fort  may  weproue  that  the  other  eleuen  folide 
angles  of  the  Icofahedron ,  eche  of  which  eleuen folide  angles  are  equall  and  like  to  the folide 
angle  Z  (by  the  id -of the  thirtenth )  are fubtended  njnto pentagons  equall,  and  like ,  and  in 
like fort fet  to  the  pentagon  IT  K  M  L.And forafmuch  as  in  thofe  petagons  the  right  lines, 
which  ioyne  together  the  centers  of  the  bafes, are  common  fides ,  it  followeth  that  thofe  12. 
pentagons  include  a  folide  which  folide  is  therefore  a  dodecahedron  (by  the  24.  diffnition  of 
the  eleventh):  and  is, by  thefrf  diffnition  of  this  booke,defcribed  in  the  Icofahedron  ,fue 

VVv.i.  fides 


That  which 
here  fclloweth 
concerning  the 
inclination  of 
the  plainer  of 
the  flue  j  elides, 
was  before 
tought  (though 
not  altogether 
after  the fame 
tnann)out  of 
Fluffs  in  the 
latter  ende  cf 
tbei$,boo!{e. 


The  fourtenthTZooke 

fides  whereof are fet  vpon  the  pentagon  ABGD  E .  Wherefore  in  an  Icofahedron  geuen  if 
mferibeda  dodecahedron  .-which  was  required  to  be  done. 

An  annotation  of  Bypficles. 

T his  is  to  be  noted, that  if  a  manjhould  demaund  how  many  fides  an  Icofahedron  hath , 
we  may  thusanfwere :  It  is  manifeft  that  an  Icofahedron  is  contayned  vnder  20.  triangles , 
and  that  entry  triangle  conffeth  of  three  right  lines  .Tfow  then  multiply  the  20.  trian¬ 
gles  into  the fides  of  one  of the  triangles , and fo  fall  there  be  produced  6  0 .  the  halfe  of  which 
is  jo.L^Jnd fomany  fides  hath  an  Icofahedron.  And  in  like fort  in  a  dodecahedron ,  foraf- 
much  as  12. pentagons  make  a  dodecahedron, and euery  pentagon  contayneth  5.  right  lines , 
multiply  $  into  12. and  there  fhall  be  produced  60. the  halfe  of which  is  $  o'.  And fo  many  are 
the fides  of  a  dodecahedron.  And  the  reafon  why  we  take  the  halfe,  is, for  that  euery  fde  whe¬ 
ther  it  be  of  a  triangle  or  of  a  pent  agon, or  of afquare  as  in  a  cube, is  taken  twife .  And  by  the 
fame  reafon  may  y  ou  finde  out  how  many  fides  are  in  a  cube ,  and  in  apyrmis ,  and  in  an 
octohedron. 

But  now  agayne  if  ye  will  finde  out  the  number  of  the  angles  of  euery  one  of  the folide 
figures, when  ye  hatie  done  the fame  multiplication  that  ye  did  before,  diuide  the  fame fides , 
by  the  number  of  the  plaine  fuperfcieces  which  ccmprehend  one  of  the  angles  of  the  folide s 
As for  example, for  aj much  as  $.  triangles  contayne  the  folide  angle  of an  Icofahedron, diuide 
So. by  s.and  there  will  come  forth  12.  and  fomany  folide  angles  hath  am  Icofahedron .  In  a 
dodecahedron  for  afmuch  as  three  pentagons  comprehend  an  angle, diuide  So.  by  3  .and  there 
will  come  forth  20  •  andfo  many  are  the  angles  of  a  dodecahedron .  And  by  the fame  reafon 
may  you  finde  out  how  many  angles  are  in  eche  oftherefi  of  the folide  figures. 

If  it  be  required  to  be  knowne,  how  one  of  the  plaints  of  any  ofthefiuefolides  being  ge¬ 
uen, there  may  pe found  out  the  inclination  of  the  faydplaines  the  one  to  the  other,  which  con 
tayne  eche  of the folides.  T  his  (as fayth  Iiidorus  our  greate  master  )  is found  out  after  this 
maner.lt  is  manifest  that  in  a  cube ,  the  plaines  which  contayne  it ,  doo  cut  the  one  the  other 
by  a  right  angle. But  in  a  Tetrahedron ,  one  of  the  triangles  being geuen ,  let  the  endes  of  one 
of  the  fides  of  the  fayd  triangle  be  the  centers, and  let  the  [pace  be  the  perpendicular  line 
drawne from  the  toppe  of  the  triangle  to  the  bafe ,  and  deferibe  circumferences  of  a  circle , 
which  fhalhutte  the  one  the  other?  and  from  the  inter fettion  to  the  centers  draw  right  lines , 
which  fhall  containe  the  inclination  of  the  plaines  cotayningtheT etrahedron.ln  an  Obiohe- 
dr on, take  one  of  the fides  of  the  triangle  thereof, and  vpon  it  deferibe  afquare, and  draw  the 
diagona.il  line, and  making  the  centres, the  endes  of  the  diagonallline,  and  the  fpace  likewife 
the  perpendicular  line  drawne  from  the  toppe  of  the  triangle  to  the  bafe ,  deferibe  circumfe¬ 
rences :  and  agayne  from  the  common  feclion  to  the  centres  draw  right  lines ,  and  they 
fhall  contayne  the  inclination  fought  for.  In  an  lcofahedron,vponthefideofoneofthetri- 
' angles  thereof  deferibe  a  pentagon,  and  draw  the  line  which  fubtendeth  one  of  the  angles  of 
the fayd  pentagon, and  making  the  centres  the  endes  of that  line ,  and  the  fpace  the  perpendi¬ 
cular  line  of  the  triangle ,  deferibe  circumferences :  and  draw  from  the  common  interfetlion 
of the  circumferences  ,vnto  the  centres  right  lines :  and  they  fall  contayne  likewife  the  incli¬ 
nation  of  the  plaines  of  the  icofahedron.  In  a  dodecahedron,take  one  of  the  pentagons ,  and 
draw  likewife  the  line  which  fubtendeth  one  of  the  angles  of  the pentagon ,  and  making  the 
'centres  the  endes  of  that  line, and  the  fpace ,  the  perpendicular  line  drawne  from  the  feclion 
into  two  equall partes  of  that  line  teethe fide  efthe  pentagon ,  which  is  parallel  vnto  it ,  de¬ 
feribe  circumferences  :and from  the  point  of the  inter  feclion  of  the  circumferences  draw  vn- 
to  the  centres  right  lines :  and  they  fall  alfo  containe  the  inclination  of  the  plaines  of  the  do¬ 
decahedron  .  Thus  did  this  mofifingular  learned  man  reafon ,  thinking  the  demonfir aiion 
in  euery  one  of  them  to  be  plaine  and  clear e.  But  to  make  the  demonfiration  of  them  mani- 


of  Suclides  Elementes. 


Fol.&pfl, 


feB>l  thinkit  goodto  declare  and  make  open  his  wordes,and frfiin  a  Tetrahedron * 

Suppofe  that  there  be  a  Pyramis  or  T etrahedro  ABCD 
cotained  under  4.equilater  triangles :&  let  the  toppe  there¬ 
of  be  the  point  D .  And  {by  the  i  o.of  the  fir fi)d wide  the fide 
A  D  into  two  equal l  parts  in  the  point  E:  &  draw  the  lines 
B  E  and  E  C  .And forafmuch  as  AD  B  and  AD  C  are  e- 
qui later  triangles ,  and  the  line  A  D  is  divided  into  two  e- 
quall  partes,  therefore  the  lines  B  E  and.E  C fall  perpendi¬ 
cularly  upon  the  line  A  D,by  the  8.  of  the firfi .  Now  I  fay 
that  the  angle  B  EC  is  an  acute  angle .  For  forafmuch  as 
the  line  A  C  is  double  to  the  line  A  E  {for  by  confiruclion 
the  line  A  D ,  which  is  equal  to  the  line  A  C,is  diuided  into  ~ 
trvo  squall  partes  in  the  point  E)  :  therefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  G  is  quadruple  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  E  {by  the  corollary  of the  2  o.of the fixt )  .But  the fquare  of  the  line  A  C 
is  e  quail  to  the  fquares  of  the  lines  A  E  and  E  C(by  the  47  wf the firfi) :  and  the  fquare  of  the 
line  A  C  is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  C  E  { fefquitertia )  as  4.  to  3:  (for  the  fquare  of  the  line 
AC  is  pro  tied  quadruple  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  E):  wherefore  the fquare  of  the  line  B  C 
(which  is  squall  to  the fquare  of  the  line  AC)  is  lefife  then  the fquares  of  the  two  perpendicu¬ 
lars  B  E  &  EC{for  it  is  unto  them  in Jubfefquialter  proportio, namely , as  4. to  6.  or  2. to  3 .) 
Wherefore(by  the  1 3 .  of  the fecond )  the  angle  B  EC  is  an  acute  angle. Now forafmuch  as  the 
line  A  D  is  the  common  inter  feci  ion  of  the  two  plain  es  A  B  D,  and  ADC,  and  in  either  of 
thofe  plaines  to  one  point  of  the  common fecit  on  are  dr awne perpendicular  lines  B  E  and  E  C 
which  contains  an  acute  angle. B  E  C,  tberefore(by  the  $  .dififinition  of  the  eleuenth  )  the  an¬ 
gle  B  E  G  is  the  inclination  of  the  plaines,  andit  is geuen.  For  the  line  B  C,  which  is  the  fide 
of the  triangle,  being  geuen,  and  any  one  of  the  lines  BE  or  E  C,  which  is  the  perpendicular 
of  the  eqiiilater  triangle, being  alfio geuen:  make  the  centres  the poyntes  B  and  C,  that  is,  the 
cndes  of  one  of  the  fides,and  the fpace  the  perpendicular  of  the  triangle, and  deficribe  circum¬ 
ferences ,and they  fhallcutte  the  one  the  other  in  the  poynt  E.  And from  the  poynt  E  draw  to 
the  centres  B  and  C  right  lines, and  they  jhall  containe  the  inclination  of  the  plaines  :  and 
this  is  it  which  ifidcrus  before  fayd  .  And  now  that  making  the  centres  the  poyntsB  and  C, 
and  the  fpace  the  perpendicular  of  the  triangle ,  the  circles  deferibed ( ball  cutte  the  one  the 
other,. it  is  manifeftffor  either  of  the  lines B  E  and  E  C  is  greater  then  halfe  of  the  line  BC.  ~~ 

Now  if the  centers  were  the  poynt s  B  and  C,and  the fpace  the  halfe  of the  line  B  C,the  circles  °/j 

deferibed fail  touch  the  one  the  other. But  if  the  fpace  be  lefife  then  the  halfe, they  jhal  neither 
touch  nor  cut  the  one  the  other:  but  if  it  be  greater,  they  (hall  undoubtedly  cut. 

Agaihe  fuppofe  that  upon  the  fquare  A  B  CD  befet  a  pyramis,  hauing  his  altitude  the 
poynt  E.and  let  the  triangles  which  containe  it, be 


equilater:  wherfore  the  pyramis  A  B  CD  E  jhalbe 
the  halfe  of  the  Oclohedron  (by  the  2  corollary  of 
the  i4.ofthe  thirtenth.)  Deuide  by  the  jo. of  the 
firfi )  one  fide  of  one  of  the  triangles,  namely,  the 
line  A  Eyinto  two  equal  partes  in  the  poynt  F:and 
draw  the  lines  B  F  and  D  F  .'  wherefore  the  lines 
B  F  and  D  F  are  equal  and  fial  perpendicularly 
upon  the  line  AE(by  the  4.  and  8.  of  the  firfi.) 

Then  I fay  that  the  angle  B  F  D,  is  an  obtufie  an¬ 
gle. For  draw  the  line  B  D  .And forafmuch  as  AC 
is  a  fquare,  and  the  diameter  is  B  D : therefore  the 
fquare  of the  line  BD  is  double to  the  fquare  of the 

line  D  A  )by  the  47. of  the  firfi.)  But  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  Aistothe  fquare  of  the  line 

VFu.ij.  D  F 


mo  ft  p  tamely 
fee  in  that 
trb'tcb  is  ad¬ 
ded  out  of 
F roc  lus  after 
then  propo¬ 
rtion  of  the 
firji  books. 


\  *T he fif tenth  <Boo%e 

&  F, as  4.1s  to  3 .)  as  ms  in  the former  proued.)  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  Bis  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line  F  D,as  8. is  to  3 -{namely, as  2. to  1. and  4. to  3  .added  together), but  the 
line  D  F  is  equal  to  the  line  FB.  Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  D  B, is  greater  then  the 
fquares  of  the  lines  D  F  and  FB  ( for  it  is  to  them, as  8. is  to  6.)  Wherfore  the  angle  BFD , 
is  an  obtufe  angle  {by  the  i2.ofthe  fecond .)  Andforafmucbeastheline  A  E  is  the  common 
feffion  of  the  two  plaines  ABF  and  AD  E  cutting  the  one  the  other, and  in  either  ofthofe 
plaines  to  apoynt  in  the  common  fettion  aredrawne  perpendicular  lines,  B  F  and  D  F,  con¬ 
taining  an  obtufe  angle  BFD:  wherfore  the  angle  BFD  ( contained  of the  right  lines  B  F 
and  D  F)is  the  angle  of  the  inclination  of  the  plaines  ABE  and  E.  if  therefore  the 

angle  BFD  be  geuen,the faide  inclination  alfois geuen .  F or  forafmuch  as  the  triangle  of 
the  Oclohedron  ts  geuen, and  one  of  the fides  of  the Otfohedron  is  the  line  A  D,  and  vpon  it 
is  defer ibed the fquare  A  C,and  B  D  the  diameter  of  that fquare  being  geuen,  and  the  lines 
B  F  and  F  D  are  the  perpendiculars  of  that  triangle :  wherefore  alfo  the  angle  BFD  is  ge¬ 
uen. Now  then  if  vpon  the fide  of  the  triangle  be  deferibeda  fquare:  as  the fquare  A  C,  and 
the  diameter  BD  be  drawne,  if  alfo  making  the  centres  the  poyntes  B  and  D, and  the J pace , 
the f aid  perpendicular  of  the  triangle, wedeferibe  circles,  they  jhall  cut  the  one  the  other  in 
the poynt  F.And  the  right  lines  which  an  drawne  from  the  centres  to  thepoynt  F  Jhal  con- 
taine  thatinclination,which  is  comprehended  vnder  the  angle  BFD,  which  is  the  angle  of 
the  inclination  of  thofe plaines.  And  it  is  manifeft  that  either  of  the  lines  BF  and  FD  ,is 
greater  then  the  halfe  of  the  line .  For for  that ,  by  the  demonstration,  it  was proued  that  the 
fquare  of  the  line  B  D  is  to  the fquare  of  the  line  F  D  ,as  8. is  to  3  :therfore  the fquare  of half 
the  line  B  D,is  to  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  D,as  2. is  to  thre  (for  the fquare  of  halfe  the  line 
B  D  is  the  fourth  part  of  the  fquare  of  the  whole  line  BD, by  tbe4.ofthe  fecond). Wherefore 
either  of  the  lines  B  F  and  F  D , is  greater  then  the  line  B  D  :  wherfore  the  circles  which  are 
defenbed  by  thofe  lines  B  F  and  F  D  ,and  hauing  their  centres  the poynts  B  and  D  jhall  cut 
the  one  the  other.  And  thus  much  touching  the  oSlohedron. 

As  touching  the  Icofahedron,fuppofean  equilater 
petagon  ABCDE,&  vpon  it  let  there  be  fetapyra- 
mis  hauing  his  toppe  the  poynt  F:  and  let  the  trian¬ 
gles  which  cotaine  it,  be  equilater. Now  the  the  pyra 
mis  ABCDEF,(hal  be  a  part  of the  lcofahedro.Let 
F  C  one fide  of  one  of  the  triangles  be  deuided  into 
two  equal partes  in  the  poynt  G.And  draw  the  lines 
BG  &  GD, which jhal  be  equal  & fal  pcrpcdicular - 
ly  •vpon  the  line  FC  (as  it  is  eafie  to  fe  by  the  demo  - 
jlratio  of  the former).  T he  l fay  thatj  angle  BGD 
is  an  obtufe  angle  -  which  thing  is  manifest.  For 
drawing  the  line  B  D  ,it  jhall  fubtend  the  obtufe  an - 
gleB  CD  of  the  pentagon  ( which  is  obtufe, by  that 
which  was  demonstrated  in  the  ende  of  the  fir  SI  co¬ 
rollary  of  the  1 8.  of the  i3.booke:)But  the  angle  B  G  D  is  greater  then  the  angle  B  CD, for 
the  lines  B  G  and  G  D,are  lefie  then  the  lines  B  Cand  C  D :  wherefore  likcwife  as  in  the for¬ 
mer  the  angle  BGDis  the  inclination  of the  triangles  B  F  C,andC  F  D .  Wherfore  the  an¬ 
gle  BGD  being  geuen, the  inclination  alfo  of  the  plaines  of  the  Icofahedron Jhall  be  geuen . 
F  or  if vpon  the fide  of the  triangle  of  the  Icofahedron  be  deferibed  an  equilater  pentagon, 
and  then  be  dr awne  the  line  which fubtendeth  two jides  of  the  pentagon, as  in  thisfgure  the 
line  B  D, if  alfo  the  perpendiculars  B  G  and  G  D  of the  triangles  be  drawne, the  angle  BGD 
jhalbe  geuen.  For  if  ye  make  the  centres  the  endes  of  the  line  which  fubtendeth  two  fides  of 
the  pentagon, as  the  poynts  B  and  D  ,and  the fpace  the perpendicular  of  the  triangle,  and fh 
deferibe  circles, they  jhall  cut  the  one  the  other  in  thepoynt  Gtand from  the  poynt  of  their 

terfeSHon 


ofSuclides  Elementess 

terfeftion  G,drawe  vnto  the  centre s  hand  D  right  Unes,andthey Jhal  containe  the  angle  of 
the  inclination  B  G  D.And  it  is  manifefi,by  the  defcriptim  of  the  figure ,  that  either  of  the 
lines  B  G  and  G  D  is  greater  then  the  line  B  JO  Which  thing  may  alfo  thus  be  proued.  Sup 
pofe  an  equilater  H  K  L,and  vpon  K.L(  one  of  the  (ides  thereof )  defcribe  an  equilater  pen¬ 
tagon  K  M  NX  L,and draw  the  line  M  L.'^And  dmide  (by  the  io.of  the  firfi)  the fide  K  L 
into  two  equal parts  in  the  poynt  0  ,<jr  draw  the  line  H  O  ,which Jhall  be  the  perpendicular  of 
the  triangle  H  K  L  (by  the  $,  ofthefrfi.)Then  I  fay  that  the  line  H  O  is  greater  then  half 
of  the  line  M  L,which  fubtendeth  the  inclination  of  the  plaines.  For  from  the  poynt  K  draw 
(i by  the  12. of the  firfi)  vnto  the  line  ML  a  perpendicular  line  K  P  :  and forajmuche  as  the 
angle  K  L  P  is  greater  then  the  third part  of  a  right  angle ,  that  is ,  then  the  angle  KHO 
( For  the  angle  KLM  is  two fueth  partes  of  a  right  angle, 
by  the  4.of the  firfi, and  by  the  afiumpt  put  after  the  firfi  co* 
rollary  of the  il.  of  the  thirtenth  booke,and  the  angle  KHO 
is  one  third part  of  one  right  angle,  for  the  whole  angle  K- 
HL,wherofthe  angle  KHO  is  the  half, by  the  4.0ft  he  firfi, 
is  one  third  part  of two  right  angles, by  the  3  2. of the  firfi, 
vpon  the  line  M  L,  and  at  the  poynt  L  put  vnto  the^angle 
KHO  an  equal  angle  P  LR  (by  the  23. of the  firfi.)  Wher - 
fore  the  triangles  P  LR&  0  H  K,jhalbe  cquiangle ,  by  the 
corollary  of  the  32.0/ the  f rtf .  Wherefore  alfotie  line  P  L 
jhalbe  the  perpendicular  of  the  equilater  triangle  defer iked 
vpon  the  line  R  L.  Wherefore  ( by  the  corollarye  added  by 
Fluflas  after  the  i2.propofition  ofthe  thirtenth  bookc)  the 
line  R  L  is  in  power fefquitercia,  that  is, as  4. is  to  3  .to  the 
perpendicular  L  P.  But  the  line  K  Lis  greater  then  theline 
LR(by  the  ip  .of  the firtf.  Wherforey fquare  of  theline  K- 
L  hath  to  the  fquare  of the  line  LP  a  greater  proportion  the 

hath  4-to  3  :but  it  hath  to  the  fquare  of the  line  H  O  that  proportion  that  4.hath  to  3  Wher - 
fore  the  line  K  L  hath  to  the  line  LP  a  greater  proportion  then  it  hath  to  the  line  HO * 
Wh  erf  ore  the  line  H  O  is  greater  then  the  line L  P,by  the  io.of the  fifth. 

As  concerning  a  Dodecahedron.  T ake  one  of  the fquares  ofthe  cube  wheron  the  Dode¬ 
cahedron  is  deferibed  ( by  the  17. of  the  thirtenth)  :and  let  the fame  be  A  B  CD :  and  let  the 
two  plaines  ofthe  Dodecahedron Jet  vpon  itbeAEBF  G,and  GFDH  C.Then  1 fay  that 
here  alfo  is geuen  the  inclination  ofthe  two  ^  A 

pentagons.  Diuide  (by  the  io.of  thefrfi) 
the fide  F  G  into  two  equalpartes  in  the 
poynt  K.  And from  the  poynt  K'draw  vnto 
the  line  F  G  in  either  of  the  plaines  A  EB- 
F  G  and  G  F  DHC  perpendicular  lines 
K  L  and K  M  (by  the  11  .of  thefrfi.)  And 
draw  the  line  M  L.  Firfi  I  fay  that  the  an - 
glcMK  L  is  an  obtufe  angle .  For, by  the  X>  & 

difeourfe  ofthe  demonfiration  of  the  17. 

propofition  ofthe  13  .boke,  where  is  taught  the  defeription  of the  Dodecahedron, it  is  mani- 
fefiy  that  the  line  drawne  perpendicularly  from  the  poynt  K  to  the  fquare  ABC  D,is  equal 
to  halfe  the fide  ofthe  pentagon  Wherefore  it  is  leffe  then  halfe  of  the  line  M  L.  Wherefore  ' 
the  angle  M  K  Lis  an  obtufe  angle.  Moreouer  by  the former  difeourfe  of  the  17  propofition 
ofthe  1 3.  bo  oke, it  was  manifeft  that  the  fquare  ofthe  line  K  L  is  equal  to  the fquare  of  half 
the fide  of the  cube, and  to  the fquare  of  halfe  the  fide  ofthe  pentagon.  And  forajmuche  as 

V  Fv.iij.  the 


fC 

e 


the  lines  K  Land  KM  are  equal,  and  are  eche greater  then  halfe  of  the  line  M  L  twherfcre 
the  angle  M  KL  being  geuen,  there fall  alfo  b  e  geuen  the  inclination  of  the  two  plaines  of 
the  Dodecahedron.  Fcrforafmuchasthe fide  of  the [quart  ABC  D  fubtendeth  two fides  of 
the pentagon  geuen, the  pentagon  alfo  is  geuen, and  therefore  alfo  is  geuen  the  line  M  L.  But 
there  is  alfo  geuen  either  of the  lines  M  K  and  K  L:for  they  are  drawne perpendicularly fro 
the fe&ion  into  two  equal  partes  ofthe  line  A  B,  which  fubtendeth  two  fdesof  thepentagon 
vnto  the fide  of  thepentagon,  which  is  a parallel  vnto  the  line  A  B :  namely, to  the fide  F  G. 
Wherfore  there  is  geuen  the  angle  L  K  \JM, which  is  the  angle  of the  inclination fought  for. 
And  now  touching  Iildorus  w or des ,, he  fay eth , that  thepentagon  being geuen,we  mufi  draw 
the  line  which  fubtendeth  two  fides  of  the  pentagon,  which  line  is  equal  to  the  fide  of  the 
cube .*  and  makingthe  centres  the  endes  of  that  line,  and  the  [pace  the  perpendicular  linet 
which  is  drawne  from  the feclionof thefame  line  into  two  equal  parts  to  the fide  of  the  pen* 
tagcn  which  is parellel  to  the  faid line, as  in  the  former  defcription  the  line  K  L,  or  the  line 
JC  M  ,defcribe  circumferences, and  from  the  poynt  of  the  interfettion  ofthe  circumferences 
draw  ’vntothecentres  right  lines  which jhall  corn  aim  the  angle  of the  inclination. 

For  by  that  which  was fay  d  be  fore, namely  touching  the  Icofahedron,  it  is 
manifejl  that  the  perpendicular  K  L, is  greater  then  halfe  of the  line 
M  Lor  CD  ,which  is  equal  vnto  it.  And  therefore  the  cir¬ 
cles  defcribed  by  thofe perpendicular s, and  hauing 
to  their  centres  the  end  of  the  line  C  D,  Jhall 
cut  the  one  the  other,  as  was  be - 
.  v  foreproued - 

-  \\  «W\  VAX  \m  U  s.  V  % 

sit  <rt  U.H  •'  vWS  ;  f 

The  ende  of  the  fiuetenthBoofee 

ofEucIides  Elementes 


*  >>l  <i  »  •  *.  ’  ■  S 


\ 


.  rc  b\  V.  1  -  '  V, 

.  '.‘i'-W'. 0 

.  A  'A  y,x'\  -jit  <it  iu  A 

.  sit  M’.Vv 

.u;  _ 

V  1  \|5.'  v  -is 1 

.  d  SV.X  v:'-'- 

■xxV> 

vi  .1.’. 

y\  ±.\%  .  \  x 

V.\. V:\'AV,  Xlv 

\  i  ■  W 

T  TN  r  ‘'I  Tv 

.  X  >  *  \ 

i  V)  Y\  V  \  .  i  '  /y  i  '  ■  ' 

f.  J  V^  %  ^  ‘  •  V*  -  •  ■ 

i  s 

*, n,  -  .i. 


^  '  '  A  A  A 

'  "  I1!  ^  W 

v  ‘  n^:.v.  c'.v.r; *. : 
y,  f>v-  ,\'iX  • .  V\') 


VdH.  V.  lU'.v.  v-  ■  ■\nv\Vv' 


. 

I  U. 


. 


I  ivt- 


\ 


\ 


\  J 


vW'Vvai  v. ; 

V •'  X  ..••••„'  a,.,  .  s-'.  \>V: \  V.:  .\v 

: ...  Aj  V\  !■>?  ■■■>'  '  S  ."A  r',V 

*  A.  d.  V.  .y.'Judr  v*  -  Y;\  >  \V<  O  ’  \  V 

vv.u\  \ 

*  v  I  ■  >  \ 

.?  .  ‘Vs  '*  v' 

-v\x  *..V*  vkX  1 


,  V'i  I  xA.  J*jL 


j"  W-- 

.  i  -A  V.  t  ' 

\  \<t!\ , y\  >•  •  ■' 

V  ’  .*• 


\vr: 


lit  i  tw 


w 


x ; 


.  V,  V/V  VA.'J 

.vv-Ay'r.i' V":  Ml 


.  >  X 


'  •  -M  t 


ofEuclitles  Elementes.  Foh\ij« 

tfTbe6.fr  ■Qpofition.  The  6.  frobletiie, 

-  ,  r  '  j  ■/  1  ■  *  *  ii  •  j  \  •{  >  >  t  :>  >/•:.  " 

In  an  Otiohedron  genenjo  infcribe  a  tri  later  equilater  fjramis. 

I 

Vppofe  that  the  Odohedrori  'Wherein  the  Tetrahedron  is  required  to  be 
infcribed,  be  A  B  G  D  E I .  Take  fower  bafes  of the  Odohedron,that  is, 
three  which  clofe  in  the  low' eft  triangle  E  G  D,  namely,  A  E  G,  B  E  D, 
I  G  D  :  and  let  the  fourth  be  A I  B,which  is  oppofite  to  the  loweft  trian¬ 
gle  before  put, namely,  to  E  G  D  .  And  take  the  centres  of  thofe  fower 
bafes,  which  let  be  the  pointes  H,C,N,L.  And  vpon  the  triangle  H  C  N 
eredea  pyramis  HCNL  .  Now  forafmuch  as  thefe  two  bafes  of  the 
Odohedroh,namely,  A GE and  AB  I  are fet  vpon  the  right  lines  EG 
and  B  I  which  are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  other,in  the  fquare  G  E  B  I  of 
the  Odohedron ,  from  the  point  A  drawe  by  the  centres  of  the  bafes, 
namely,  by  the  centres  H,L,  perpendicular  lines  A  H  F,  A  L  K,  cutting 
the  lines  E  G  and  B I  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  pointes  F,  X  (by  the 
Coro llaryof  the  r a  .of  the  thirtenth).Wherfore 
a  right  line  drawen  fro  the  point  F  to  the  point 
K,fhallbe  a  parallel  and  equall  to  the  fides  of 
the  Odohedron,namely,to  EBandGI(by  the 
33-ofthefirft)  .  And  the  right  line  H  L  which 
cutteth  the  equall  fides  A  F,A  K, proportionally 
,  (for  A  H  aiid  A  L  are  drawen  from  the  centres 
of  equall  circles  to  the  circumferences)  is  a  pa¬ 
rallel  to  the  right  line  F  K  (by  the  i.of  the  fixth) 
and  alfo  to  the  fides  of  the  Odohedron,name- 
ly,  to  E  B  and  I  G  ( by  the  9.  of  the  ele.uenth  )  . 

Wherefore  as  the  line  AF  is  to  the  line  AH, 
fo  is  the  line  F  K  to  the  line  H  L  (by  the  4.of the 
fixth  )  :  For  the  triangles  A  F  K  and  A  H  L  are 
like  (by  thn  Corollary  ofthe  2. ofthe  fixth). But 
the  line  AF  is  in  fefquialter  proportionto  the 
line  A  H :  (for  the  fide  E  G  maketh  H  F  the  halfe 
ofthe  right  line  AH.by  the  Corollary  ofthe  12. 
ofthe  thirtenth).WherforeFK  or  GI  the  fide 
of  the  Odohedron,  is  fefquialter  to  the  right 
line  H  L.And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  we  proue 
Ihat  the  fides  of  the  Odohedron  are  fefquialter 
to  the  reft  of  the  right  lines  which  make  the  pyramis  HNC  L,namely,  to  the  right  lines  H  N,N  C,C  L, 
LN,andCH  :  wherefore  thofe  right  lines  are  equall,  and  therefore  the  triangles  which  aredefcribed 
of  them,namely,  the  triangles  H  C  N,HNL,N  C  L,and  C  H  L,  which  make  the  pyramis  H  N  C  L,  are 
equall  and  equilater  .  Andforafmuch  as  the  angles  of  the  fame  pyramis,namely,the  angles  H,  C,  N,  L, 
do  end  in  the  centres  ofthe  bafes  ofthe  Odohedron,therefote  it  is  infcribed  in  the  fame  Odohedron, 
by  the  firft  definition  ofthisbooke .  Wherefore  in  an  Odohedron  geuen,is  infcribed  a  trilater  equila¬ 
ter  pyramis  :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

#  A  Corollary. 

The  bafes  of  a  fjramis  infcribed  in  an  Otfobedron,  are  parallels  totbe 
bafes  of  the  Ofiobedron  .  For  forafmuch  as  the  fides  ofthe  bafes  of  the  Pyramis  touching  the 

one  the  other,  are  parallels  to  the. fides  of  the  Odohedron  which  alfo  touch  the  one  the  other,  as  for 
example,  H  L  was  proued  to  be  aparallel  to  G  I,  and  L  C  to  D I , therefore,by  the  1  f.  ofthe eleuenth, 
the  plainefuperficieSwhich  is  drawen  by  the  lines  HL  and  LC,  is  a  parallel  to  the  plaine  fuperficies 
drawen  by  the  lines  G I  and  D I .  And  folikewife  of  the  reft. 

..  .  #  Second  Corollary. 

..  "7  ~  i  j  1  - 1  a  ,  ,  M  ■  io  "  •  -  _  j ^  1  . 

A  right  line  iojning  together  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  Offio* 
hedronfsjefquialter  to  the  perpendicular  line  drawen  from  the  angle  of  the  in* 

feribed 


A  . 


Conttruttknb 


Vemnftra « 
thn • 


ConBrnBion. 


Vemwflra- 
tion * 


Conflruttlon, 


The fiftenth  <Boo!{e 

fcribed py  ramis  to  the  bctje  thereof .  For  forafmuch  as  the  pyramis  and  the  cube  which 
containethitdointhe  felfefamepointesendtheirangl.es  (by  the  i .  of  this  booke  )  :  therefore  they 
fhall  both  be  inclofed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  Odtohedron  (  by  the  4.of  this  booke  )  .  But  the  diame¬ 
ter  of  the  cube  ioyneth  together  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bales  of  the  O&ohedron ,  and  therefore  is 
the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  which  containeth  the  cube  and  the  pyramis  inferibed  in  the  cube  (  by  the 
13 .  and  14.  of  the  thirtenth)  :  which  diameter  is  fefquialter  to  the  perpendicular  which  is  drawen  from 
the  angle  of  the  pyramis  to  the  bafe  thereof:  for  the  line  which  is  drawen  from  the  centre  of  the  fphere 
to  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis,  is  the  fixth  part  of  the  diameter  (  by  the  3 .  Corollary  of  the  13  .of  the  thir¬ 
tenth)  .  Wherefore  ofwhat  partes  the  diameter  containeth  fixe,of  the  fame  partes  the  perpendicular 
containeth  fower. 

f  The  7.  Proportion.  The  7.  (problems. 


In  a  dodecahedron geuen,  to  inferibe  an  Icofahedron. 


IVppofe  that  the  dodecahedron  geuen ,  be  A  B  C  D  E.  And  let  the  centres  of  the  circles 
which  cotaynefixe  bafes  ofthe  fame  dodecahedron  be  the  points  L,M,N,P,Q^,O.And 
draw  thefe  right  lines  0L,0M,0N,0P,0  Q^and  moreouer  thefe  right  lines  LM, 
M  N,N  P,P  Q^,Q_L  .  And  now  forafnuch  as  equall  and  equila ter  pentagons  are  contay- 
nedin  equall  circles ,  therefore  perpendicular  lines  drawne  from  their  centres  to  the 
fides  fhall  be  equall(by  the  14.  of  the  third)  ,and  fhall  diuide  the  fides  of  the  dodecahedron  into  two  e« 
quallpartes(by  the3.ofthe  fame) .  Wherefore  the  forefayde  perpendicular  lines  fhall  concurre  ip  the 
point  ofthe feiftion, wherein  the  fides  are  diuided  ^4 

into  two  equall  partes,  as  L  F  and  M  F  doo  .  And 
theyalfo  containe  equall  angles,namely,  the  in¬ 
clination  ofthe  bafes  ofthe  dodecahedron ,  (by 
the  i. corollary  ofthe  1 8. of  the  thirtenth).  Wher-  , 
fore  the  right  lines  LM,M  N,N  P,P  Q^,QJ.,and  t 
the  red  of  the  right  lines  which  loyne  together 
two  centres  of  the  bafes ,  and  which  fubtende 
the  equall  angles  contayned  vnder  the  fayd  equall 
perpendicular  lines,  are  equall  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther(by  the4.ofthe  firft )  .  Wherefore  the  trian¬ 
gles  OLM,OMN,ONP,OPQ,0  QL, and 
the  reft  of  the  triangles  which  are  fee  at  the  cen¬ 
tres  of  the  pentagons,  are  equilater  and  equall. 

Now  forafmuch  as  the  iz.pentagons  of  a  dodeca¬ 
hedron  containe 60. plainc  fuperficiall  angles, of 
which  6o.euery  thre  make  one  folide  angle  of  the 
dodecahedron,it  followeth  that  a  dodecahedron 
hath  zo.folideangles:  but  eche  of  thofe  folide  an¬ 
gles  is  fubcededof  ech  ofthe  triangles  ofthe  Ico- 
jahedron,namely,of  ech  of  thofe  triangles  which 
ioyne  together  the  centres  of  the  pentagos  which 
make  the  folide  angle,  as  we  haue  before  proued.  Wherefore  the  10.  equall  and  equilater  triangles 
which  fubtende  the  20.  folide  angles  of  the  dodecahedron  ,and  haue  their  fides  which  are  drawne 
from  the  centres  ofthe  pentagons  common, doo  make  an  Icofahedron  (  by  the  2?.  definition  ofthe  e* 
leuenth)  rand  it  is  inferibed  in  the  dodecahedron  geuen  (by  the  firft  definition  of  this  booke)  for  that 
the  angles  thereof  doo  all  at  one  time  touch  the  bales  of  the  dodecahedron.Wherefore  in  a  dodecahe¬ 
dron  geuen, is  inferibed  an  Icofahedron ‘.which  was  required  to  be  done. 


f  The  8.  Propofition.  T  he  8 . Probleme , 

In  a  dodecahedron  geuen  yto  include  a  cube * 


Efcribe(by  the  i7.of  the  thirtenth)a  dodecahedron. And  by  the  fame,tak*  the  n.  fides 
of  the  cube, eche  ofwhich  fubtena  one  angle  of  eche  of  the  iz.  bales  of  the  dodecahe¬ 
dron  :for  the  fide  of  the  cube  fubtendeth  the  angle  of  the  pentagon  of  the  dodecahe- 
dron,by  the  2  .corollary  of  the  17.  ofthe  thirtenth  .  If  therefore  in  the  dodecahedron 
delcribed  (by  the  felfe  fame  i7.  propofition)  we  draw  the  12.  right  lines  fubtendedvn- 
,der  the  forefayd  12  .angles ,  and  ending  in  8.  angles  of  the  dodecahedron ,  and  concur¬ 
ring 


o/Suclides  Elementes. 


ring  together  in  fuch  fort  that  they  be  in  like  fort  fituate, 
as  it  was  plainely  proued  in  that  proportion ,  then  lhall 
it  be  manueft  ,  that  the  right  lines  drawue  in  this  dode- 
cahedron  from  the  forefayd  S  .  angles  thereof  doo  make 
the  forefayd  cube,which  therefore  is  included  in  the  do¬ 
decahedron  ,  for  that  the  fides  of  the  cube  are  drawnein 
the  fides  of  the  dodecahedron ,  and  the  angles  of  the 
fame  cube  are  fetin  the  angles  ofthefaid  dodecahedron. 
As  forexamole  take  4.  pentagons  o'fa  dodecahedron, 
namely  A  G I  B  Q,B  H  C  N  0,C  K  E  D  Nand  D  F  A  O- 
N.And  draw  thefe  rightlines  A  B,B  C,CD,D  A  Which 
fower  right  lines  make  a  fquare  :  for  that  eche  of  thofe 
right  lines  doo  fubtend  equall  angles  of  equall  penta¬ 
gons^  the  angles  which  thofe  4. right  lines  cotaine  are 
right  angles,as  we  proued  in  the  conftru&ion  of  the  do¬ 
decahedron,  in  the  i7.propofitio  before alledged.  Wher 
fore  the  fixe  bafes  being  fquares,  do  make  a  cube  (by  the 
a  1. definition  of  the  eleuenth )  and  for  that  the  8.angles 
of  the  fayd  cube  are  fet  in  8.  angles  of  the  dodecaheeron, 
therefore  is  the  fayd  cube  infcribed  in  the  dodecahedron 
(by  the  firft  diffinition  of  this  booke  )  .  Wherefore  in  a 
dodecahedron  is  infcribed  a  cube  :  which  was  required 
to  be  doone. 


f  The  9.  rPropoJiti<m.  T he  p.Trohleme , 


In  a  (Dodecahedron geuen  to  include  an  Offiohedron* 

BJjt  Vppofe  that  the  dodecahedron  ge 
j|.uen  be  A  B  G  D.  Now(by  the  3. 

^  i;  correllary  of  the  17. of  the  thirteth 
b‘  take  thetf.fides  which  are  oppofite 
the  one  to  the  other,  thofe  6.fides,I  faye 
whofe  fedlions  wherin  they  are  deuided  in¬ 
to  two  equal  partes,  are  coupled  by  three 
right  lines  which  in  the  centre  of  the  fphere, 
wherin  the  Dodecahedron  is  contained,doe 
cut  the  one  the  other  perpendicularly.  And 
let  the  poyntes  wherin  the  forfayde  fides  are 
cut  into  two  equal  partes  be  A,B,G,D,C,I. 

And  let  the  forefaid  thre  right  lines  ioyning 
together  the  faide  fe&ions  be  A  B,  G  D  and 
Cl.  And  let  the  centre  of  the  fphere  be  E. 

Now  forafmuch  as  (by  the  forefaid  corrella- 
ry)thofe  thre  right  lines  are  equal,  it  folow- 
eth  (by  the  4.of  the  firft)  that  the  right  lines 
fuhteding  the  right  angles  which  they  make 
at  the  centre  of  the  fphere,  whiche  right  an¬ 
gles  are  contained  vnder  the  halues  of  the  laid  three  right  lines,are  equal  the  one  to  the  other:  that  is, 
the  right  lines  A  G,G  B,B  D,D  A,C  A,C  G,C  B,C  D,  and  I  A,I  G,I B,I  D  are  equal  the  one  to  the  o- 
ther.Wherfore  alfo  the  8  .triangles  C  A  G,C  G  B,C  B  D,C  D  A,T  A  G,I  G  B,  I B  D  &  I D  A  are  equal 
and  equilater.And  therefore  A  G  B  D  C I  is  an  O&ohedron  by  the  13. definition  oftheeleueth.)  And 
the  fayd  Oftahedron  is  included  in  the  dodecahedron  (by  the  firft  definition  of  this  booke: )  for  that 
all  the  angles  thereof  doe  at  one  time  touch,  the  fides  of  the  dodecahedron.  Wherefore  in  the  dodeca¬ 
hedron  geuen, is  included  an  Odohedron:  which  was  required  to  be  done. 


tf  The  io.Tropojttion.  The  iofProbleme .* 

In  a  Dodecahedron  geuen }  to  infcribe  an  equilater  trilater  ( Pyramis . 


ntor 


|§fe§gfc,Vpp0fe  that  the  Dodecahedron  geuen,be  ABC  D,of  which  Dodecahedron  take  thre  bafes 
^(^^^meting  at  the  poynt  S,namelv  thefe  thre  bafes  ALSIK,  DNSLE  and  S I B  R  M  :  and  of 
thofe  thre  bafes  take  the  three  angles  at  the  poynts  A,B,D :  and  draw  thefe  right  lines  A  B, 
D  and  D  A;and  let  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  containing  the  dodecahedron  be  S  O,  and 

XXx.i.  then 


VemonftM- 

thn . 


ConUratlkth 


VemonSm* 
tim « 


Conftruftfon. 


The fiftmth  *Boo%e 


Demonffra- 

t'm* 


then  draw  thfe  right  lines  A  C>,B  O  and  D  O  :Nowforafmuch  as /by  the  if.  of  the  thirienth  )  the  an* 
gles  of  the  dodecahedron  are  fetin  the  fuperficiesofthc  fpfoere  defcribed  about  the  Dodecahedron  t 
therefore  if  vpon  the  diameter  S  0,and  by  thepoynt  A,be  defcribed  a  femicircle, it  fhall  make  the  an* 
gle  S  A  O  a  right  angle  (by  the  3 1  .of  the  third.)  And likewifeif  the  lame  femicircle  be  drawne  by  the 
poyntes  D  and  B,it  mail  alfo  make  the  angles  S  B  0,and  S  D  O  right  angles.  Wherefore  the  diameter 
5  O  containeth  in  power  bothe  the  lines  S  A,  A  O,or  the  lines  S  B,B  O, or  els  S  D,D  O,  but  the  line* 
S  A,S  D,S  B  are  equal  the  one  to  the  other  ,for  they  cchefubtendone  of  the  angles  of  equal  pentagos. 
Wherfore  the  other  lines  remaining>natnely,A  Q,B  Q,D  O  are  equal  the  one  to  the  other  .And  by  the 
feme  reafon  maybe  proued  that  the  diameter  HD  which  fubtendeth  the  two  right  lines  HA,  AD, 
containeth  in  power  both  the  feid  two  right  lines,and  alfo  containeth  in  power  bothe  the  right  line* 
H  B  andB  D, which  two  right  lines  italfo  fuhcendeth.And  moreouer  by  the  feme  reafon  the  diameter 
A  C,  which  fubtendeth  the  right  lines  C  B  and  B  A,containeth  in  po  wer  both  the  feid  right  Lines  C  B 
and  B  A.  But  the  right  lines  H  A,H  B  and  C  B 
are  equal  the  one  to  the  other,  for  that  eche 
of  them  alfo  fubtendeth  one  of  the  angles  of 
equal  pentagons  ?  wherfore  the  right  lines  re- 
maining,namely,A  D,  B  D,andB  A  are  equal 
the  one  to  the  other.  And  by  the  feme  reafon 
may  be  proued  that  eche  of  thofe  right  lines 
AD,B  Dand  B  A  is  equal  to  eche  of  theright 
lines  A  0,B  O  and  D  O.  Wherefore  the  fixe  p 
right  lines  AB,BD,DA,  A0,BO,  &  DO  arc 
equal  the  one  to  the  other.Andtherefore  the 
mangles  which  are  made  of  the,  namely,  the 
triangles  A  B  D,A  O  B,A  O  D  and  B  O  D  are 
equal  and  equilater:  which  triangles  therfore 
do  make  a  pyramis  ABDO,  whofe  bafe  is  A- 
B  D  and  toppe  the  poynt  O.  Eche  of  the  an¬ 
gles  of  which  pyramis,namely,  the  angles  at 
the  pointes  A,B,D,0,doe  in  the  felfe  fame 
pointes  touche  the  angles  of  theDodecahe- 
dron.  Wherfore  the  laid  pyramis  is  inferibed 
in  the  Dodecahedron,  (by  the  firft  diffinition 
of  this  boke,)  Wherefore  in  a  Dodecahedron 
geuen,  is  inferibed  a  trilater  equilater  pyra¬ 
mis  :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

f  The  i 1.  (proportion.  T be  t  i.Trobleme. 

In  an  Icofahedr on  geuen  }to  inferibea  cube. 

■  T  \vasmanifeftbythe7.ofthisbooke,that  the  angles  of  a  Dodecahedron  are  fetin  thecen- 
tres  of  the  bafes  of  the  Icofehedron.  And  by  the  8  .of  this  boke,ir  was  proued,that  the  angles 
’  ofa  cube  are  fetin  the  angles  of  a  Dodecahedron.  Wherefore  the  felfe  fern  tangles  of  the 

_ ^ .  J  cube,fhall  of  neceifitie  be  fet  in  the  centres  of  the  bafes  of  Icofehedron .  Wherfore  the  cube 

ihalbe  inferibed  in  the  Icofehedron(by  the  firft  diffinition  of  this  boke.J  Wherfore  in  an  IcofehedroS 
geuen^s included  a  cube: which  was  required  to  be  done. 

f  The  ti.  Propoftion.  The  iz.Probleme. 

In  an  Icofahedr  on  geuenpto  infiribe  a  trilater  equilater  pyramis. 

Y  the  former  propofition  it  was  manifeft,that  the  angles  of  a  cube  are  fet  in  the  centres  of 
the  bafes  of  the  Icofehedron  .Andfby  the  firft  ©f  this  booke^it  was  playne  that  the  foure  an¬ 
gles  of  a  pyramis  are  fet  in  foure  angles  of  a  cube.  Wherefore  it  is  euiden  t,by  the  firft  diffini® 
_ rion  of  this  booke,that  a  pyramis  deferibed  of  right  lines  ioyning  together  thefe  foure  cen¬ 
tres  of  the  bafes  of  the  Icofehedron, Ihalbe  inferibed  in  the  feme  Icofehedron .  Wherefore  in  an  Icofa- 
dron  geuen,is  inferibed  an  equilater  trilater  pyramis :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

Tbt 


of  Suclides  Element eu 


fThe  13, Problem?  The  ts.PropoJition . 

In  a  Cubegeuen }  to  infcribe  a  -Dodecahedron. 


Ake  a  Cube  A  D  F  L .  And  diuide  euery  one  of  the  fides  therofinto  two  equall  partes 
inthepointes  T,H,K,P  :  G,L,M,F  :and  pkQf.  And  drawethefe right  lines  TK, 
G  F,  p  Qj  H  k,  P  f,  and  L  M  :  which  lines  againe  diuide  into  two  equall  partes  in  the 
pointes  N,V,Y,I,Z,X .  And  draw  thefe  right  lines  N  Y,V  X,  and  I Z  :  Now  the  three 
lines  N  Y,  V  X,  and  I Z,  together  with  the  diameter  of  the  cube,  {hall  cut  the  one  the 
other  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  centre  of  the  cube,  by  the  3?.  of  the  eleuenth  :  let 
that  centre  be  the  point  O .  And  not  to 
{land  long  about  the  demonlhation,  vn- 
drriland  all  thefe  right  lines  to  be  equal! 
and  parallels  to  the  fides  of  the  cube  and 
to  cut  the  one  the  other  right  angled 
wife ,  by  the  19 .  of  the  firft  .  Let  their 
halfes, namely,  F  V,G  V,H  I, and  k  I, and 
the  red  fuch  like,  be  diuided  by  an  ex¬ 
treme  and  meane  proportion,  by  the  30. 
of  the  fixth :  whofe  greater  fegmets  let  be 
the  lines  F  S ,  G  B,  H  C,and  1c  E,&c.  and 
drawe  thefe  right  lines  G  I,G  E,B  C,and 
BE.  Nowforafmuch  as  the  line  Glis^j 
equall  to  the  whole  line  GV,  which  is 
the  halfe  of  the  fide  of  the  cube :  and  the 
line  I E  is  equall  to  the  line  B  V,  that  is, 
to  thelelfefegmet :  therfore,the  fquares 
of  the  lines  G I  and  I E,  are  triple  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  GB,  by  the  4.ofthe 
thirtenth  :  Butvnto  the  fquares  of  the 
lines  GI  and  IE,  the  fquare  of  the  line 
G  E  is  equall,  by  the  47  .of  the  firfi  :  for 
the  angle  G  IE  is  a  right  angle;  Where¬ 
fore  the  fquare  of  the  line  G  E  is  triple 
to  the  fquare  of  the  line  GB .  And  foral- 
much  as  the  line  FG  is  erefled  perpen¬ 
dicularly  to  the  plaine  A  G  k  L ,  by  the 
4.of  the  eleuenth  :  for  it  is  erefted  per¬ 
pendicularly  to  the  two  lines  A  G  and 
G I :  therefore  the  angle  B  G  E  is  a  right 

angle  :  for  the  line  G  E  is  drawen  in  /  ,, 

the  plaine  A  G  k  L .  Wherefore  the  line 
B  E ,  containing  in  power  the  two  lines 
B  G  and  G  E ,  by  the  47.  of  the  firft, 

is  in  power  quadruple  to  the  line  G  B  (  for  the  line  G  E  was  proued  to  be  in  power  triple  to  the  feme 
line  GB):  Wherefore  the  line  B  E  is  in  length  double  to  the  line  B  G,  by  the  zo.of  the  fixth  .  But  (by 
conftru&ion  )  the  line  C  E  is  double  to  the  line  I E  :  Wherefore  the  halfes  G  B  and  I  E,  are  in  propor¬ 
tion  the  one  to  the  other,  as  their  doubles  B  E  and  C  E  ;  by  the  rj  .of  the  fifth.  Wherefore  the  lineCB 
is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  B  E  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion .  And  forafmuch  as 
the  felfe  fame  thing  may  be  proued  touching  the  line  B  C  :  therefore  the  lines  B  E  and  B  C,  are  equal!, 
making  an  Ifofceles  triangle.  Now  let  vs  proue  that  three  angles  of  the  Pentagon  of  the  Dodecahedron 
are  fet  at  the  pointes  B,C,E  :  and  the  other  two  angles  are  fet  betwene  the  lines  B  C  and  B  E. 


Forafmuch  as  the  circle  which  containeth  the  triangle  BCE  circumfcribeth  the  Pentagon  whofe 
fide  is  the  line  C  E,  by  the  1  r  .of  the  fourth :  Extend  the  plaine  of  the  triangle  B  C  E,by  the  parallel  lines 
d  B  and  H  E,  cutting  the  line  AD,  namely,  the  diameter  of  A  D  the  bale  of  the  cube  in  the  point  I ; 
and  let  it  cut  the  line  Ah  the  diameter  of  the  cube  in  the  point  m.  And  by  the  point  I  drawe  in  the 
bafe  A  D ,a  parallel  line  vnto  the  line  A  d  ;  which  let  bell.  And  forafmuch  as  from  the  triangle  A  H  N 
is,  by  the  parallel  line  1 1,  taken  away  the  triangle  A 1 1,like  ynto  the  whole  triangle  A  H  N,by  the  Co¬ 
rollary  of  the  i .  of  the  fixth :  the  lines  A 1,  and  i  I,  {hall  be  equall.  But  as  the  line  H  A  is  to  the  line  A  d, 
fo  ( by  the  z.of  the  fixth  )  is  the  line  H 1  to  the  line  1 1, or  to  the  line  1  A,  which  is  equall  to  the  line  1 1. 
And  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  HA»(  which  is  halfe  the  fide  of  the  cube  )  is,  as  before  hath  bene 
proued,  the  line  Ad,  that  is,  the  line  GB,  which  is  equall  to  the  line  Ad  (by  the  33.  of  the  firft). 

XXx.ij .  Wherefore 


Firft  pift  of 
theeanfim - 
ikn. 


Firft  part  of 

the  demon* 


Second  pan 

of  the  con* 
flruftion. 

Second  part 
of  the  De 
monjlrathn. 


Thiri  part  of 
the  centime* 
sum . 


7'hjrd  part  of 
the  demon  - 
jhratsW?  - 


1* 


Wherefore  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  H 1  is  the  line  1 A  .  And  as  the  whole  line  H 1  is  to  the  grea¬ 
ter  fegment,  fo  fhall  the  fame  greater  fegment  Hi  be  to  the  lefle  fegment  lA,by  the  j.  of  the  thir- 
tenth  ,  Wherefore  the  line  HA  is  di-  , 

uided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  pro¬ 
portion  in  the  point  1 .  But  in  the  tri-  y|  ,j 

angle  AHN,  the  line  NA,  which  is 
drawen  fro  the  centre  of  the  bafe  A  D, 
is' in  the  point  I  cut  like  v-nto  the  line 
AH,  by  the  parallel  line  1 1  (by  thefame 
fecond  of  the  fixth  )  :  for  the  lines  H  N 
and  11,  are  parallels,  by  confirudhon. 

Wherefore  the  line  NA 
I  diuided- by  an  extreme  and 
proportion  by  the  fuperficies  d  B  E  H. 

And  forafmuch  as  the  line  YON  which 
coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite 
bafes,isa  parallel  to  the  line  HE:  A 
plaine  fuperficies  extended  by  the  line 
Y  O  N,  parallel  wife  to  the  plaine  dB- 
E  H  :  the  two  plaines  fhall  cut  the  lines 
A  O  and  A  N  (  the  femidiameter  of  the 
cube,  and  the  femidiameter  of  the  bafe 
A  D )  into  the  felfe  fame  proportions  in 
the  pointed  m  and  I ,  by  the  i  7.  of  the 
•eleueth.  B  u  t  the  line  A  N  is  in  (he  point  - 
1  di  uided  by  an  extreme  &  meane  pro¬ 
portion  :  Wherefore  the  femidiameter 
■of  the  cube 'is  in'the  point  m  diuided  by 
an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  by 
the  plaine.  of  the  triangle  BCE-  And 
forainmehas  therefiofthetrianglesde- 

ferihed  in  the  cube  after  the  like  maner,  may  by  the  fame  teafons  be  proued  to  be  in  a  plaine  which 
cutteth  the  femidiameter  of  the  cube  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  :  it  is  maftifefl  that  three 
plaines  of  the  Dodecahedron  fhall  vnder  euery  angle  ofthe  cube  conctirre  in  one  8r  the  folffame  point 
of  the  femidiameter  being  cut  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  .  Now  refleth  to  proue  that  the 
right  lines  which  couple  that  point  of  the  femidiameter  with  the  angles  of  the  triangle  BE  Ca  aree- 
quall :  whereby  may  fee  proued  that  the  Pentagons  are  equilater,and  equiangle. 

- - -  A  -f'  '’i  !• 

Take  the  twobafes  ofthe cube. 

Whereon  are  fet  the  triangle  BCE, 
namely ,  the  bafes  A  F  and  A  k  ,  take 
alfo  the  fame  diameter  of  the  cube 
that  was  before,  namely,  A  h  •.  and  let 
the  fide  fet  at  the  poynt  n,  of  the  fedti- 
on  of  the  diameter  by  an  extreame  & 
tneanepioportion.be  the  line  C  n  or 
B  n  :  and  let  the. centre  ofthe  cube  ,be 
as  before  the  poinVO.  And  extend  the 
ImeC'hto  the  line  Bd, and  let  it  con-  <• 
curre  wirh  itirt'the point  a.  And  foraf¬ 
much  as  the.  plaine  which  pafieth  by 
the  1  iiie  If  C  E  and  the  centre  O  ( cut¬ 
ting  the  tube  into  two  equall  partes) 
is  parallel  to  A  F  the  bafe  ofthe  cube 
by  conftrudlion  imagine  that  by  the 
poynt  n,  be  extended  a  playne  fuper¬ 
ficies  parallel  to  the  former  parallel 
playnes,  which  fhall  cutte  the  femidi¬ 
ameter  O  A  &  the  line  C  a, proporti¬ 
onally  in  the  point  n,  by  the  17*  of  the 
eieuenth  :  For  thofe  lines  doo  touch 
the  extreame  parallel  plaines  exten¬ 
ded  by  the  lines  H  Eana  E  O ,  and  by 
the  lines  A  d  and  d  B.  But  it  is  prouea 
that  the  line  O  A  is  diuided  by  an  ex¬ 
treame  and  meane  proportion  in  the 


V  '  >  »-*  ‘  *  7  I 


poynt, 


ofEuclides  Elementes .  FoL\6oa 

poyntn  :  wherefore  the  line  Ca,  is  alfo  diuided  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion  in  the  poyntn, 
Agayne  forafmuch  as  BCEis  an  Ifofcels  triangle,  and  it  is  proued  that  the  lineB  I  cutteth  the  bale 
G  E  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  poynt  I,  the  angles  B I C  and  B  I E  ihall  be  right  angles .  Imagine  by 
the  line  B I  and  the  centre  O  a  plaine  to  pafie  (cutting  the  cube  into  two  equall  partes  )  parallel  to  the 
bafe  A  D .  And  vnto  thofe  plaines  let  there  be  imagined  an  other  parallel  plaine  paffing  by  the  poynt 
n :  which  let  be  n  e  :  which  fball  cutte  the.  femidiameter  A  O  and  the  halfe  fide  of  the  cube ,  namely, 
the  line  I H,  tike, in  the  pointes  n  and  ebv  the  17.  of  the  eleuenth  .  Wherefore  the  line  I H  is  in  the 
poynt  e  diuided  by  an  extreame  &  meane  proportio.Wherfore  the  line  H  e  is  equall  to  the  line  C I  or 
I E :  namely,ech  are  lefie  fegm  ets.And  forafmuch  as  the  line  I  e  is  to  the  line  I  C(which  is  equall  to  the 
line  E  H)as  the  whole  is  to  the  greater  fegment ,  take  away  from  the  whole  line  I  e  the  greater  fegmet 
I C :  there  Ihall  remayne  the  lefie  fegment  C  e  by  the  j  .of  the  thirtenth  .  Wherefore  the  line  I  e  is  diui¬ 
ded  by  an  extreame  &  meane  proportion  in  the  point  C.  Againe  vnto  the  fame  playnes  imagine  an  o- 
ther  playne  to  pafie  by  the  point  a, parallel  wife,  and  let  the  fame  be  a  g.Now  then  ’(  by  the  fame  17 .  of 
the  eleuenth  )  the  lines  C  a  and  C  g  are  in  like  fort  cut  in  the  pointes  n  and  e.  But  the  line  C  a  was  in 
the  point  n  cutte  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion ,  wherefore  the  line  C  g  Ihall  be  cutte  in  the 
poynt  e,by  an  extreame  &  meane  proportion. But  the  line  I C  is  to  the  line  C  e,as  the  greater  fegm  enc 
is  to  the  lefie  twherfore  the  line  C  e,  is  to  the  line  e  g,as  the  greater  fegment  to  the  leffe:and  therefore 
their  proportion  is  as  the  whole  line  I C  is  to  the  greater  fegment  C  e,and  as  the  greater  fegment  Ce 
is  to  the  lefie  fegment  eg:  wherefore  the  whole  line  C  e  g  which  maketh  the  greater  fegment  and  the 
lefie, is  equall  to  the  whole  line  I C  or  I E .  And  forafmuch  as  two  parallel  plaine  fuperfkieces  (namely, 
that  which  is  extended  by  I O  B  and  that  which  is  extended  by  the  line  a  g  )  are  cutte  by  the  playne  of 
the  triangle  BCE,  which  paffeth  by  the  lines  a  g  and  I  B,their  common  fedtionsagand  IB  Ihall  be 
parallels  (by  the  itf.of  the  eleuenth  )  .  But  the  angle  BIEorBICisa  right  angle ,  wherefore  the  angle 
a  g  C  is  alfo  a  right  angle(by  the  z^.of  the  firft)and  thofe  right  angles  are  contayned  voder  equall  fides, 
namely, the  line  g  C  is  equall  to  the  line  C  I,and  the  line  a  g  to  theline  B  I,by  the  33  .of  the  firfi  :  wher- 
fore  the  bafes  C  a  and  C  B  are  equall, by  the  4.of  the  firfi.But  of  the  line  C  B  theline  C  E  was  proued  to 
be  the  greater  fegment :  wherefore  the  lame  line  C  E  is  alfo  the  greater  fegment  of  theline  C  a  :  but 
c  n  was  alfo  the  greater  fegment  of  the  fame  line  C  a.  Wherefore  vnto  theline  C  E,the  line  cn  which 
is  the  fide  of'ths  dodecahedron ,  and  is  fet  at  the  diameter,is  equall.And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  refi  of 
the  fides, which  are  fer  at  the  diameter  may  be  proued  equall  to  lines  equall  to  the  line  C  E.  Wherfore 
the  pentagon  infcribed  in  the  circle  where  in  is  contained  the  triangle  B  C  Eis,by  the  1  i.of  the  fourth 
equiangle,and  equilater.  And  rdrafmch  as  two  pentagons ,  fet  vpon  euery  one  of  the  bafes  of  the  cube 
do©  make  a  dodecahedron,and  fixe  bafes  of  the  cube  doo  receaue  twelue  angles  of  the  dodecahedron: 
and  the  S.femidiameters  doo  in  the  pointes  where  they  are  cutte  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proporti¬ 
on  receaue  the  reft :  therefore  the  iz .pentagon  bafes  contayningzo.  folide  angles  dob  infcribe  the  do¬ 
decahedron  in  the  cube:  by  the  1 .  diifinition  of  this  booke .  Wherefore  in  acubegeuen  is  infcribed  a 
dodecahedron :  which  was  required  to  be  done. 

Firft  Corollary. 

The  diameter  of  the  Sphere  ^hicb  contained  the  dodecahedron 3  contained 
in  poloer  thefe  ttyo  (ides .namely ,  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron ,  and  the  fide  of 

de  cube  therein  the  Dodecahedron  is  infcribe  dioxin  the  firft  figure  a  line  drawnefrom 
the  centre  O,to  the  poyntB  the  angle  of  the  Dodecahedron,namely  the  line  O  B,X:ontaineth  in  pow¬ 
er  thefe  two  lines  O  V  the  halfe  fide  of  the  cube,and  V  B  the  halfe  fide  of  the  dodecahedron,by  the  47. 
of  the  firft.  Wherefore  by  the  1  f.of  the  fiueth,the  double  of  the  line  O  B,which  is  the  diameter  of  the 
fphere  containing  the  Dodecahedron,  containeth  in  power  the  double  of  the  other  lines  O  Vand  VBa 
which  are  the  fides  of  the  cube, and  of  the  dodecahedron. 

Second  Corollary. 

T he  fide  of  a  cube  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion ,  maketh  the 
lejfe  fegment  the fide  of  the  dodecahedron  infcribed  in  it:  and  the  greater feg* 
ment  the fide  of  the  cube  infcribed  in  defame  Dodecahedron:?™  it  was  beforepro- 

ued,  that  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the  greater  fegment  of  B  E  the  fide  of  the  triangle  B  E  C :  but 
the  fide  B  E(which  is  equall  to  the  lines  G  B  and  S  F)is  the  greater  fegmet  of  G  F  the  fide  of  the  cube: 
which  line  B  Effubtending  the  angle  ofthepentagon)was(by  the  8.of  this  booke)thefide  ofthe  cube 
infcribed  in  the  dodecahedron . 


XXx.iij. 


Third 


CmfttuUm* 


Denton  fir a- 

non* 


7* hefiftenth  Hooke 

Third  Corollary. 

The  fide  of  a  cube }  is  equal  to  the  Jides  of  a  dodecahedron  infcribed  in  itx 
■and  cimmifcrtbed  about  it  Jot  it  was  manifeft  by  this  propofition.that  the  fide  of  a  cube  ma- 
ieth  the  lefle  iegro  ent,the  fide  of  a  Dodecahedron  infcribed in  it,  namely,  as  in  the  firft  figure  the  line 
B  S  the  nde  ot  the  Dodecahedron  infcribed  ,is  the  lefle  fegmet  of  the  line  G  F  the  fide  of  the  cube.  And 
it  wasproued  in  the  i7.of  thethirten  th,that  the  fame  fide  of  the  cube  fubtedeth  the  angle  of  the  penta- 
^on  oi  the  Dodecahedron  circamfcribed :  and  therefore  it  maketh  the  greater  fegment  the  fide  of  the 
Dodecahedron  or  of  the  pentagon,by  the  firft  corollary  of  the  fame.  Wherefore  it  is  equal  to  bothe 
thofefegments. 

The  i+f?  robleme.  T he  14/Propojitwn, 

In  a  cubegeuen,  to  infcribe  an  Icojahedron. 


Vppofe  that  the  cubegeuen 


\t  / 

Vl, 

•  \  a 

vx 

./I 


1>  - 


••s 


E 


K\ 


whofe  bafes  let  be  the  points 
D,E,G,H.,I,K  :  by  whiche 
poyntes  draw  in  the  bafes  vnto  t'heo- 
ther  fids  parallels  not  touching  the  one 
the  other  .And  deuidc  the  lines  drawn 
from  the  centres  ,  as  rhe  line  DT. 

&c.  by  an  extreme  and  meane  pro¬ 
portion  in  the  poyntes  A,  F:  L,  M: 

N,B:P,QjR,S:C,0;by  thejo.of  the 
fixth  :and  let  the  greater  fegmentes  be 
about  the  cetres.  And  draw  thefe  right 
lines,  A  L,A  G,A  M,and  TG.And  for- 
afmuch  as  the  lines  cut  are  parallels  to 
thefides  of  the  cube  :  they  ihall  make 
right  angles  the  one  with  the  other  by 
the  19.0?  the  firft  :  and  forafmuche  as 
they  are  equal :  their  fedhons  (hall  be  e- 
qual,for  that  thefeftions  are  like  by  the 
a. of  thefourtenth.Wherfore  the  line  T 
G  is  equal  to  the  line  D  T,  for  they  are 
eche,halfe  fides  of  the  cube.  Wherfore 
the  fquare  of  the  whole  line  TG,and  of 
the  Ieffe  fegment  T  A,  is  triple  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  AD  the  greater  feg- 
ment(by  the  4.of  the  thirteth).But  the 
line  A  G  containeth  in  power  the  lines 

AT&T  G,for  the  angle  A  T  G  is  a  right  angle.Wherefore  the  fquare  of  the  line  A  G  is  triple  to  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  D.And  forafmuch  as  the  line  M  G  L  is  credled  perpendicularly  to  the  plain  paffing 
by  the  lines  AT,  &  which  is  parallel  to  the  bafes  of  the  cube(by  the  corollary  of  the  H.of  the  eleueth) 
therfore  the  angle  A  G  L  is  a  right  angle  .But  the  line  LG  is  equal  to  the  line  AD, for  they  are  the  grea¬ 
ter  fegments  of  equal  lines :  Wherfore  the  line  A  G  (which  is  in  power  triple  to  the  line  A  D)is  in  po¬ 
wer  triple  to  the  line  L  G.  Wherefore  adding  vnto  the  fame  fquare  of  theline  A  G,  the  fquare  ofthe 
line  L  G,the  fquare  of  the  line  A  L, which  (by  the  47  .of  the  firft)  containeth  in  power  the  two  lines  A- 
G  and  G  L,fhalbe  quadruple  to  the  line  A  D  or  L  G .  Wherefore  the  line  A  L  is  double  to  the  line  A  D 
( by  the  20. of  the  fixth  :)and  therfore  is  equal  to  theline  A  F,or  to  theline  LM.  And  by  the  fame  rea- 
fon  may  we  proue  that  euery  one  of  the  other  lines  which  couple  the  next  fe&ions  of  the  lines  cut,  2s 
the  lines  A  M,P  F,P  M,M  Q^and  the  reft  are  equal.  Wherfore  me  triangles  A  L  M,A  P  F,A  M  P,PMQ_ 
and  the  reft  fuch  like,are  equal,equiangle,and  equilater,  by  the  4.and  eigth  of  the  firft.  And  forafmuch 
as  vpon  euery  one  of  the  lines  cut  of  the  cube  are  fet  two  triangles,  as  the  triangles  A  L  M,and  BLM, 
there  fhalbe  made  12.triagles.And  forafmuch  as  vnder  euery  one  of  the  8. angles  of  the  cube, are  fub- 
tended  the  other  8. triangles, as  the  triangle  A  M  P.&c.of  12.2nd  8. triangles ,fhall  be  produced  2o.tri- 
angles  equal  and  equilater  cotaining  the  folide  of  an  Icofahedron,by  the  25  .diffinition  ofthe  eleuenth, 
which  ihalbc  infcribed  in  the  cube  geuen  A  B  C  by  the  firft  diffinition  of  this  booke.  The  inuention  of 
the  demonftration  of  this  dependeth  of  the  ground  ofthe  former.  Wherfore  in  a  cube  geuen,we  haue 
deferi bed  an  Icofahcdron  ‘.which  was  required  to  be  done. 

Firft 


vfSuclides  Elements  Foh$  41. 

Corollary. 

The  diameter  of  a  Jfibere  Which  containeth  an  leofahedron,  containeth  two 
fides /tamely  the  fide  of  the  leofahedron >  and  the  fide  of  the  cube  Which  contain 

neth  the  leofahedron. Vot  ii  we  drawe  the  line  A  B,it  fliall  make  the  angles  at  the  poynt  Aright 
angles:  for  that  it  is  a  parallel  to  the  fideS  of  the  etibe  :  wherfore  the  line  which  coupleth  theoppofite 
angles  of  the  Ieofahedronj&E  the  poynts  f  andB,eotaineth  in  power  the  line  A  B  (the  fide  of  the  cube) 
ina  the  line  A  F  (the  fide  Of  the  leofahedron)  by  the  47  *©f  the  firfl.  Which  line  F  B  is  equal  to  the  dia-" 
meter  of  the  fphere/whieh  containeth  the  leofahedron, by  the  deirtsnllration  ofths  16,  of  the  thirteth* 
./ 

^  Second  Corollary* 

T  he fix  oppofite fides  of  the  leofahedron  deuided  into  two  equal parts:  their 
JeBions  are  coupled  by  three  equal  right  lines 9  cutting  the  one  the  other  into  two 
equal  partes,  and  perpendicularly  in  the  Centre  of  the Jphere  'Which  containeth 

the  leofahedron.  For  thofe  three  lines  are  the  three  lines  which  couple  the  centres  of  the  bafes  of 

the  cube,which  do  in  fuche  fort  in  the  centre  of  the  cube, cut  the  one  the  other,by  the  corollary  of  thd 
third  of  this  booke,and  therfore  are  equal  to  the  fides  of  the  cube.But  right  lines  drawn  e  from  the  ce- 
tre  of  the  cube  to  the  angles  of  the  leofahedron,  euery  oneof  them  fhall  fubtend  the  halfc  fide  of  the 
cube,andthehalfefidcof  the  leofahedron  (which  halfe  fides  containe  a  right  angle)  wherefore  thofe 
linesare  equal.Wherby  it  is  manifell  that  the  forefaid  centre  is  the  centre  of  the  fphtere  Which  contai¬ 
ned!  the  leofahedron. 

#  Third  Corollary. 

T  he  fide  of a  cube  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion $  maheth  the 
greater  figment  the fide  of an  leofahedron  defiribed  in  it.  For  thehalf  fide  of  the  cube 

maketh  tne  halfe  of  the  fide  of  the  Icofahc  dron  the  greater  fegment :  wherefore  alfo  the  whole  fide  of 
the  cube,maketh  the  whole  fide  of  the  leofahedron  the  greater  fegment  by  the  1  y  .of  the  fifth  e,  for  the 
fedions  are  like  by  the  2  .of  the  fourtenth. 

^Fourth  Corollary. 

T he  fides  and  bafes  of  the  leofahedron ,  which  are  oppofite  the  one  to  the  6* 

ther/re  parallels  yorafmuch  as  eiiery  one  of  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  leofahedron,  may  be  in  the 
parallel  lines  of  the  cube,  namely,in  thofe  parallels  which  are  oppofite  in  the  cube  *  and  the  triangles 
which  are  made  of  parallel  lines, are  parallels,by  the  if  .of  the  eleuenth:  therfore  the  oppofite  triangle 
of  the  Icofahedron,as  alfo  the  fides^are  parallels  the  one  to  the  other. 


fTk  is,  Probieme.  The  i s.  Tropofition. 

In  an  leofahedron  geuen,  to  inferibe  an  OBohedron. 


I  Vppofe  that  the  leofahedron  geuen  be  A  C  D  F  :  and  by  the  former  feeoiid  C6rolfei¥, 
let  there  be  take  the  three  right  lines  which  cut  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  partes 
|  perpendicularly,  and  which  couple  the  fe&ions  into  two  equall  partes  of  the  fides  of 
|  the  leofahedron  :  which  let  be  B  E,G  H,and  K  L,  cutting  the  one  the  other  in  the  point 
_ *  I .  And  drawe  t-hefe  fight  lines  B  G,  GE,  E  Hi  and  H  B  i  And  forafmuch  as  the  an¬ 
gles  at  the  point  l  are  (by  conflru&ion  )  right  angles, 
iftd  are  contained  vnder  equal! lilies :  the  bafes  GB  and 
H  E  fhall  make  a  fquare,  by  the  4.©f  the  firfl .  Likewyfo 
f&te  thofe  bafes  fliall  be  equall  the  lines  drawfcn  front 
the  poiates  K  and  L,to  euery  one  of  thepointes  B,G  > 

:  And  therefore  the  triangles  Which  rhake  the  py- 
famis  BGEflK,  fhall  be  equall  and  equilater  .  Anti  by 
the  fame  reafon  fhall  the  rell  of  the  triangles  which  fiiakS 
the  other  pyratnis  B  GE  H  L  vpun.  the  fame  baft  B  Gi¬ 
lt  H,  be  equall  and  equilater  .  Wherefore  B  G  EH  KL 
{half  be  an  O&ohedroft  (  by  the  13  .definition  of  the  die- 
uCrtth) :  And  fhall  be  infcribed  in  the  leofahedron, by  the 
firfl  definition  of  this  bookd  .  Wherefore  man  leofahe¬ 
dron  geuen,  is  inferibed  an  0&©hedrorf  •.  Which  was  re* 
quireato  bedoOe, 

fTht 


Csnffru&k?!* 


Demon  ft  rt* 
non. 


7 he fiftenth  Hooke 

fTbe  16.  Trohleme.  The  it.'Propofition. 

In  an  0£?ohedrongeuen}to  infcribe  an  Icofahedmu 


CmUtuUm* 


Demonftra- 

tim. 


Et  there  be  taken  an  O&ohedron,  whofe  Wangles,  let  be  A,B,C,F,P,L .  And  draw  the 
lines  A  C,  B  FjPL, cutting  the  one  the  other  perpendicularly  in  the  point  R  (by  the  a. 
Corollary  of  the  i4.of  the  thirtcnth  )  .  And  let  euery  one  of  the  12. fides  of  the  O&ohe- 
dron  be  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meaoe  proportion,™  the  pointes  HjXjMjKjDjSjN, 
GjVjEjQ^,  T.  Andlet  the  greater  fegmcntes  be  thelinesB  H,B  X,FM,FK,AD,A  Q  * 
CSjCT3P  N,P  GjLV.LEt  And  drawethefe  lines  H  K,XM,GE,N  V,DS,QJT.Now 
forafmuch  as  in  the  triangle  ABF,  the  lides  are  cut  proportionally,  namely,  as  the  line 
B  H  is  to  the  line  FI  A,  fois  the  line  F  K  to  the  line  KA  (  by  thei.ofthefouretenth):  therefore  the  line 
H  K  fhallbe  a  parallel  to  the  line  B  F  (by  the  2. of  the  fixth)  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  A  C  cutteth  the 
line  H  K  in  the  point  Z,  and  the  line  Z  K  is  a  parallel  vnto  the  line  RF,  the  line  R  A  Ihall  be  cut  by  an  ex* 
tremeand  meane  proportion  in  thepoint  Z  :  by  the  2.  of  the  fixth  :  namely,  ihall  be  cut  like  vnto  the 
line  FA  :  and  the 
greater  fegmet  ther- 
of  ihall  be  the  line 
2  R  .  Vnto  the  line 
ZK  put  the  line  RO 
equall ,-  by  the  3.  of 
the  firft  :  and  drawfc 
the  line  K  O  :  now 
then,  the  line  K  O 
fliall  be  equall  to  the 
line  ZR,  bv  the  33  .of 
the  firft  .  Draw  the 
lines  KG,  K  E , 

K I .  And  forafmuch 
as  the  triangles  AR- 
F, and  AZK, are  e- 
quiangle  (by  the  tf.of  3 
the  fixth  )  the  fides 
A  Z  and  Z  K,fhall  be 
equall  the  one  to  the 
other,by  the  4.of  the 
fixth,  for  the  fides 
AR  and  RF, are  e - 
quail .  Wherfore  the 
line  Z  K  ihall  be  the 
leffe  fegment  of- the 
line  R  A .  But  if  the 

?  rearer  fegment  RZ 
e  diuided  by  an  ex¬ 
treme  &  meane  pro¬ 
portion  ,  the  greater 
fegment  tjierof  ihall 

be  the  line  Z  K ,  which  was  the  leffe  fegment  of  the  whole  line  R  A,  by  they,  of  the  thirtenth .  And  fbr- 
afmuchas  the  two  lines  FEandF  G,are  equall  to  the  two  lines  A  H  and  A  K,  namely,  ech  are  leflefeg- 
mentes  of  equall  fides  of  the  Oftohedron,  and  the  angles  H  A  K  and  E  F  G  are  equall,namely,are  right 
angles,  by  the  1 4 .  of  the  thirten  th  :  the  bafes  H  K  and  G  F  ihall  be  equally  by  the  4.of  thefiril :  And  by 
the  fame  reafon  vnto  them  may  beproued  equall  the  lines  X  My  NV,D  S,and  QJT  .  And  forafmuch  as 
the  lines  A  C,B  F,and  P  L,do  cut  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  parts,and  perpendicularly,  by  con- 
ilrudlion  .•  the  lines  H  K  and  G  E  (which  fubtend  angles  of  triangles  like  vnto  the  triangles  whofe  an¬ 
gles  the  lines  AC,  B  F,and  P  L  fubtend)  are  cut  into  two  equallpartes  in  the' pointes  Z  and  I,  by  the  4. 
of  the  fixth,  fo  alfo  are  the  other  lines  N  V,XM,D  S,QJT  (which  are  equall  vnto  the  lines  H  K  &  G  E) 
cut, 'in  like  fort,  and  they  ihall  cut  the  lines  A  G,  B  F,and  P  L  like .  Wherefore  the  line  K  O  (  which  is 
equal!  to  R  Z  )  ihall  make  the  greater  fegment  the  line  RO,  which  is  equall  to  the  line  Z  K  (for  the  grea¬ 
ter  fegment  of  RZ  was  the  line  Z  K ) :  and  therefore  the  line  O I  ihall  be  the  leffe  fegment,  when  as  the 
whole  line  RI  fs  equall  to  the  whole  line  R  Z  „  Wherefore  the  fqUares  of  the  wholeline  K  0,arid  of  the 
leffe  fegment  O:  I,  are  triple  to  the  fquare  of  the  greater  fegment  R  0,hy  the  4,of  the  thirtenth.Wher- 
fore  the  hne  IC  I,  which  containeth  in  power  the  two  lines  K  O  and  O  I,  is  in  power  triple  to  the  line 
R£>%(by  the  47. of  the  full )  ;  for  theangleKO  lisa  right  angle.  Andforafmuch  as  the lines  FE -arid 
F  G  {  which, are  the  leffe  fegmentes  of  the  fidesof  the  Qftohcdron  )  are  equall :  and  the  line  F  K  is  c6- 

i-  ,  mon. 


ofcudides  Elemmieu 


mon  to  them  both  :  and  the  angles  K  F  G  and  K  FE  (of  the  triangles  of  the  Odohedron  )  are  equali  s 
the  bafes  K  G  and  KE  fhall  (by  the  4  ofthe  firft)  be  equali  :  and  therefore  the  afigles  KJE  and  KIG 
which  they  fubtend,  are  equali  (by  the  8  .ofthe  firft  ) :  Wherefore  they  are  right  angles.hy  the  13  .ofthe 
firft:.  Wherefore  the  right  lineK  E  fwhich  containeth  in  power  the  two  lines  KI  and  IE, by  the47.of 
the  firft )  is  in  power  quadruple'to  the  line  R  O  (or  T  E  )  :  for  the  line  K I  is  proued  to  he  in  power  triple 
to  the  fame  line  R  O :  But  the  line  G  E  is  double  to  the  line  IE  :  Wherfore  the  line  G  Eisalfoin  power 
quadruple  to  the  line  I  E  (  by  the  rc.of  the  fixth  )  .  "Wherefore  the  two  lines  K  E  and  G  E  are  equalL 
And- by' the  fame  reafon,  may  the  reft  of  the  lines,namely,  H  K,  H  N,  N  V,  V  X,-X  S,  and  the  other  lines 
which  couple  the  lections  of  the  fides  of  the  Odohedron  be  proued  equali  to  the' lame  lines  KEand 
G  E .  Wherefore  the  triangles  defcribed  of  them, namely  3GF.  K,G  K  D,G  D  S,G  S  M,G  M  E,  fhall  be  e- 
qualiand  equilater,  by  the  8. of  the  firft,  making  a  folide  angle  at  the  point  G  :  which  is  therefore  the 
angle  of  an  Icofahedron,by  the  i6.o£  the  thirtenth,  and  is  fee  in  the  fedion  G  of  the  fide  P  F.  And  by 
the  fame  reafon  may  be  proued,that  the  reft  of  the  eleuen  folide  angles  of  the  Icofahedron,  are  fetiii 
thefedions  ofeuery  one  of  the  fides  ofthe  Odohedron, namelv,  in  theipointes  EjNjV.HjK^JjDjS, 
0,T  .  Wherefore  there  are  u.  angles  of  the  Icofahedron  .  Moreouer,  forafrnuch  as  euery  one  of 
the  bafes  of  the  Odohedron,  do  echecontaine  triangles  of  the  Icofahedron,  as  in  thepyramis  ABC- 
FP  (which  is  the  halfe  of  the  Odohedron)  the  triangle  F  C  P  receaueth  in  the  fedions  ofhis  fides  the 
triangle  GMS  :  and  the  triangle  C  P  B  containeth  the  triangle  N  X  S  :  and  the  triangle  BAP  contay- 
neth  the  triangle  H  N  D  :  and  moreouer  the  triangle  AP  F  containeth  the  triangle  KD  G,  and  the  fame 
may  be  proued  in  the  oppofite  pyramis  A  B  C  FL  :  Wherefore  there  fhall  be  eight  triangles  .  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  befides  thefe  triangles,  to  euery  one  of  the  folide  angles  of  the  Odohedron  are  fubtended 
two  triangles,as  the  triangles  KEG  and  M  E  G,  to  the  angle  F  :  and  the  triangles  H  N  V  and  X  N  V, 
to  the  angle  B  :  alfo  the  triangles  N  D  S  and  G  D  S,  to  the  angle  P  :  likewife  the  triangles  DHK  and 
Qji  K,  to  the  angle  A  :  Moreouer  the  triangles  E  QJT  and  V  QJT,  to  the  angle  L :  and  finally  the  tri¬ 
angles  SXM  and  TXM,  to  the  angle  C  :  thefe  ri.  triangles  being  added  to  the  8.former  triangles, fbali 
produce  zo.  triangles  equali  and  equilater  coupled  together  :  which  fhall  make  an  Icofahedron, by  the 
z  s  .definition  of  the  eleuenth  :  anditfhallbeinfcribedinthe  Odohedron  geuen  ABCFP  L,  by  the. 
firft  definition  of  this  booke  :  for  the  iz,.  angles  thereof  arefetin  u,.  like  fedions  of  the  lides  of  the 
Odohedrou .  Wherefore  in  an  Odohedrbn  geuen,  is  inferibed  an  Icofahedron. 


Firft  Corollary, 

T  he  fide  of an  equilater  triangle  being  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meant 
proportion :  a  right  line  fuhtending  within  the  triangle ,  the  angle  H>hich  is  con * 
tained  lander  the  greater fegment  and  the  lefe :  is  in  power  duple  to  the  leffe feg* 

ment  ofthe  jamejlde .  For  the  line  KE,which  fubtendeth  the  angle  KFE  of  the  triangle  AFL, 

which  angle  K  E  E  is  contained  vnder  the  two  fegmentes  K  F  &  F  E,was  proued  equali  to  the  line  H  K, 
which  containeth  in  power  the  two  leffe  fegmentes  H  A  and  A  K,  by  the  47.  ofthe  firft,  for  the  angle 
H  A  K  is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  the  line  K  E  or  H  K,  is  in  power  duple  to  the  line  A  K. 

#  Second  Corollary. 

The  hafes  of  the  Icofahedron  are  concentricall  ( that  is  ,haue  one  and  the 
felfe  fame  centre  )  H>ith  the  bafes  of  the  Offiohedron  lahtch  contajneth  it* 

For  ftippofe  that  A  B  G  be  the  bafe  of  an  Odohedron  contay- 
ning  E  C  D  the  bafe  of  an  Icofahedron  :  and  let  the  centre  of  the  " 
bafe  A  B  G  be  the  point  F .  And  drawe  thefe  right  lines  F  A,F  B, 

F  C,and  F  E.  Now  then  the  two  lines  F  A  and  A  Eihall  be  equali 
to  the  two  lines  FBand  BC  :  for  they  are  lines  drawen  from 
the  centre,  and  are  alfo  lefle  fegmentes  :  and  they  contayne  the 
halfcs  of  equali  angles .  Wherfore  (  by  the  4.of  the  firft)  the  bafes 
F  C  and  F  E  are  equali  :  and  by  the  fame  reafon  vnto  them  lhall 
be  equali  the  otherlineFD.  Wherefore  making  the  centre  the 
point  F  :  and  the  fpace  FE  deferibe  a  circle  and  it  fhall  becir- 
cumfcribed  about  the  triangle  CED  :  and  fo  fhall  the  point  F 
the  centre  of  the  bafe  of  the  Odohedron  be  the  centre  of  C  E  D 
the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron. 


rry.j. 


fThe 


ConUruftm. 


Tkmnffra- 

tin. 


Conttruttion. 


The fifienth  <Boo%e 

fThe  17.  tProbleme.  Tlx  17.  Tropojitwn. 

In  an  Odohedron  geuen  y  to  infiribe  a  {Dodecahedron, 

Vppofe  that  the  Odohedron  geuen  be  A  B  G  D  E  C  :  whofe  12  .fides  let  be  cut  by  an  ex- 
cremeand  meane  proportion,  as  in  the  former  Propofition  .  It  was  manifeft  that  of  the 
right  Ikies  which  couple  thefe  fedions,are  made  ao.triangles,of  which  8.  are  concentri- 
call  with  the  bafes  of  the  Odohedron,  by  thefecond  Corollary  of  the  former  Propor¬ 
tion.  If  therefore  in  euery  one  ofthe  centres  of  theio.triangles  beinfcribed(by  the  y.of 
this  booke )  eueiy  one  of  the  11. angles  of  the  Dodecahedron,  we  fhall  finde,  that  8.  an¬ 
gles  of  the  Dodecahedron 
arefet  in  the  8.  centres  of 
the  bafes  of  the  Odohe- 
dron:  namely  ,thefe  angles 
I,u,  d,  O,  M,  a,P,and  Xt 
and  of  the  other  12.  folide 
angles  there  are  two  in  the 
centres  of  the  two  trian¬ 
gles  which  haue  one  fide 
common  vnder  euery  one 
of  the  folide  angles  of  the 
Odohedron  :  namely,  vn¬ 
der  the  folide  angle  A,  the 
two  folide  angles,K,Z :  vn¬ 
der  the  folide  angle  B,  the^ 
two  folide  angles  H,  T ; 
vnder  the  folide  angle  G, 
the  two  folide  angles  Y,  V: 
vnder  the  folide  angle  D, 
the  two  folide  angles  F,L: 
vnder  the  folide  angle  E, 
the  two  folide  angles  S,N: 
vnder  the  folide  angle  C, 
the  two  folideangles  Q^R: 
and  forafmuch  as  in  the 
Odohedron  are  fixe  folide 
angles,  vnder  them  fliall  be 
fnbtended  1  a. folide  angles 
of  the  Dodecahedron:  and 
fo  are  made  20.  folide  an¬ 
gles  eompofed  of  i2.equall  and  equilater  faperficiall  pentagons  ( as  it  was  manifcfl,  by  the  f.  of  this 
booke)  which  therefore  containe  a  Dodecahedron  (by  the  14.  definition  of  the  eleuenth)  .  And  it  is 
infcribed  in  the  Odohedron  (by  the  1  .definition  of  this  booke  )  :  for  that  euery  onp  of  the  bafes  of  the 
Odohedron  do  receaue  angles  therof.  Wherefore  in  an  Odohedron  geuen,  is  infcribcd  a  Dodeca¬ 
hedron. 


fThe  18.  (Problems. 


The  18.  (Proportion. 


In  a  tri  later  and  equilater I*yr amis }  toinferibea  Cube. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  a  trilater  equilater  Pyramis,whofe  bale  let  be  A  B  C,  and  toppe  the 
point  D.  And  let  it  be  comprehended  in  a  Sphere,  by  the  rj.ofthethirtenth .  And  lei 
the  centre  of  that  Sphere  be  the  point  E.  And  from  the  folide  angles  A, B,C,D,draw  right 
lines  palling  by  the  centre  E,vnto  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  pyramis,  and  they  fhall  fall 
perpendicularly  vpon  the  bafes,  and  fhall  alfo  fall  vpon  the  centres  of  the  circles  which 
containe  the  bafes,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  13  .of  the  thirtenth  .  Let  the  centre  of  the  tri¬ 
angle  A  B  C,  be  the  point  G,  and  let  the  centre  of  the  triangle  A  D  C  be  the  point  H,  and  of  the  trian¬ 
gle  AD  B  let  the  point  N  be  the  centre,  and  finally  ,let  the  point  F  be  the  centre  of  the  other  triangle 
D  B  C .  And  let  the  right  lines  falling  vpon  thofe  cetres  be  D  E  G,B  E  H,G  E  N,&  A  E  F.  And  by  thofe 
centers  G,H,N,F,let  there  be  drawen  from  the  angles  to  the  oppofite  fidcs  thefe  right  lines,  AGi, 

DHX, 


ofEuclules  Element es.  Fol.\ 4.3. 

D  H  K3  N  M,  and  D  F  L,  which  fhall  fall  perpendicularly  vpo  n  the  fides  B  C ,0  A,  A  D,  and  C  B,by  the 
Corollary  of  the  ia.of  the  thirtenth,and  therefore  they  fhall  cut  them  into  two  equal!  partes  in  the 
pointes  K,  L,  M,  bythe 

3  .of  the  third  .  Agayne  X) 

let  the  lines  which  wer 
drawen  from  the  folide 
angles  to  the  oppofite 
bafes  be  diuided  into 
two  equal  partes,name- 
ly,  the  line  D  G  in  the 
pointT,the  line  C  N  in 
the  point  O ,  the  line 
AF  in  the  point  P,and 
the  line  B  H  in  the 

EointR:  and  drawethe 
nesHT,FT,H  0,and 
F  O  .  Now  forafmuch 
as  the  lines  G  K,  and 
G  L,  which  are  drawen 
from  the  centre  of  one 
and  the  felffame  trian¬ 
gle  A  B  C  to  the  iides, 
are  equall,and  the  lines 
D  K  and  D  L  are  equall, 
for  they  are  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  of  equal  &  like  4 
triangles:  and  the  line 
D  G  is  common  to  the, 

Wherefore,by  the  8.of 
the  firft,the  angles  K  D- 
G  &  LDG,are equall. 

And  forafmuch  as  the 
lines  HD  &DF  are  dra¬ 
wen  from  the  centre  of 
equal  circles  which  co- 

taine  the  equal  triangles  ADC&DB  C,therfore  they  are  equal,  &  the  line  D  T  is  comon  to  the  both* 
and  they  containe  equal  angles, as  before  hath  bene  proued  .Wherfore  the  bafes  H  T  and  F  Tare  equal 
by  the  4.of  the  fuff  And  by  the  fame  reafon  if we  drawe  the  lines  C  F  and  C  H,  may  we  proue  that  the 
other  lines  H  O  and  F  0,are  equal  to  the  fame  lines  HT  and  F  T,and  alfo  the  one  to  the  other.Wher- 
for'e  alfo  after  the  fame  maner  may  be  proued  that  the  reft  of  the  lines,which  couple,  the  centres  of  the 
triangles  apd  the  fe&ions  of  the  perpendiculars  into  two  equal  partes,as  the  lines  NP,G  R,G  P,R  Ns 
NT,P  H,G  O,andR  F, are  equal.  And  forafmuche  as  from  euery  one  of  the  centres  of  the  bafes  are 
drawne  th  re  right  lines  to  the  fe&ions  into  two  equal  parts  of  the  perpendiculers,  and  there  are  fours 
centresjit  followerh,that  thefe  equal  right  lines  fo  drawne3are  twelue  in  number,of  which  euery  three 
and  three  make  afolide  angle  in  the  foure  centres  of  the  bafes,  and  in  the  foure  fe&ions  into  two  equal 
partes  of  the  perpendiculars:  wherfore  that  folide  hath  8.angles,contained  vnder  it. equal  fides,which 
make  fixe  quadrangled  figures,  namely,  H  O  F  T,  P  G  R  N,  P  H  O  G,  G  O  F  R,F  RN  T,and  TNPH, 
Now  let  vs  proue  that  thofc  quadrangled  figures  are  redangle. 

Forafmuch  as  vpon  D  C  the  common  bafe  of  the  triangles  A  D  C  and  B  D  C  falleth  the  perpen¬ 
diculars  AS  and  B  S,  which  are  drawne  by  the  centres  H  and  F:  either  of  thefe  lines  H  S  and  S  F  fhalbe 
the  third  part  of  either  of  thefe  lines  A  S  and  S  B :  for  the  line  AH  is  duple  to  the  line  H  S,and  deuideth 
the  bafe  D  C  into  two  equal  partes  by  the  corollary  of  the  iz  .of  the  thirtenth.  Wherefore  in  the  trian¬ 
gle  A  B  S,the  fides  A  S  and  B  S  are  cut  proportionally  in  the  poynts  H  and  F :  and  therfore  the  line  H  F 
is  a  parallel  to  the  fide  AB,by  the  i.of  the  fixth .Wherfore  the  triangles  A  S  B  and  H  S  F  are  equiangles 
by  the  6. of  the  fixth.  Wherfore  the  bafe  H  F  lhalbe  the  third  part  of  the  bafe  A  B3by  the4.of  the  fixth. 
We  may  alfo  proue  that  the  li*e  T  O  is  the  third  part  of  the  line  D  C,for  the  linesE  C  and  E  D,  which 
are-drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  fphere  which  contaideth  the  pyramisare  equal:  and  the  line  E  N, 
{which  is  drawne  from  the  centre  to  the  bafe)is  the  third  part  of  the  line  E  C,fo  alfo  is  the  line  G  E  the 
third  part  of  the  line  E  D(by  the  corollary  of  the  13  .of  the  thirtenth)  for  it  is  the  fixth  parte  of  the  dia¬ 
meter  of  die  fphere  which  containeth  the  pyramis :  And  the  line  O  N,is  the  halfof  the  whole  line  NC 
wherfore  the  refidue  E  O  is  the  third  part  of  the  line  E  C,and  fo  alfo  is  the  line  ET  the  third  part  of  the 
line  E  D.Wherfore  the  line  T  O  in  the  triangle  D  E  C  is  a  parallel  to  theline  D  C, and  is  a  third  parte 
of  the  fame,by  the  former  s.  and  4.  of  the  fixth.as  the  line  H  F  was  proued  the  third  part  of  the  line  AB. 
But  A  B  and  D  C  being  fides  of  the  pyramis  are  equal.  Wherfore  the  lines  HF  and  TO,being  the  third 
partes  of  equal  lines,are  equally  the  if. of  the  fiueth.  Wherfore  by  the  8  .of  the  firft  the  angles  H  T  F, 
and  T  F  O  are  equal: and  by  the  fame  reafon-the  angles  oppofite  vnto  them,namely,  the  angles  F  O  H 

YY y.ij.  and 


Dmonttu* 

non. 


Product  in 
the  figure  the 
line  TP  to 
the  point  B* 


/ 


The  fif tenth  cBooke 


and  O  H  f'jft  equal  the  one  to  tie  other,  and  alio  are  equal  to  the  faid  angles  HTFandTFO :  but? 
thefe  foure  angles  are  equal  to  4  . right  angles  by  the  corollary  of  the  3 1  .of  the  firil :  wherefore  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  quadrangle  HO  F  T  are  right  angles  .And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  the  angles  of  the  other 
hue  quadrangled  figures  be  proued  rightangles.NoW  refteth  to  proue  that  the  forcfayde  quadrangles 
are  ech  in  one  and  the  '  -p 

felfe  fame  plaine. 

Take  the  quadragle 
H  O  FT  :  and  foraf- 
much  as  in  the  trian¬ 
gle  A  S  B,  the  line  H  F 
is  proued  a  parallel  to 
the  line  A  B,  therefore 
it  cutteththe  lines  SV, 
and  SB  proportional¬ 
ly  in  the  poyntsl.and 
•  F.by  the  2  .of  thefixth : 

Now  then  forafmuch 
as  S  F  was  proued  the 
third  parte  of  the  line 
S  B,  the  line  S  I,  fhall 
alfo  be  the  thirde  part 
•of  the  line  S  V.  More- 
oucr  forafmuch  as  the 
line  V  S,whichecou 
pleth  the  feiftions  into 
equal  partes  ofthe  op- 
pofite  fides  of  the  py-^4 
rainis,  namely,  of  the 
fides  AB  and  D  C,  is 
by  the  centre  E  deui- 
ded  into  two  equal 
partes,  by  the  corolla¬ 
ry  of  the  feconde  of 
thisboke  (for  it  is  the 

diameter  of  the  o£to-  c 

bedron  infcribedin  the  pyramis) :  therfore  the  line  S I  is  two  third  partes  of  the  halfe  line  S  E.  And  by 
the  fame  reafo,  forafmuch  as  in  the  triagle  DEC  the  line  TO  is  proued  to  bea  parallel  to  the  fide  DC, 
it  {hall  in  the  felfe  fame  triangle  cut  the  lines  C  E  and  S  E,  proportionally  in  the  poynts  O  and  I  by  the 
famez. of  thefixth :  but  the  line  £  O  is  proued  to  bea  third  parteofthelineEC.  Whereforethe  lyne 
El  is  alfb  a  third  part  of  the  line  F.S.  Wherefore  the  refidue  ISfhalbetwo  third  partes  of  the  whole 
line  ES.  Wherefore  the  poin  1 1  cutteth  either  of  the  lines  T  O  and  H  F.  Wherefore  the  two  lines  H I B 
and  TIO  cutting  the  one  the  other,  are  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame’ plaine,  bythe  z.  of  the  eleuenth. 
And  therefore  the  poyntes  H,T,F,0  are  in  one  &  the  felfe  fame  plaine.  Wherfbrejthere&uigle  figure 
H  O  FTbeingquadrilaterand  equilater,  and  in  one  and  the  felfe  lame  playne, is  a  Iquare,  bythe 
diffinitiou  of  a  fqiure.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  the  reft  of  the  bafes  of  the  folide  be  proued  to 
be  fquares  equall  and  plaine  or  fuperficial :  Now  then  the  folide  is  comprehended  of  6. equal  Iquares 
(which  ari:  contained  of  is, equal  fides)which  Iquares  make  8.folideangles,of  which  foure  are  in  the 
centres  of  the  bafes  ofthe  pyramis,and  the  other  4.  are  iti  the  midle  fedlions  of  the  foure  perdendicu- 
iars  .Wherfore  the  ifolide  HOFTPGR  N,is  a  cube  by  the  2 1  .diffinition  of  the  eleuenth,  and  is  in- 
Icribed  in  the  pyramis,by  the  firft  definition  of  this  boke.  Wherfore  in  a  trilater  equilater  pyramis  gc- 
uenjis  infcribed  a  cube. 


A  Corrollary. 


The  line  Hohich  cutteth  into  two  equall  partes  the  oppofite fides  of  the  Ty* 
ranmfis  triple  to  the fide  ofthe  cube  infcribed  in  the  pyramis  }and  pajfeth  by  the 

Centre  of  the  cube.^or  theline  S  E  V,whofe  third  part  the  line  S I  is,  cutteth  the oppofite fides  C« 
Dand  AB  into  two  equll  partes  :  but  thelineEI  (  which  is  drawnefrom  the  centre  ofthe  cube  to  the 
bafe  is  proued  to  be  a  third  part  ofthelineES:  wherefore  the  fide  ofthe  cube  which  is  double  to  the 
lin  e  E I  iliall  bea  third  part  of  the  whole  line  V  S ,  which  is  (  as  hath  bene  proued  )  double  to  the  Une 

E  S. 


The  jp.Trobleme  The  iyfPropofition. 

In  a  trilater  equilater  Tyramisgeuen/o  inferibe  an  Icofahedron. 

Suppoff 


F0/.4.44. 

■r~|  Vppofe  that  the  pyramis  geuen,be  A  B  G  Di!  cuery  oneofwhofefidesletbe  diuided  into 
I  w^S'  tW0  equall  partes  in  the  poyntes,  E,M,K,L,P,N..  And  in  euery  one  of  the  bafes  of  that  py- 
ramisjdefcride  thetrianglest  F  P,  P  M  N,  N  K  L,  and  F  M  K:  which  triangles  {hall  be  e- 
quilater  by  the  4.of  the  firll,for  the  fides  fubtend  equall  angles  of  the  pyramis,  contayned 
V  pder  the  halues  of  the  fides  of  the  fimie  pyramis:  wherfore  the  fides  of  the  faid  triangles 
are  equall. Let  thofe  fides  be  diuided  bv  an  extreame  and  meane  proporti.on(by  the  3o.of 
the  fixth)in  the  poyntes  C,E,  Q,R,S,T,  II,  1,0,  V,  Y,  X .  Now  then  thofe  fides  are  cutte  into  the  felfe 
fame  proportion  s,by  the  z.ofthefourtethtand  therforethey  make  the  like  feftio&equalh  by  the  z-part 
of  the  ninth  of  the  fiueth.  Now  I  fay,  that  the  forefayd  poyntes  doo  receaue  the  angles  of  thelcofahe- 
dron  inferibed  in  the  pyramis  A  B  G  D.  In  the  forefayd  triangles  let  there  agayne  be  made  other  trian¬ 
gles  by  coupling  the  fe£tions,and  let  thofe  triangles  boT  R  S,  I O  H,C  E  Q,and  V  X  Y,  which  {hall  be. 
equilater:  for  euery  one  of  their  fides  doo  fubtend  equall  angles  of  equilater  triangles ,  and  thofe  fayd 
equall  angles  are  contayned  vnder  equall  fides  (namelyyvnder  the  greater  fegment  and  the  leffe  )  :  and 
thbrefore^the  fides  which  fubtend  thofe  angles  are  equall  by  the  4.  of  the  firlt .  Now  let  vs  proue  that 
at  eche  of  the  forefayd  poynts,as  for  example  at  T,is  let  the  folide  angle  of  an  Icofahedron  .Forafmuch 
as  the  triangles  T  R  S  and  T  QO  are  equilater  and  equall, the  4.right  lines  T  R,T  S,T  Qjmd  T  O  {hall 
be  equall .  And  forafmuch  as  F  P  N  K  is  a  fquare  cutting  the  pyramis  A  B  G  D  into  two  equall  partes, 
by  the  corollay  of  the  fecond  of  this  booke ;  the  line  T  H  IhaU  be  in  power  duple  to  the  line  T  N  or  N» 
H  by  the  47.  of  the  firft.  * 

For  the  lines  TNorNH 
are  equall,  for  that  by  con 
ftrudtion  they  are  eche 
leffe  fegmentes :  and  the 
line  R  T  or  T  S  is  in  pow¬ 
er  duple  to  the  fame  line 
TN  orNH  (  by  the  co¬ 
rollary  of  the  16.  of  this 
booke  )  for  it  fubtendeth 
the  angle  of  the  triangle 
contayned  vnderthetwo 
fegmentes.  Wherfore  the 
lines  TH,TS,TR,T  Q^ 
and  T  O  are  equall :  and 
fo  alfo  are  the  lines  H  S, 

SR,R  Q,Qjf>,  andO  H, 
which  fubtend  the  angles 
at  the  poynt  T,equall.For 
the  line  Qjt  contayneth 
in  power  the  two  lines  P- 
Qjind  P  R  the  leffe  feg¬ 
mentes  ,  which  two  lines 
the  line  T  H  alfo  contay¬ 
ned  dn  power.  And  the 
reft  of’the  lines  doo  fub- 
tend  angles  (  of  equilater^ 

triangles) contayned  vn-'  ■-  -  -v  ^ 

der  the  greater  fegment  and  the  leffe.  Wherefore  the  fiue  triangles  TR  S,T  S  H,T  H  0,T  O  Q,T  Q- 
R  are  equilater  and  equall  making  the  folide  angle  of  an  Icofahedron  at  the  poynt  T ,  by  the  16.  of  the 
thir  tenth,  in  the  fide  P  N  of  the  triangle  PNM.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  in  the  other  fides  of  the  4.  tri¬ 
angles  P  N  M,N  K  L,F  M  K,& -LFP (which  are  inferibed  in  the  bafes  of  the  pyramis)which  fides  are  jz. 
in  nfiberflial  be  fetiz. angles  of  the  Icofehedrocotained  vnder  2o.equal&  equilater  triangles  of  which 
fowere  are  fet  iu  the  4. bales  of  the  pyramis,namely,thefefower  triangles,  T  R  S,H  O  I,C  E  Q,VXY: 
4.4riangles  are  vnder  4.angles  of  the  pyramis :  that  is,the  fower  triangles  C I X,  Y  S  H,  E  R  V,  T  QO: 
and  vnder  euery  one  of  the  fixefides  of  the  pyramis  are  fet  two  triangles,  namely,  vnder  the  fide*  of 
the  triangles  T  H  S  and  THO:  vnder  the  fide  D  B  the  triangles  R  QJi  and  R  QJT :  vnder  the  fide  D  A 
the  triangles  GO  Q^and  COI:  vnder  the  fide  A  B,the  triangles  E  X  C  and  E  X  V :  vnder  the  fide  BG 
the  triangles  S  V  R  and  S  V  Y :  and  vnder  the  fide  A  G  the  triangles  I Y  H  and  I Y  X.  Wherefore  the  fo¬ 
lide  being  contayned  vnder  zo.equilater  and  equall  triangles  {hall  be  an  Icofahedron  by  the  23  .diffiniti- 
on  of  the  eleuenth :  and  lhall  be  inferibed  in  the  pyramis  A  B  G  D  by  the  firft  diffinition  of  this  booke, 
for  all  his  angles  doo  at  one  time  touch  the  bafes  of  the  pyramis .  Wherefore  in  a  trilater  equilater  pyl 
ramisgeuen,we  haue  inferibedan  Icofahedron. 


f  The  20.  Tropofition.  The  20.  ^Problem?. 

In  a  trilater  equilater  Pyramis  geuen3to  infcribea  dodecahedron. 

YYy.iii.  Suppofe 


ConUrkftm* 


Demon  Ora¬ 
tion. 


c 

perpendiculars  which  arc  drawne  from  thefolideangles  of  the  pyramis  to  the  oppofite  bafes  :  where¬ 
fore  the  other  jangles  of  the  dodecahedron  are  alfo,as  the  angles  of  the  cube,  fetin  thofe  middle  fec- 
tions  of  the  perpendiculars  .Namely,  the  angle  V  is  fet  in  the  mitjdeft  of  the  perpendicular  A  H  •  the  an¬ 
gle  Y  in  the  middeft  of  the  perpendicular  B  F :  the  angle  X  in  the  middeft  of  the  perpendicular  G  E :  and 
laftly  the  angle  D  in  the  middeft  of  the  perpendicular  D  which  is  drawne  from  the  toppe  of  the  py- 
ramis  to  the  oppofite  bafe .  Wherefore  thofe  4. angles  of  the  dodecahedron  may  be  fayd  to  bedire&Iy 
vnder  the  folide  angles  of  the  pyramis,or  they  may  be  feyd  to  be  fet  at  the  perpendiculars.  Wherefore 
the  dodecahedron  after  this  maner  fet, is  infcribed  in  the  pyramis  geuen  (  by  the  firft  diffinition  of  this 
booke  )  for  that  vpo  euery  one  of  the  bafes  of  the  pyramis  are  fee  an  angle  of  the  dodecahedro  iafcri- 
bed  .Wherefore  in  a  trilater  equilater  pyramis  is  infcribed  a  dodecahedron. 

The  2  i.Trobleme.  \The  2  i.Vropofoion. 
hi  euery  one  of  the  regular  folides  to  inferibe  a  Sphere , 


The  fiftenth  Boo^e 

j  Vppofe  that  the  pyramis  geuen  be  A  B  G  D ,  eche  of  whofe  fides  let  be  cutte  into  two  e- 
'  quail  partes  :and  draw  the  lines  which  couple  the  feftions ,  which  being  diuided  by  an 
extreame  and  meane  proportion ,  and  right  lines  being  drawne  by  the  fe&ions,lhall  re- 
ceaue  zo.triangles  making  an  Icofahedron ,  as  in  the  former  propofition  it  was  manifest. 
j  Now  then  if  we  take  the  centres  of  thofe  triangles,  we  {hall  there  finde  the  20.  angles  of 
the  dodecahedron  infcribed  init  by  the  f  .ofthisbooke.And  forafmuckasft.bafes'of  the 
fbrefayd  Ieofahedro  are  cocentricall  with  the  bafes  of  the  pyram  is,  as  it  was  proued  in  the  a  .corollary 
of  the  tf.ofthisboke:  there  fhal  be  placed  4  angles  of  the  dodecahedr6,namely,the  4, angles  E,F,H,D, 
in  the4.centres  ofthe  bafes: and  of  the  other  if  .angles,  vnder  euery  one  of  the  6.  fides  ofthe  pyramis 
are  fubtended  two:  namely, vnder  the  fideAD,  the  anglesCK:  vnder  the  fide  B  D  the  angles  LI :  vn¬ 
der  the  fide  G  D  the  angles  M,  N :  vnder  the  fide  A  B  the  angles  T,  S  *.  vnder  the  fide  B  G  the  angles  P, 
O  :and  vnder  the  fide  A  G  the  angles  R,Qrfo  therereft 4.  angles ,  whofe  true  place  we  will  now  ap- 

Eoynt.Forafinuch  as  a  cube  contayned  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  Iphere  with  a  dodecahedron,  is  inferr¬ 
ed  in  the  fame  dodecahedron,as  it  was  manifeft  by  the  1?.  of  the  thirtenth,and  8.  of, this  booke  vjt  fol- 
loweth  that  a  cube  and  a  dodecahedron  circumfcribed  about  it ,  are  contayned  in  oneand  the  felfe 
fame  bodies jfor  that  their  angles  concurre  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  poyntes.And  it  was  proued  in  the 
iS.ofchis  booke,that  4.angles  ofthe  cube  infcribed  in  the  pyramis  are  fetin  the  middle  feftions  of  the 


In 


of  cue  licks  Elementes  FoL$  4.5. 

N  the  13 .  of  the  thirtenth  and  the  other/j..  propofitions  following ,  it  was  declared  that 
the  y  .regular  folides,are  fo  contaynedin  a  fphere,that  right  lines  drawne  from  the  cen¬ 
tre  of  the  fphere  or  of  the  folide  inferibed ,  to  euery  one  of  the  angles  of  the  folide  in¬ 
feribed, are  equall .  Which  right  lines  therefore  make  pyramids ,  whofe  toppes  are  the 
centre  of  the  fphere  3  or  of  the  folide,  and  the  bafts  are  entry  one  ofthebafes  ofthofe 
folides .  And  forafmttch  as  thofe  bafts  are  in  euery  folide  equall  and  like  the  one  to  the 
other,and  deferibed  in  equall  circles :  thofe  circles  fhall  cutte  the  fphere  :  for  the  angles 
which  touch  the  circumference  of  the  circle,touch  alfo  the  fuperficies  of  the  fphere.  Wherefore  perpe- 
diculars  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  fphere  to  the  bafts ,  or  to  the  playne  fuperficieces  of  the  equall 
circles,are  equall, by  the  corollary  of  the  affumpt  of  the  16. of  the  twelfth  .  Wherefore  making  the  cen¬ 
tre  the  centre  of  the  fphere  which  contayneth  the  folide,  and  the  fpace  fame  one  of  the  equall  perpen¬ 
diculars  .deferibe  a  fphere,  and  it  fhall  touch  euery  one  of  the  bafts  of  that  folide  ;  neither  lhall  the  fu¬ 
perficies  of  the  fphere  paffe  beyond  thofe  bafes :  when  as  thofe  perpendiculars  are  the  left  lines  which 
are  drawne  from  the  centre  to  the  bafes, by  the  3  .corollary  of  the  fame  affumpt.  Wherefore  we  haue  in 
eueryoneofthe  regular  bodies  infcribedafpherctwhich  regular  bodiesareinnumber  onely  hue,  by 
the  corollary  of  the  1 8  .of  the  thirtenth . 

A  Corollary. 

The  regular  figures  inferibed  in  fpheres  }  and  alfo  the fpheres  circumfcri* 
led  about  them}or  containing  them  fane  one  and  the felfe fame  centre.  Namely, 

their  pyramids ,  the  angles  of  whofe  bafes  touch  the  fuperficies  of  the  fphere ,  doo  from  thofe  angles 
caufe  equall  right  lines  to  be  drawne  to  one  and  the  felfe  fame  poynt ,  making  the  toppes  of  the  pyra¬ 
mids  in  the  fame  poynt :  and  therefore  they  make  the  centres  of  the  fpheres  in  the  felfe  fame  toppes  * 
when  as  the  right  lines  drawne  from  thofe  angles  to  the  crooked  fuperficies,  wherein  are  ft t  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  bafes  of  the  pyramids,are  equall. 

An  aduertifment  of Fluffs 

Of  thefe  folides, onely  the  Odlohedron  receaueth  the  other  folides  inferibed  one  within  an 
other  .  For  the  O&ohedron  contayneth  the  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  it :  and  the  lime 
Icofahedron  contayneth  the  Dodecahedron  inferibed  in  the  fame  Icofahedron: 
and  the  fame  dodecahedron  contayneth  the  cube  inferibed  in  the  fame 
Odtohedron,  and  finally  the  fame  cube  circumfcribeth  the  Pyra- 
mis  inferibed  in  the  fayd  Odiohedron .  But  this  happe¬ 
ned:  not  in  the  other  folides. 

00 


The  ende  of  the  fiuetenth  Booke 

of  Euclides  Elementes  after 


Campane  and  riuRat. 


This  proporti¬ 
on  Campane 
bath,  &ts  the 
lafl  alfo  in  cr- 
deroftbe  1 5, 
booke  with 
him . 


\ 


theElementes  of  Geometric 

added  by  Flufias. 


N  the  former  fiuetenth  booke  hath  bene  taught  how 
to  infcribe  the  fine  regular  folides  one  with  in  an  other. 
Now  femeth  to  reft, to  copare  thofe  folids  fo  inferibed, 
one  to  an  other, and  to  fet  forth  their  paflions  and  pro¬ 
prieties  :  which  thing, Ffijfas  confidering,  in  this  fixteth 
booke  added  by  him ,  hath  excellently  well  and  molt 
conningly  performed .  For  which  vndoubtedly  he  hath 
of  all  them  which  haue  a  loue  to  the  Mathematical, dc- 
ferucd  much  prayfe  andcommendacion:both  for  the 
greattrauailesandpaynes  (which  it  is  moftlikely  )  he 
hath  taken  in  inuenting  fuch  ftraunge.  and  wonderful! 
propofition  s  with  their  demonftrations ,  in  this  booke 
contayned,as  alfo  for  participating  and  communica¬ 
ting  abrodcthe  fame  to  others.  Which  booke  alfo, that 
the  reader  ihould  want  nothingconducingtotheperfe&ion  of  Euclides  Elements: 
I  haue  with  fome  trauaile  tranflated,&  for  the  worthines  thereof  haue  added  it,  as  a 
lixtenth  booke  to  the  x  ? .  bookes  of  Euclide .  Vouchfafe  therefore  gentle  reader  dili¬ 
gently  to  read  and  pey  fe  it, for  in  it  (hall  you  finde  not  onely  matter  ftrange  and  delec¬ 
table,  but  alfo  occafion  of  inuention  of  greater  things  pertayning  to  the  natures  of  the 
hue  regular  folides.  -  , 

3fi»£i’jiU  !>r;«  :  :»i  .  •  1 1131m  noit-utujoai  ’  ;r  aiaa^iaiico  b  )  stutoH  .  is  til  o 

r  j!  - >•  J  pt  osbcC  otii  .  noabedslool 


A  Dodecahedron,  and  a  cube  infcribe  din  it ,  and  a  Pyramis  inferibed  in 
the  fame  cube, are  contained  in  one  and  the felfe fame  sphere. 


Or  the  angles  of  the  pyramis  are  fet  in  the  angles  of  the  cube  wherein  it  is  inscri¬ 
bed  (by  the  firft  of  the  fiuetenth  :and  all  the angles  of  the  cube  are  fetin  the  angles 
ofthe  dodecahedron  circumfcribed  about  it  (by.  the  8. of  the  fiuetenth)  :  And  all 
the  angles  of  the  Dodecahedron,  are  fet  in  the  fuperficies  of  the  fphere,by  the  17. 
of  the  thirtenth.  Wherefore  thofe  three  folides  inferibed  one  within  an  other,are 
contained  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fphere,by  the  firft  diflinition  of  the  fiuetenth. 
A  dodecahedron  therfore  and  a  cube  inferibed  in  it,  and  a  pyramis  inferibed  in  the 
fame  cube,are  contained  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fphere . 

.  ^[A  Corollary. 

Thefe  three  folides  hkeloife  are fet  in  one  and  the felfe  fame  lcofahedron,or 

0 Siohedron ,0r  'Pyramis. for  they  are  inferibed  in  one  and  the  lame  Icolahedron,by  the,? .«.& 
ia  .of  the  fiuetenth :  and  they  are  inferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  Odohedron,  by  the  4. 6. and  irf.of 
the  fame  rlaftly  they  are  inferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  pyramis,by  the  firft,:8.and  19 .of  the  lame. 
For  the  angles  of  all  thefe  folides  are  fet  in  the  centres  of  the  bafes  of  the  circumfcribed  Ieolkhedron, 
or  odohedron,or  pyramis. 

f  The  2.  Propofition. 

The  proportion  of a  Dodecahedron  circumfcribed  about  a  cube, to  a  Dodeca * 

hedron 


Elementes  ofCjeometry^added  hy  Fluids.  FoL 4 \6* 

bedro  infcribed  in  the  fame  cube, is  triple  to  an  extreme  (y  meane  propartid. 

Orafmuch  as  in  the  z -corollary  of  the  13. of  thefiuetenth,itwasproued,  that  the  fidei 
of  a  Dodecahedron  infcribed  in  a  cube,is  the  leffe  fegment  of  the  fide  of  that  cube  de- 
uided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion:  and  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  circum- 
fcri  bed  about  the  fame  cube,is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  fide  of  the  famecube(which 
thing  alfo  was  taught  in  the  13  .of  the  hue  tenth)  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  circum¬ 
fcribed, fhalbe  to  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  infcribed,  as  the  greater  fegment  of  a 
right  line  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,  is  to  the  Idle  fegment  of  the 
fame, which  proportion  is  called  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,by  the  diffinition,and  by  the  3o.of 
fixth.Butthe  proportion  of  like  folide  prolihedrons,is  triple  to  the  proportion  of  the  fides  of  like  pro¬ 
portion, by  the  corollary  of  the  i7.ofthetwelueth.  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  the  Dodecahedron 
circumfcribed  about  the  cube, is  to  the  dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the  fame  cube,  in  triple  proportion 
of  the  fides  ioyned  together  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion.  The  proportion  therefore  of  a  Do¬ 
decahedron  circumfcribed  about  a  cube  to  a  dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the  fame  cube,  is  triple  to  an 
extreme  and  meane  proportion. 

The  3.Tropoftion. 

In  euery  equiangle, and  equilater  ^Pentagon,  a  perpendicular  drawne  from 
one  of  the  angles  to  the  bafe, is  deuided  hy  an  extreme  and  meane  proporti* 
on  hy  a  right  line fuhtending  the  fame  angle. 


ior: 


A 


'  Vppofe  that  A  B  C  D  F  be  an  equiangle  and  equilater 
pentagon  :  and  from  one  of  the  angles  namely,  from 
A,let  there  be  drawne  to  the  bafe  C  D  a  perpendicu- 

_ jlar  A  Grand  let  the  line  B  F\  fubtend  the  angle  B  A  F, 

which  line  B  F  let  the  line  AD  cut  in  the  poynt  I.  Then  I  fay 
that  the  line  B  F,cutteth  the  line  A  G  by  an  extreme  and  meane  -g 
proportion.  Forforafmucheasthe  angles G  A FandGABare 
equal  by  the  17 .of  the  third,  and  the  angles  A  B  F and  A  F  B,  are 
equal  by  the  of  the  firfb  therefore  the  angles  remaining  at  the 
poynt  Ejof  the  triangles  A  E  B  and  AEF  are  equal:  for  that  they 
are  the  refidues  of  two  right  angles  by  the  corollary  of  the  3  2,.  of 
the  firft.  But  the  angle  E  G  C,  is  by  conftruction  a  right  angle  : 
wherfore  the  lines  B  F  &C  Dare  parallels  by  thei8.ofthe  firlE 
'Wherefore  as  the  line  D I  is  to  theline  I  A,fo  is  theline  G  Eto 
the  line  E  A,by  the  2,  of  the  fixth.But  the  line  D  A,is  in  the  point 
I  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,by  the  8. of  the  thirtenth.  Wherfore  the  line  G  A  is  in 
the  poynt  E, deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  (by  the  z.of  the  fourtenth)  Wherfore  in  e- 
uery  equiangle  and  equilater  pentagon^  perpendicular  drawne  from  one  of  the  angles  to  the  bafe,  is 
deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  by  a  right  line  fubtending  the  fame  angle. 

«^A  Corollary. 

Theline  yvbich fubtendeth  the  angle  of  a  pentagon, is  a  parallel  to  the  fide 

oppofite  iPntO  the  angle  As  it  was  manifeftin  the  lines  B  F  and  C  D„ 


0 ition. 


\i 

V  >  '  *  • ; '?  t.H  ! 

\d 

If  fro  the  angles  of the  bafe  of  a  *  Pyramis,he  drawne  to  the  oppofite fides, 
right  lines  cutting  the  fay  d fides  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportiomthey 
Jhallcontaine  the  hafe  of  the  Icofahedron  infcribed  in  the  Pyramis ,  ypbicb 
bafe  fl?albe  infcribed  in  an  equilater  triangle,  1 vhofe  angles  cut  the  fides  of 
t  he  bafe  of the  Pyramis  hy  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion , 

p  AAA.j.  Suppofe 


ConftrutUon, 

Vemonttra* 
tkn « 


*  Bya  Vyra* 
mis  yttder - 
ftand  a  Te¬ 
trahedron 

throughout  aU 
this  hooks* 


Cw8ruftiott» 


Dmonftr*- 
sieit . 


jT hefixtenth  cBooke  of \he 


Vppofe  that  A  B  G  be  the  bafe  of  a  pyramis,  in  which  let  be  infcribed  an  equilatei*  triangle 
F  K  H,  which  is  done  by  deluding  the  fides  into  two  equal  partes.  And  in  this  triangle  let 
there  be  infcribed  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedro  infcribed  in  the  pyramis :  which  is  defcribed  by 
deuiding  the  lides  FK,KH,HF,by  an  extreme  &  meane  proportio  in  the  poynts  C,  D,  B>  by 
the  i?.of  the  fiueteth.  Againe  let  the  fides  of  the  pyramis,nameIy,AB,B  G,andG  A  be  deuided  by  an 
extreme  and  meane1  proportion  in  the  poynts  I,M,L,by  the  3o.of  the  fixth.  And  drawe  thefe  rightlines 
A  M,B  L,G  I.Then  I  fay  that  thofe  lines  defcribe  the  triangle  CDE  of  the  Icofahedron .  Fofforafmuch 
as  the  lines  B  G  and  F  H  are  parallels,by  the  2  .of  thefixth :  by  the  point  D  let  the  line  ODN  be  drawne 

Earallel  to  either  of  the  lines  B  G  &  F  H .Wherfore  the  triangle  HDN  fiialbelike  to  the  triangle  HKG, 
y  the  corollary  of  the  2. of  the  fixth.Wherfore  either  of  thefe  lines  DN  and  N  Hfhall  be  equal  to  the 
line  D  H,the  greaterfegmenc  of  the  line  K  H  orF  H.  And-forafmuch  as  the  line  F  O  is  a  parallel  to  the 
line  H  K,and  the  line  O  D  to  theline  F  H :  the  line  O  D  ihall  be  equal  to  the  whole  line  F  H  in  the  pa- 
rallelogramme  F  G  D  H,by  the  34. of  the 
firft.  Wherefore  as  the  whole  line  F  H  is 
to  the  greater  fegment  F  E,  fo  Ihall  the 
lines  equal  to  them  be,  namely,  the  line 
O  D  to  the  line  DN,by  the  7  .of  the  fifth. 

Wherfore  the  line  O  N  is  deuided  by  an 
extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the 
poynt  D,bythe2.of  thefourtenth.  But 
the  triangles  A  O  D,  A  F  E,and  ABM, are 
like  the  one  to  the  other,  and  fo  alfo  are 
the  triangles  A  D  N,  A  E  H,  and  A  M  G, 
by  the  corollary  of  the  fecod  ofthe  fixth; 

Wherefore  as  F  E  istoE  H,fo  is  O  D  to 
D  N,and  BMtoM  G  .Wherfore  the  line 
AM  cutting  the  lines  F  H  and  O  N,lyke 
vnto  the  line  B  G  in  the  pointes  E,D,M, 
defcribeth  E  D  the  fide  of  the  triangle  of 
the  Icofahedron  E  C  D,  which  is  defcri¬ 
bed  in  the  fe&ions  E,C,D,by  fuppofitio. 

And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  lines  BL  and 

G  Ifhall  defcribe  the  otherfides  EC  and  B  R  ts~  m  _ 

C  D  ofthe  fame  triangle. By  the  point  E,  ® 

let  there  be  drawne  to  G I  a  parallel  line  P  E  Q^Now  forafmuch  as  the  lines  B  M  and  F  E  are  parallels, 
the  line  A  M  is  in  the  poynt  E,cut  like  to  the  line  A  B  in  the  poynt  F,by  the  2.of  the  fixth.  Wherefore 
the  line  A  E  is  equal  to  the  line  E  M :  and  vnto  the  line  E  M  alfo  are  equal  either  of  the  lines  G  D  and 
D I  .'which  arc  cutlike  vnto  the  forfaid  lines.  Againe  forafmuche  as  in  the  triangle  A  D I  the  lines  D I 
and  E  P  are  parallels,as  the  line  D I  is  to  the  line  E  P,fo  is  the  line  A  D  to  the  line  A  E  :  but  as  the  line 
A  D  is  to  the  line  A  E,fo  is  the  line  D  G  to  the  line  E  QJjy  the  2  .of  the  fixth :  wherefore  as  the  line  D  I 
is  to  the  line  E  P,foisthelineD  G  to  the  line  EQj  and  alternately  as  the  line  D I  is  to  the  line  D  G,  fo 
is  the  line  E.P  to  the  line  E  Q;  but  the  lines  D I  and  IG  are  equal :  wherfore  alfo  the  fines  EP  and  EQ^ 
are  equal.  And  forafmuch  as  die  line  A  H  is  equal  to  theline  F  H,whofe  greater  fegmet  is  the  line  HN: 
therfore  the  whole  line  A  N,is  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  poynt  H,  by  the 
5. of  the  thirtenth.  But  as  the  line  A  N  is  to  the  line  A  H,fo  is  the  line  A  D  to  the  line  A  E,by  the  2. of 
fixth  (for  the  lines  F  H  and  O  N  are  parallels'  )and  againe  as  the  line  A  D  is  to  the  line  A  E,  fo  (by  the 
fame)  is  theline  A  G  to  theline  A  Q^and  the  line  Alto  theline  A  P  ;  for  the  lines  P  Q^and  G I  are 
parallels :  Wherefore  the  lines  A  G  and  A I  are  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the 
points  QJSc  P :  &  the  line  A  6jhalbe  the  greater  fegrnet  ofthe  line  A  Gor  A  B.And  forafmuch  as  the 
whole  line  A  G  is  to  the  greater  fegment  A  Q_,  as  the  greater  fegment  A I  is  to  the  refidue  A  P  :  the 
line  A  P  fhalbe  the  lefie  fegmehtx>f  the  whole  line  A  B  or  AG.  Wherfore  the  line  P.E  Q  (which  by 
the  poynt  E  paffeth  parallelwife  to  the  line  GI)  cutteth  the  lines  A  G  and  BA  by  an  extreme  and 
meane  proportion  in  the  poynts  Qand  P  .And  by  the  fame  reafon  the  line  P  R  (which  by  the  poynt  C, 
paffeth  parallelwife  to  the  line  A  M)fhall  fall  vpon  the  feftions  P  and  R:fo  alfo  fbal  the  line  RQ.(which 
by  the  poynt  D  paffeth  parallelwife  to  the  line  B  L)fall  vpon  the  fe&ions  R  Wherefore  either  of  the 

lines  P  E  and  E  Qfhalbe  equal  to  the  line  C  D,in  the  parallelogrammes  P  D,and  Qj3,by  the  34.ofthe 
firft.  And  forafmuch  as  the  lines  P  E  and  E  Qare  equal,thelines  P  C,C  R,RDandD  Q^fhalbelikewife 
equal.  Wherfore  the  triangle  P  R  QJs  equilater,and  cutteth  the  fides  of  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis  in  the 
poyntes  P}Q,R,by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion.  And  in  itis  infcribed  the  bafe  E  C  D  of  the  Ico¬ 
fahedron  contained  in  the  forefayd  pyramis.  If  therefore  from  the  angles  of  the  bafe  of  a  pyramis,be 
drawne  to  the  oppofite  fides,right  lines  cutting  the  fayde  fides  by  an  extreme  an  d  meane  proportion  - 
they  fhall  containe  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron  infcribed  in  the  pyramis,  which  bafe  fhall  be  infcribed 
i  n  an  equilater  triangle,whofe  anglescut  the  fides  of  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis  by  an  extreme  &  meane 
proportion. 

fA 


Elementes  of  Geometry ^added  by  Flufias.  FoL^J* 

«j[  A  Corollary. 

The  Jlde  of  an  Icofabedron  infcrihed  in  an  OSlohedron/ts  the  greater 
fegment  of  the  line ,  K>hicb  being  drawen  from  the  angle  of  the  bafe  of  the 
Offiohedron  cutteth  the  oppofite  fide  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion . 

For,by  the  1 6.of  the  fiuetenth,F  K  H  is  the  bafe  of  the  O£tohedron,which  containeth  the  bafe  of  the  I- 
cofahedron  C  D E  ;  vnto  which  triangle F K H,the  triangle  H  K  G  is  equall,as  hath  bene  proued .  By  the 
point  H  draw  vnto  the  line  M  E  a  parallel  line  H  T,cutting  theiline  D  N  in  the  point  S.  Wherefore  E  $, 
DT,and  E  T,are  parallelogrammes :  and  therefore  thelines  E  H  and  M  T  are  equall :  and  the  lines  E  M 
and  H  T  are  like  cut  in  the  pointes  D  and  S,by  the  34-of  the  firft .  Wherefore  the  greater  fegment  of  the 
line  H  T  is  the  line  H  S, which  is  equall  to  ED  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron.  But(by  the  a.of  the  fixth)che 
line  T  K  is  cut  like  to  the  line  H  K  by  the  parallel  DM.  And  therefore(by  the  x.  of  the  fourtenth)  it  is  di- 
uided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion.But  the  line  TM  is  equall  to  the  line  E  H.  Wherefore  alfo 
the  line  TK  is  equall  to  the  line  E  F  or  D  H  .  Wherefore  the  refidues  EH  and  T  G  are  equall .  For  the 
whole  lines  F  H  and  K  G  are  equall.  Wherefore  KG  the  fide  of  the  triangle  HKG  is  in  the  point  Tdiui- 
ded  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  the  point  |T,by  the  right  line  H  T,and  the  greater  fegment 
thereofisthelineED  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  theO£iohedron,whofe  bafe  is  the  trian¬ 
gle  H  K  G  (  or  the  triangle  FKH  which  is  equall  to  the  triangle  HKG)  by  the  16  .of  the  fiuetenth. 

jr  The  s.(Propofition. 

is  diuidedbyan  extreme  and  meane  proportion }  ma« 
t  in  power  double  to  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  in * 


T he fide  of  a  Tyram 
keth  the  leffe fegmen 
fcribed  in  it . 


]  Vppofe  that  A  B  G  be  the  bafe  of a  pyramis :  and  let  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron  infcri¬ 
bedin  it, be  C  D  E,defcribed  of  three  right  lines, which  being  drawen  from  the  angles 
of  the  bafe  A  B  G  cut  the  oppofite  fides  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,  by  the  ror- 
mer  Propofition:namely,of thefe  three  lines  A  M,  B  I,and  G  L.  Then  I  fay,  that  A  Lthe 
_  leffe  fegment  of  the  fide  A  G,is  in  power  duple  to  G  E  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  .  For, 
forafmuch  as  by  the  former  Propofition,it  was  proued  that  the  triangle  C  D  E  is  infcri- 
bed  in  an  equilater  triangle,  whofe  angles  cut  the  fides  of 
A  B  G  the  bafe  of  the  pyramis  by  an  extreme  and  meane 
proportion,  let  that  triangle  be  F  H  K,  cutting  the  line  A  B 
in  the  point  F  .Wherefore  the  leffe  fegment  FA  is  equall 
to  the  fegment  A I ,  by  the  a. of  the  fouretenth  :  (for  the 
lines  A  B  and  AG  are  cut  like  )  .  Moreouer  the  fide  FH  of 
the  triangle  FHK  is  in  the  point  D  cut  into  two  equall 
partes, as  in  the  former  Proportion  it  was  proued, and  F  C- 
E  D  alfo  by  the  fame  is  a  parallelogramme:  Wherefore  the 
lines  C  E  and  F  D  are  equall,by  the  3  3,  of  the  firft.  And  for¬ 
afmuch  as  the  line  F  H  fubtendeth  the  angle  B  A  G  of  an  e- 
quilater  triangle,  which  angle  is  contained  vnder  the  grea¬ 
ter  fegment  A  Hand  the  leffe  fegment  A  F  :  therefore  the 
line  F  H  is  in  power  double  to  the  line  A  F  or  to  the  line  A I 
the  leffe  fegment,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  16.  of  the  fiue¬ 
tenth  .  But  the  fame  line  F  H  is  in  power  quadruple  to  the  ■ 
line  CE,  by  the  4. of  the  fecond:  (for  the  line  F  H  is  double  ^ 
to  the  line  C  E  ) .  Wherefore  the  line  A I  being  the  halfe  of  the  fquare  of  the  line  F  H  is  in  power  duple 
to  the  line  C  F.,  to  which  the  line  F  H  was  in  power  quadruple .  Wherefore  the  fide  A  G  of  the  pyramis 
being  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meaneproportion,maketh  the  leffe  fegment  Alin  power  duple  to  the 
fide  C  E  of  the  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  it.  ■ 


ConftruB'm* 


Demonflrfc 

tm* 


A  Corollary. 

The  fide  of  an  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  a  pyramis  /is  a  refiduallline . 

For  the  diameter  of  the  Sphere  which  containeth  the  fiue  regular  bodies, being  rationall,is  in  power  fef- 
quialtera  to  the  fide  of  the  pyramis, by  the  13  .of  the  thirtenth  :  and  therefore  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  i  s 
rationalljby  the  definition  :  which  fide  being  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,  maketh 

AAA.ij.  the 


I 


Conduction. 


cV,  i 


The  fixtenth  ''Bookg  ofth 


e 


the  leffe  fegment  a  refiduall  line, by  the  6.  of  the  thirtetith .  Wherefore  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  be¬ 
ing  eommenfurable  to  the  fame  leffe  fegment  (for  the  fquare  of  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  is  the  halfe 
of  the  fquare  of  the  faid  leffe  fegment )  is  a  refiduall  line,  by  that  which  was  added  after  the  103 .  of  the 
tenth  boofte. 


f  The  6.  Tropofition. 


T  he  fide  of a  Cube  containeth  in  power  halfe  the  fide  of an  equilater  trian¬ 
gular  { Tyranns  infcribed  in  the Jaid  Cube. 


Or  forafmuch  as  the  fide  of  thepyramis  infcribed  in  the  cubeffubtedeth  two  fides  of  the  cube 
'  which  containe  a  right  angle, by  the  1  .of  the  fiuetenth  :  it  is  manifefi,  by  the  47.  of  the  firft, 
h  ^.that  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  fubteding  the  faid  fides, is  in  power  duple  to  the  fide  of  the  cube : 

_ t^Whereforealfothefquareofthefideofthecubeisthehalfe  of  the  fquare  of  the  fide  of  the 

pyramis.  The  fide  therefore  of  a  cube  containeth  in  power  halfe  the  fide  of  an  equilater  triangular  pyra¬ 
mis  infcribed  in  the  faid  cube. 


f  The  jCPropofition. 


The  fide  of  a  pyramis  is  duple  to  the  fide  of  an  OBohedron  infcri  ¬ 
bed  in  it. 


I  ^Qrafmuch  as  by  the  z.of  the  fiuetenth  it  was  proued,that  the  fide  of  the  Odtohedron  in- 

ieriheri  in  3  m/ramK  mnnlpf-h  flip  rmrllp  nPfhp  firJp’;  nf  fhp  nvnmic  WhprpFnrp 


■'•'E®  '  fcribed  in  a  pyramis  coupleth  the  midle  fedtrons  of  the  fides  of  the  pyramis  .  Wherefore 
"  ^  the  fides  of  the-pyramis  and  ofthe 'O&ohedron  are  parallels,  ,by  the  Corollary  of  the  3  9. 
of  the  firll  :  and  therefore,by  the  Corollary  of  the  z.of  the  fixth,they  fubtend  like  trian- 
gles .  Wherfore  (by  the  4. of the  fixth )  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  is  double  to  the’fide  of  the 
Ofloh  edro  n  ,112  m  ely,i  n  the  proportion  of  the  fides  .  The  fide  therefore  of  a  pyramis  is 
duple  to  the  fide  of  an  Octohedron  infcribed  in  it . 


f  T he  8.  Tropofition. 


The  fide  of  a  Cube  is  in  power  duple  to  the  fide  of  an  OBohedron  infer!  « 
bed  in  it. 


T  was  pro  ued  in  the  3  .of  the  fiuetenth, that  the  diameter  of  the  Odtohedron  infcribed, in  the 
[del'  cube, coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  cube  •.  Wherefore  the  faid  diameter  is 


’jj' equal]  to  the  fide  of  the  cube .  But  the  fame  is  alfo  the  diameter  of  the  fquare  madeofthc 
fides  of  the  Odohedron,  namely,is  the  diameter  ofthe  Sphere  which  containeth  it,  by  the 
i4.c:thethirtenth  .  Whereforethat  diameter  being  equall  to  the  fide  of  the  cube,  is  in  power  double 
to  the  fide  of  that  fquare, or  to  the  fide  of  the  Octahedron  infcribed  in  it,by  the  47  .of  the  firft.  The  fide 
therefore  ofa  Cube,  is  in  power  duple  to  thefide  of  an  Octahedron  infcribed  in  it':  which  was  requi¬ 
red  to  be  proued. 


flTbe  9.  Tropofition. 

The  fide  of  a  {Dodecahedron fis  the  greater  fegment  ofthe  line  H dnch 
containeth  in  power  halfe  the  fide  ofthe  pyramis  infcribed  in  the  fayd 

Dodecahedron. 


q  Vppofe  that  ofthe  Dodecahedron  AB  G  D  the  fide  be  A  B  :  and  let  the  bafe  ofthe  cube 
1  infcribed  in  theDodecahedron  be  E  C  E  H,by  the  tf  .ofthe  fiuetenth  .  And  let  the  fide  of 
the  pyramis  inferibedin  the  cube  beC  H,by  the  r. of  the  fiuetenth.  Wherefore  the  fame 
pyramis  is  inferibedin  the  Dodecahedron,by  the  ro.ofthe  fiuetenth  .  Then  I  fay,  that 
AB  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  is  the  greater  .fegment  of  the  fine  which  contai¬ 
neth  in  power  halfe  the  line  C  H,  which  is  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  infcribed  in  the 

Dodecahedron. 


» 


Dodecahedron  .  For  forafmuchas  EC  the  fide  of  the  cube  be¬ 
ing  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion  -maketh  the 
greater  fegment  the  Hne  A  B,  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron, by  the 
full  Corollary  of  the  17. of  the  thirtenth  :  (  For  they  are  contained 
in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  Sphere  (by  the  firll  of  this  booke)  :  and 
the  line  E  C  the  fide  of  the  cube  concayneth  in  power  the  halfe  of 
the  fide  C  H,  by  the  6.  of  this  booke  .  Wherefore  AB  the  fide  of 
the  Dodecahedron,  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  EC,  which 
contained),  in  power  the  halfe  of  the  line  C  H,  which  is  the  fide  of 
the  Dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the  pyramis .  The  fide  therefore 
of  a  Dodecahedron,  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  which  con¬ 
tained)  in  power  halfe  the  fide  of  the  Pyramis  infcribed  in  thefaid 
Dodecahedron. 


A  3 


The  fide  of  an  Icofahedron ?  is  the  meane proportionall  hetwene  the  fide  of 
the  Cube  circumjcribed  about  the  Icofahedron }  and  the  fide  of  the  HD  ode* 
cahedron  infcribed  in  the  fame  Cube. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  a  cube  A  B  F  D,  in  which  let  there  be  infcribed  an  Icofahedron  C  L- 
I  G  O  R,  by  the  14. of  the  finetenth.  Letalfo  the  Dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the  fame  be 
EDMNPS,  by  the  i3.ofthefame.  Nowforafmuch  as  Ct  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron 
is  the  greater  fegmet  of  A  B  the  fide  of  the  cube  circumfcribed  about  it,  by  the  3.  Corolla* 
ry  of  the  14. of  the  fiuetenth  :and  the  fide  E  D  of  the 

Dodecahedro  infcribed  in  thefame  cube  is  the  leife  O  if  35  L 
fegmet  of  the  fame  fide  A  Bof  the  oube,bv  the  i.CorolIary  of  the  A 
13.  of  the  fiuetenth:  it  folio  weth  that  A  B  the  fide  of  the  cube  be¬ 
ing  diuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,maketh  the 
greater  fegment  C  L  the  fide  ofthe  Icofahedron  infcribed  inic, 
and  the  leife  fegment  E  D  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  likewife 
infcribed  in  it .  Wherefore  as  the  whole  line  A  B  the  fide  of  the  T 
cube,  is  to  the  greater  fegment  C  L  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron, 
fo  is  the  greater  fegment  C  L  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,  to  the 
leife  fegment  ED  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron, by  the  third 
definition  of  the  fixth  .  Wherefore  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron, 
is  the  meane  proportionall  betwene  the  fide  ofthe  cube  circum-  vp 
fcribed  about  the  Icofahedron,  and  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahe-  ^ 

dron  infcribed  in  thefame  cube.  ®  d 


JP 


flTbe  u.tPropofition. 

The  fide  of a  Tyramis ,  is  in  power  t  Ododecuple  to  the fide  of the  cube  in* 
fcribed  in  it . 

Or,by  that  which  was  demonftrated  in  the  18. of  the  fiuetenth,the  fide  of  the  pyra- 
mis  is  triple  to  the  diam  eter  of  the  bafe  of  the  cube  infcribed  in  it :  and  therefore  it 
is  in  power  nonecuple  to  the  fame  diameter  (by  the  20  ofthe  fixth)  .  Butthedia- 
mer  is  in  power  double  to  the  fide  of  the  cube,  by  the  47. of  the  firll .  And  the  dou¬ 
ble  of  nonecuple  maketh  Odlodecuple  .  Wherefore  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  isin 
power  Ododecuple  to  the  fide  of  the  cube  infcribed  in  it. 


T  he  fide  of aT yr  amis  fis  in  power  Ododecuple  to  that  right  line^hofe 

JJJ.iij.  greater 


Vemnflr&> 

tiQtf, 


ContlrutUon, 

VationUre^ 
tkn • 


f  7  bath  as 


Demonfir** 
tion • 


f  TbatityS  9» 

toi. 


*7batisias 

1S.f01.er9. 

<01. 


*TbefixtenthfBookfoftbe 

greater  ferment  is  the fide  of the  (Dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the  ^Pyramis. 

by  Orafmuch  as  the  Dodecahedron  and  the  cube  infcribed  in  it,are  fet  in  one  and  the  felfe 
'  fame  pyramis, by  the  Corollary  of  the  firft  of  this  booke :  and  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  cir- 
I  cumfcribed  about  the  cube  is  in  power  oftodecuple  to  the  fide  of  the  cube  infcribed, by 
‘  the  former  Propofition :  but  the  greater  fegment  of  the  felfe  fame  fide  of  the  cube,is  the 
fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  which  containeth  the  cube,by  the  Corollary  of  the  17.  of  the 
thirtenth  .  Wherfore  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  is  in  power  o&odecuple  to  that  right  line, 
namely,to  the  fide  ofthecube,whofe  greater  fegment  is  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron 
infcribed  in  the  pyramis. 


jf  The  13.  Propofition. 

The  fide  of anlcofahedron  infcribed  in  an  0  Ctohedron  fis  in power  duple 
to  the  lefie  fegment  of  the  fide  of  the  fame  Octahedron . 

Orafmuch  as  in  the  i7.ofthefiuetenth,  it  was  proued,  that  thefideofan  Icofahedron  infcri- 
ked in  2  pyramis,  coupleth  together  the  two  fe&ions  (which  are  produced  by  an  extremeand 
|  J>meane  proporrion )  of  the  fideof  the  Oftohedron  which  make  a  right  angle  :  and  that  right 

K>_i(^§|(angleis  con  mined  vnderthelefle  fegmentes  of  the  fides  of  the  Odohedron,  and  is  fubtenaed 
ofthe  fide  ofthe  Icofahedron  infcribed itfolloweth  therefore,  that  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  which 
fubtendeth  the  right  anglc,being  in  power  equall  to  the  two  lines  which  containe  the  faid  angle, by  the 
47  .ofthe  firfl,is  in  power  duple  to  euery  one  ofthe  lefie  fegmetes  ofthe  fide  ofthe  O&ohedron  which 
containe  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron  infcribed  in  an  O&ohedron,  is  in  power 
duple  to  the  lefie  fegment  of  the  fide  of  the  fame  Ofiohedron. 


The  14.  Propofition. 

The fides  of the  0  Ctohedron,  and  of the  Cube  infcribed  in  it,  are  in  power 
the  one  to  the  other  +  in  quadmpla fiefquialter  proportion , 

jVppofeth.it  AB  GDEbean  Oftohedron,  and  let  the  cube  infcribed  in  it  be  F  CHI.  Then 
,  I  fay,  that  A  B  the  fide  of  the  O&ohcdrondsin  power  quadruple  fefquialter  to  F I  the  fide  of 
the  cube  .  Let  there  be  drawen  to  B  E  the  bafe  of  the  triangle  A  B  E  a  perpendicular  A  N:and 
'  againe  let  there  bedrawen  to  the  lame  bafe  in  the  triangle  G  B  E  the  perpendicular  GNs 
which  AN &GNihall  ' 

pafie  by  the  centres  F 
and  I :  and  the  line  A  F 
is  duple  to  the  line  F  N, 
by  the  Corollary  of  the 
iz.  of  the  thirtenth. 

Wherfore  the  line  AO 
is  duple  to  theline  OE, 
by  the  z.  of  the  fixth. 

For  the  lines  F  O  and 
N  E  are  parallels  .  And 
therefore  the  diameter 
A  G  is  triple  to  the  line 
F I. Wherfore  the pow-  3 

erofA  Gis  *noncuple 
to  the  power  of  F I. But 
the  line  AG  is'in  power 
duple  to  the  fide  AB,by 
the  i4.of  the  thirtenth. 

Wherefore  the  fquare 
ofthe  line  AB,  being 
ing  the  halfe  of  the 
fquare  of  the  line  A  G, 
which  is  noncuple  to 
the  fquare  of  the  line 
F  I,is  quadruple  fefqui¬ 
alter 


alter  tothe  fquare  of  the  line  F  I.The  fides  therefore  of  the  Octahedron  and  of  the  cube  inferibed  in 
arein  power  the  one  to  the  other, in  quadruple  fefquialter  proportion. 

ftThe  is.  tPropoJition. 

T  he fide  of  the  Otfohedrofi,  is  in  power  quadruple fefquialter  to  that  right 
line,  lohofi  greater fegment  is  the  fide  of  the  {Dodecahedron  inferibed  in 
the  fame  Otiohedron. 

Orafmuch as  in  the  r4.ofthisbookeiit  Was proued, that  the  fide  of  the  Octahedron  is  in 
f!  p°wer  quadruple  fefquialter  to  the  fide  of  the  cube  inferibed  in  it :  but  the  fide  of  the  cube 

1  gSf^beingcut  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion,maketh  the  greater  fegment  the  fide  of  the 
w  ^Dodecahedron  circumfcribed  about  it,  by  the  3  .Corollary  of :he  13. ofthe  fiuetenth  :  there¬ 

fore  the  fide  of  the  OCtohedron  is  in  power  quadruple  fefquialter  to  that  right  line  (natnely,to  the  fide 
of  the  cube  )  whofe  greater  fegment  is  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  inferibed  in  the  cube*  But  the  Do¬ 
decahedron  and  the  cube  inferibed  one  within  an  other,  are  inferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  OCta- 
hedron,by  the  Corollary  of  the  firft  of  this  booke  .  The  fide  therefore  of  the  OCtohedron,  is  in  power 
quadruple  fefquialter  to  that  right  line,Whofe  greater  fegment  is  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron  inferi* 
bed  in  the  fame  OCtohedron. 

f  The  16.  (Propofition. 

The  fide  of  an  Icofahedron  fis  the  greater  fegment  of  that  right  line , 
~tohich  is  in  power  duple  to  the  fide  of the  QSiohedron  inferibed  in  the fame 
Icofahedron . 


Vppofe  that  there  be  an  Icofahedron  ABGDFHEC:  whofe  fide  let  be  B  G  or  E  C  -and 
let  the  OCtohedron  inferibed  in  it  be  A  K  DL:  and  let  the  fide  therof  be  A  L.Then  I  fay, 
that  the  fide  EC  is  the  greater  fegment  ofthat  right  line  which  is  in  power  duple  to  the 
fide  A  L  .  For  forafmuch  as  figures  inferibed  and  circumfcribed  haue  one  &  the  felf  fame 
centre,by  the  Corollary  of  the  2,1  .of  the  fiuetenth,  let  the  fame  be  the  point  I.  Now  right 
lines  drawen  by  that  centre  to  the  midle  feCiions  of  the  oppofite  fides,  namely,  the  lines 
AI D  and  KlL,do  in  the  point  I  cut  the  one  the  other  in¬ 
to  two  equal!  partes,aud  perpendicularly,  by  the  Corolla¬ 
ry  of  the  14. ofthe  fiuetenth:  and  forafmuch  as  they  couple 
the  midle  fe&ions  of  the  oppofite  lines  B  G  and  H  F,ther- 
fore  they  cut  them  perpendicularly  :  wherefore  alfo  the 
lines  B  G  and  H  F,are  parallels,  by  the  4.  Corollary  ofthe 
i4*of  the  fiuetenth  .  Now  then  draw  a  line  from  BtoH: 
and  the  fayd  line  B  H  /Hall  be  equall  and  parallel  to  the  line 
KL,by  thejj.ofthefirft.Buttheline  BH  fubtendeth two  K 
fides  of  the  pentagon  which  is  compofed  of  the  fides  of 
the  Icofahedron, namely, the  fides  B  A  and  A  H:Wherfore 
the  line  B  H  being  cut  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proporti¬ 
on  maketh  the  greater  fegment  the  fide  of  the  pentagoh,by 
the8.ofthethirtenth:whichfideisalfothefideofthelco-  <? 
fahedron , namely, E  C  .  And  vnto  the  line  B  H  the  line  K  L, 
is  equall :  and  the  line  K  L  is  in  power  duple  to  A  L  the  fide 
ofthe  OCtohedron, by  the  47.  of  the  firft:  for  in  the  fquare 
A  K  D  L  the  angle  K  A  L  is  a  right  angle .  Wherefore  EC  the  fide  ofthe  Icofahedron,is  the  greater  feg- 
ment  of  the  line  B  HorKL,whichisin  power  duple  to  A  L  the  fide ofthe  OCtohedron  inferibed  in 
the  Icofahedron.  Wherefore  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron, is  the  greater  fegment  ofthat  right  Iine,which 
is  in  power  d  uple  to  the  fide  ofthe  OCtohedron  inferibed  in  the  fame  Icofahedron . 


The  17.  Tropofition. 

T he  fide  of  a  Cube  is  to  the  fide  of  a  {Dodecahedron  inferibed  in  itfn  duple 
proportion  of an  extreame  and  meane  proportion , 

For 


Draw  in  the 
figure  a  line 
from  B  to  Hi 


*  iVhat  the 

duple  of  an 
extreme  ani 
meant  pro¬ 
portion  is* 


The  fixtenth  Booke  ofth 


e  ■ 

$$  Ot  it  was  mamfeft  by  the  i.corollary  of  the  13  .of  the  fiuetenth ,  that  the  fide  of  a  cube  diui* 
r>  ded  by  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion  ,  maketh  the  leffe  fegment ,  the  fide  of  the  dode- 
hcahedron  infcribcd  in  it :  but  the  whole  is  to  the  Idle  fegment  in  duple  proportion  of  that  in 

_ %  which  it  is  to  the  greater,  by  the  io.diffinitio  of  the  fifth.  For  the  whole,the  greater  fegmet, 

and  the  lefle,are  lines  in  continuall  proportion, by  the  3  .diffinition  of  the  fixth .  Wherefore  the  whole 
namely  the  fide  ofthe  cube,  is  to  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  inferibed  in  it ,  namely,  to  his  Idle  feg¬ 
ment, in  duple  proportion  of  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion,  namely,^  of  that  which  the  whole 
hath  to  the  greater  fegment, by  the  a  .of  the  fourtenth . 

ffThe  18.  Tropofition.  .7,7 

T be fide  of  a  t Dodecahedron  is 3to  the  fde  of  a  Cuhe  inferibed  in  it}  in  con * 
uerfe  proportion  of an  extreame  and  meane  proportion. 

[7\  T  Was  proued  in  the  3  .corollary  of  the  13  .ofthe  fiuetenth,  that  the  fide  ofa  Dodecahe- 

|  J|  Lfrf)  dron  circumfcribed  about  a  Cube,is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  fide  of  the  fame  Cube. 

S  n|k<^  Wherefore  the  whole  fide  ofthe  Cube  inferibed  is  to  the  greater  fegment ,  namely, 

'  to  the  fide  ofthe  dodecahedron  circuin.fcribed,in  an  extreame  and  meane  proportion; ' 
wherefore  by  conuerfion,the  greater  fegment,  that  is,the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron,  is 

_ _  to  the  whole,  namely,  to  the  fide  of  the  Cube  inferibed ,  in  the  conuerfe  proportion  of 

an  extreame  and  meane  proportion,by  the  13. diffinition  of  thefiueth. 

The  ip.  Tropo/ition. 

The  fide  of  an  Offohedronfi  fefiquialter  to  the fide  of  a  Tjramis  inficrU 
bed  in  it. 


Conttruftion. 


♦WuSti  one 

‘Demontfn- 

tim . 


Of  (  by  the  corollaryof  the  14.  of  the  thirtenth  )  the  OCiohedron  is  cutte  into  two 
quadrilater  pyramids., one  of  which  let  be  A  B  G  D  F  :  and  let  the  centres  of  the  cir¬ 
cles  which  contayne  the  4.  bafes  of  the  OCiohedron  be  K,  E,  I,  C .  And  draw  thefe 
right  lines  K  E,E  1,1  C,C  K,and  E  C  .Wherefore  K  E I C  is  a  fquare ,  and  one  of  the 
I  bafes  of  the.  cube  inferibed  in  the, OCiohedron, by  the4.ofthefiuetenth.  And  foraf- 
much  as  the  angles  of  a  cube  and  of  the  pyramis  inferibed  in  it,are  fet  in  the  centres 
Jd of  the  bafes  of  the  OCiohedron  circumfcribed  about  the  cube ,  by  the  6.  of  the  fiue¬ 
tenth  ;  and  the  fide  of  the  pyramis  coupleth  the  oppofite  angles  ofthe  bafe  ofthe 
cube ,  by  the  1  .of  the  fiuetenth  ,  it  is  manifell  that 
the  line  EC  is  the  fide  ofthe  pyramis  inferibed  in  : 
the  OCiohedron  A  B  G  D  F ,  Then  I  fay  that  G  D 


vm 


K- 


the  fide  of  the  OCiohedron ,  is  fefquialter  to  E  C 
the  fide  of  the  pyramis  inferibed  in  it.  From  the 
poync  A  draw  to  the  bafes  B  G  and  F  D  perpendi¬ 
culars  AN  and  A  M :  wbichfby  the  corollary  ofthe 
xi.  of  the  thirtenth)  fhall  pafie  by  the  centres  E  and 
C.And  draw  the  lineNM  .  Now  forafmuch,as B-  |] 

G  D  F  is  a  fquat^ ,  by  the  14.  of  the  thirtenth  s  the 
lines  NGand  M  D  fhall  be  parallels  and  equall. 

For  thelines  B  G  and  F  D  are  by  the  perpendicu¬ 
lars  cutte  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  poyntes  N  v» 
and  M  (by  the  3. of  the  third).  Wherefore  the  lines. 

N  M  and  G  D  fhall  be  parallels  and  equall ,  by  the 
33. of  the  firil.  And  forafmuch  as  thelines  AN  and 
A  M  Which  are  the  perpendiculars  of  equall  and  ., 
like  triangles  are  cut  a  like  in  the  poyntes  Band  C,  7  ,L 

the  lines  EC  and  NM  fhall  be  parallels,  by  the  a* 

of  the  fixth  ;  and  therefore  by  the  corollary  of  the  fame ,  the  triangles  A  E  C ,  and  A  N  M  fhall  be  like. 
Wherefore  as  the  line  AN  is  to  the  line  A  E,fo  is  the  lineNM  to  the  line  EC  bythe4.0fthefixth.Buc 
the  line  A  N  is  fefquialter  to  the  line  A  E ,  for  the  line  A  E  is  duple  to  the  line  E  N ,  by  the  corollary  of 
the.ra.of  the  thirtenth :  wherefore  the  line  N  M ,  or  the  line  G.D  which,  is  equall  vnto  it,  is  fefquialter 
to  the  line  EC.  Wherefore.  G  D  the  fide  ofthe'Odohedron,  is  fefquialter  to  EC  the  fide  ofthe  pyra- 
snis  inferibed  in  it. 


u.  1 .  j  i 

/  Xf 

s f  j*.  «►- 

/  /  ^X/X 

\  \ 

m 

.7  *  I 

/ 

/ 

L. - — - , - — - 

is  ; 

Elementes  of  Geometry  .added  by  Flu  fas.  Fol.\^ o. 

f  The  20.  Propofition. 

If  from  the  power  of  the  diameter  of  an  Icofahedron .  he  taken  ays  ay  the 
power  tripled  of  the  fide  of  the  cube  infcribed  in  the  Icofahedron:  the 
poyver  remaynmgjhall  be  fefquitertia  to  the  payer  of  the  fide  of  the  I * 
cofthedron. 


Et  there  be  taken  an  Icofahedron  ABGD:  andlettWo  bafes  of  the  cube  Infcribed  in  it. 


^^Jjioyned  together  beBHKLandLKFC  :  andletthe  diameter  of  the  cube  beF  H  andthe 
fjfcf  fide  be  E  H,  and  let  the  diameter  of  the  Icofahedron  be  B  G,  and  the  fide  be  A  B. 

I  fay,  that  if  from  the  power  of  the  diameter  G  B,  be  taken  away  the  power 
tripled  of  EH  the  fide  of  the  cube:  the  power  remayning,  fhall  be  fefquitertia  to  the 


power  of  AB  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  .For  forafmuchasthc  centres  of  infcribed  andcircum 
feribed  figures,arein  one  &  the  felfe  fame  poynt,  by  the  corollary  of  the  21.  of  the  fiueteth:  the  diame¬ 
ters  B  G  and  F  H  fhall  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  poynt 
cutte  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall  partes :  for  we 
haue  before  by  the  fame  corollary  taught ,  that  the 
toppes  of  equall  and  like  pyramids  doo  in  that  poynt 
concurrent  that  poynt  be  the  centre  I .  Now  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  cube,which  are  at  the  poyntes  F  and  H  are 
fet  at  the  centres  of  the  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron ,  by 
the  n.of  the  fiuetenth .  Wherefore  the  line  F  H  fhall 
be  perpendicular  to  both  the  bafes  of  the  Icofahedro, 
bv  thecorollary  of  the  affupt  of  the  nS.of  the  twelfth. 

Wherefore  the  line  I B  contayneth  in  power  the  two 
lines  I  H  and  H  B,  by  the  47. of  the  firft  .But  the  line  H- 
B,isdrawne  from  the  centre  ofthe  circle  which  con¬ 
tayneth  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron,nameIy,the  angle 
B  is  placed  in  the  circumference ,  and  the  poynt  H  is 
the  centre.  Wherefore  the  whole  IineB  G  contayneth 
in  power  the  whole  lines  F  H  and  the  diameter  of  the 
eircle(namely,the  double  of  the  line  B  H)by  the  if.  of 
the  fiueth  .  But  the  diameterwhich  is  double  to  the 
line  H  B  is  in  power  fefquitertia  to  the  fide  of  the  e- 

quilater  triangle  infcribed  in  the  fame  circle,by  the  corollary  of  the  12  .of  the  thirtenth.Forit  is  in  pro¬ 
portion  to  the  fide,as  the  fide  is  to  the  perpendicularly  the  corollary  of  the  8. of  the  fixth.And  F  H  the 
diameter  ofthe  cube,  is  in  power  triple  to  E  H  the  fide  of  thefame  cube,by  the  iy.of  the  thirtench  .If 
therefore  from  the  power  ofthe  diameter  B  G  ,be  taken  away  the  power  tripled  of  E  H  the  fide  of  the 
cube  infcribed, that  is, the  power  ofthe  line  FH:  the  refidue  (namely,  the  power  of  the  diameter  of 
the  circle  which  is  duple  to  the  line  H  B  Jihall  be  fefquitertia  to  the  fide  of  the  triangle  infcribed  in  that 
circle:  which  felfe  fide  is  A  B  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  .If  therfore  from  the  power  of  thediametcr  of 
anIcofahedro,be  take  away  the  power  tripled  ofthe  fide  of  the  cube  inferibea  in  the  Icofahedron,thc 
power  remayning  (hall  be  fefquitertia  to  the  power  of  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron. 

A  Corollary. 

T he  diameter  of  the  Icofahedron ,  contayneth  in  power  two  lines ,  namely . 
the  diameter  of  the  cube  infcribed yhich  coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  ba* 
fes.dnd  the  diameter  ofthe  circle  yhich  contayneth  the  bafe  of the  Icofahedron. 

For  it  was  manifeft ,  that  B  G  the  diameter  contayneth  in  power  the  line  F  H  which  coupleth  the 
centres, and  the  double  of  the  line  B  H,that  is,the  diameter  of  the  circle  contayning  the  bafe  wherein 
is  the  centre  H.  , 

f  The  21.  Propofition  t 

The fide  of a  Dodecahedron  is  the  lefie fegment  of  that  right  line  yhich 
is  in popper  duple  to  the fide  of  the  Octahedron  infcribed  in  the  fame  Do* 
decahedron . 

BBB.i.  im 


Vtwn!tte~ 


/ 


Conffruftfoti* 


The fixtentb  T>oo%e  of  the 


Et  ther  be  taken  a  Dodecahedron  AB  GDC  T,one  of  whofe  fides  let  be  A  B.  And 
let  the  O&ohedron  infcribed  in  the  Dodecahedron  be  E  F  L  K I :  one  of  whole 
fides  let  be  E  F  .  Then  I  fay  that  A  B  the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron,  is  the  lelfe  feg- 
raent  of  a  certayoe  right  linefcuc 
by  anextreameand  meane  pro- 
portion)which  is  in  power  duple 
to  E  F  the  fide  of  the  O&ohedro 
infcribed  in  theDodecahedron .  Draw  the  diameters 
E  L  and  F  K  of  the  Odohedron .  Now  they  couple 
the  midle  fedtons  of  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  dode¬ 
cahedron  A  B  and  GD,(by  the  .of the  fiuetenth,  & 

3. corollary  of  the  17.  of  the  thirtethj&r  euery  one  of 
thofe  diameters  being  diuided  by  an  extreameand 
meane  proportion ,  doo  make  the  lelfe  fegment ,  the 
fide  of  the  dodecahedron ,  by  the  4. corollary  of  the 
fame.  Wherefore  the  fide  A  B  is  the  lelfe  fegment  of 
the  line  F  K.But  the  line  F  K  contayneth  in  power  the 
two  equall  lines  E  F  &  EK,  by  the  47. of  the  firft:  for 
the  angle  F  E  K  is  a  rightangle  of  the  Iquare  F  E  K  L 
of  the  Odehedron.Wherforc  the  line  F  Kis  in  pow¬ 
er  duple  to  the  line  E  F.  Wherefore  the  line  A  B  ( the 
fide  of  the  dodecahedron  )  is  the  lelfe  fegment  of  the 
line  F  K ,  which  is  in  power  duple  to  E  F  the  fide  of 

the  Odohedron.The  fide  therefore  of  aDodecahedron  is  the  lelfe  fegment  of  that  rightline ,  which  is 
in  power  duple  to  the  fide  of  the  Odohedron  infcribed  in  the  fame  Dodecahedron. 


f  The  22,  Propofitkn. 

T  he  diameter  of an  Icofahedron  is  in  poloer fefquitertia  to  die  fide  of  the 
fame  Icofahedron, and alfo  is  in  power  fefquialter  to  the  fide  of  the  Pyra* 
mis  infcribed  in  the  Icofahedron , 

Or  forafmuch  as  it  hath  bene  proued  (by  the  10  .of  this  booke)  that  if  fro  the  power  of 
the  diameter  of  the  Icolahedro  be  taken  away  the  triple  of  the  power  of  the  fide  of  the 
cube  infcribed  in  it, there  Ihalbelefc  a  fquare  fefquitertia  to  the  Iquare  of  the  fide  of  the 
Icolahedron:  But  thepower  of  the  fide  ofthecube  tripled,is  the  diameter  of  the  lame 
cube, by  the  if  .of  the  thirteth:  And  the  cube,&  the  pyramis  infcribed  in  it  are  contai- 
!)  ped  in  one  Srthe  felf  lame  fphere,  by  the  firft  of  this  booke,and  in  one  &  the  felf  lame 
Icofahedron  by  the  corollary  of  the  fame.Wherfore  one  and  the  felfe  fame  diameter  of  the  cube,or  of 
the  fphere  which  cotaineth  the  cube  and  thepyramis,is  in  power  felquialter  to  the  fide  of  the  pyramis 
by  the  1 3  .of  the  thirtenth  .Wherfore  it  followeth,that  iffrom  the  diameter  of  the  Icofahedron,  be  ta¬ 
ken  away  the  triple  power  of  the  fide  of  the  cube,or  the  fefquialtcr  power  of  the  fide  of  the  pyramis, 
which  are  the  powers  of  one  and  the  felfe  lame  diameter,  there  fhall  be  left  the  fefquitertia  power  of 
the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron. The  diameter  therefore  pf  an  Icofahedron  is  in  power  fefquitertia  to  the 
fide  of  the  fame  Icofahedron.and  alfo  is  in  power  fefquialter  to  the  fide  of  the  Pyramis  infcribed  in 
the  Icolahedron. 

The  zsSPropofition. 

T fa  fide  of  a  {Dodecahedron  is  to  the  fide  of  an  Icofahedron  infcribed  in 
it, as  the  lelfe fegment  of the  perpendicular  of the  (Pentagons  to  that  line 
'Which  is  ar alone from  the  centre  to  the fide  of the  fame  pentagon. 

Et  there  be  taken  a  Dodecahedron  A  B  G  D  F  S  O  .Whofe  lidelet  be  A  S  or  S  O  :and  let  the 
?  Icofahedron  infcribed  in  it  be  K  L  H  M  N  E,whofe  fide  let  be  K  L .  From  the  two  angles  of 
'  the  pentagons  B  AS  and  FAS  oftheDodecahedron,namdv,  from  the  angles  B  apaF,  let 
[  ]  there  be  arawne  to  the  common  bafe  A  S  perpendicular  lines  BC&F  C-.which  fhal  pafle 
by  the  centres  K  &  L  of  the  layd  pentagons,by  the  corollary  of  the  xo.of  the  thirteth  .Draw 

the 


1 


the  lines  B  F  and  R  O.Now  forafmuche  as  the 
line  R  O  fubtendeth  the  angle  O  F  R  of  the 

{>entagon  of  the  dodecahedron, it  fhall  cut  the 
ineF  C  by  an  extreme  and  meane  proportion, 
by  the  3  .of  this  booke,  let  it  cutit  in  th  e  poynt 
I.  And  forafmuche  as  the  line  K  L  is  the  fide  of 
the  Icofahedron  infcribed  in  the  Dodecahe¬ 
dron,  it  coupleth  the  cetres  of  the  bafes  of  the 
dodecahedron  ;  for  the  angles  of  the  Icofahe¬ 
dron  are  fet  in  the  centres  of  the  bafes  of  the 
dodecahedron, by  the7.ofthefiuetenth.  Now* 

I  fay  that  S  O  >  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  is 
to  K  L  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,  as  the  lefle 
fegrrtent  I F  of  the  perpendicular  line  C  F,is  to 
the  line  L  C  which  is  drawne  from  the  centre 
L  to  A  S  the  fide  of  the  pentagon.  For  foraf- 
tnuch  as  in  the  triangle  BCE  the  two  fides 
C  B  and  C  F  are  in  the  centres  L  and  K  cut  like 
proportion  ally, the  lines  BF  and  K  L  fhalbe  pa- 
rcllels,by  the  z.  of  the  fixth  .Wherefore  the  tri- 
angles  B  C  F,  an  d  K  C  L  fhallbe  eauiangle,  by 
the  corollary  of  the  fame.  Wherfore  as  the  line  C  Lis  to  the  line  K  L,  fo  is  the  IineC  F  to  the  line  B  F'» 
by  the  4.of  the  fixth.  ButC  F  maketh  the  lelfe  fegmcnt  the  line  I  F,by  the  3. of  thisbookc,  and  the  line 
B  F  maketh  the  lelfe  fegment  the  line  S  0,namely,the  fide  of  the  Dodecahedron,by  the  z. corollary  of 
the  i3.ofthefiuetenih  For  the  line  B  F  which  coupleth  the  angles  B  and  F  of  the  bafes  of  the  dodeca¬ 
hedron,  is  equall  to  the  fide  of  the  cube,  which  contayneth  the  dodecahedron,  (by  the.13.of  the 
fiuecenth).  Wherefore  as  the  whole  line  C  F,is  to  the  whole  line  B  F,  fois  the  lefle  fegment  I F  to  the 
lefle  fegment  S  O  (by  the  z.of  the  14)  .  But  as  the  line  CF  is  to  the  line  BF,  fois  the  line  CL 

!>roued  to  be  to  the  line  KL.  Wherefore  as  the  line  IF  is  to  the  line  SO,  fois  the  line  GL  to  the 
ine  K  L.  Wherefore  alternately  by  the  x6.ofthe  fiueth,  as  the  line  IF  the  lefle  fegment  of  the  per¬ 
pendicular  of  the  pentagon  F  A  S,is  to  the  line  L  C  which  is  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  pentagon, 
to  the  bale.  Ibis  the  line  S  Q  the  fide  of the  Dodecahedron  to  the  line  KL  the  fide  of  the  Icowhe- 
dt  on  infcribed  in  it.  The  fide  therfore  of  a  Dodecahedron  is  to  the  fide  of an  Icofahedron  infcribed  in 
it,a$  the  lelfe  fegment  of  the  perpendicular  of  the  pentagon,  is  to  that  line  which  is  drawne  from  the 
centre  to  the  fide  of  the  fame  pentagon. 


iisru, 


fj  The24.  Tropofitiori* 

If  half e  of  the fideof  an  Icofahedron  he  deuided  by  an  extreme  £9“  meant 
proportion:  and  if  the  leffe fegment  thereof  be  taken  aneay from  the  "tyhole 
fide 3and  againe  from  the  refidue  be  taken  away  the  third partithat'tyhicb 
remaineth  Jhall  be  equal  to  the  fide  of  the  ' Dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the 

If^fimeUoJahedron.^ 


j  Vppofe  that  A  B  G  D  F  be  a' 

! pentagon,  containing  fiue 
j  fides  of  the  Icofahedron  by 
itheifi.of  the  thirtenth,  and 
let  it  be  infcribed  in  a  circle, 
whofe  centre  let  be  the  point  E.And  vpon 
the  fides  of  the  pentagon,  let  there  be  rea¬ 
red  vp  triangles,  making  a  folide  angle  of 
the  Icofahedron  at  the  poynt  I, by  the  16. 
of  the  thirtenth.  And  in  the  circle  A  B  D, 
inferibe  an  equilater  triangle  A  H  K.Frotn 
the  centre  E  drawe  to  HK  the  fide  of  the  „ 
triangle,  and  G  D  the  fide  of  the  penta-  ** 
gon,a  perpendicular  line, which  let  be  E- 
CNM.  And  draw  thefe  right  lines  EG, 
EDjIGandlD.AnddeuidethelineB  G 
jnto  two  equal  parts  in  the  poynt  T.  And 
BB.ii.  draw 


tenftruflm. 


Vemontfra- 

tion. 


Thefixtenth  <Boofyoftb 


e 


drawe  thefelinesl  N,I  T,T  N,E  T.  And 
forafmuche  as  in  the  perpendiculars  I T 
&  IN  are  the  ccntresof  the  circles  which 
containe  the  equilater  triangles  I B  G,  & 
I G  D,by  the  corollarye  of  the  firft  of  the 
thirde.  Let  thofe  centres  be  the  points 
S  and  O  .And  draw  the  line  S  O.  Deuide 
the  line  TB  the  half  of  BG  the  fide  of  the 
Icofahedron  by  an  extreme  and  meane 
proportion  in  thepoynt  R,  by  the  jo.of 
the  fixth,  and  let  the  leffe  fegment  therof 
be  RB.And  forafmuch  as  the  line  SO  cou 
pleth  the  centres  of  the  triangles  I B  G,& 
I G  D,itis  by  the  j. of  the  fiuetenth,  the 
fideof  the  Dodecahedro  infcribed  in  the 
Icofahedron,  whofe  fide  is  thelineB  G. 
From  the  fide  BG  take  away  B  R  the  leffe 
fegment  of  the  halfefide.  And  from  the 
refidue  G  R  take  away  the  third  part  G  V 
(by  the  jj.of  the  fixth.)Then  I  lay  that  the 
refidue  R  V  is  equal  to  S  O  the  fide  of  the 
Dodecahedron  infcribed.  For  forafmuch 
as  the  perpendicular  EN  is  in  the  pcynt 
G  deuided  by  an  extreme  and  meane 


proportion,  by  the  corollary  ofthefirfiofthefourtenthjandthe  greater  fegmenttherofis  thelineEC, 
andvnto  thelineEC  the  line  GM  is  equal, by  the  corollary  of  the  12. of  the  thirtenth :  wherefore  the 
line  E  C  is  to  the  line  C  N,  as  the  line  CM  is  to  the  fame  line  C  N,  by  the  7.  of  the  fiueth. 


But  as  the  line  E  C  is  to  the  line  C  N ,  fo  is  the  whole  line  E  N,  to  the  greater  fegment  E- 
C,by  the  jidiffinition  of  the  fixth.  Wherefore  (  by  the  n.  of  the  fiueth),  as  the  whole  line  EN  is 
to  the  greater  fegment  £C,fo  is  the  line  CM  to  the  line  CN.  Wherefore  the  line  C  M,is  deuided  by  an 
extreme  and  meane  proportion  in  th  e  poy  n  t  N,  namely,  is  deuided  like  vnto  the  line  EN,by  the  i.of 
the  fourtenth .Wherfore  the  line  E  M  excedeth  the  line  E  N  by  rhe  leffe  fegment  of  his  halfe,natnely, 
by  M  N.  And  forafmuche  as  E  G  D  is  the  triangle  of  an  eqiiilater  and  equiangle  pentagon  ABGDF, 
dhdE  TN  is  likewifethe  triangle  of  the  like  pentagon  infcribed  in  thepentagon  A  B  G  D  F:  Therefore 
by  the  lo.of  the  fixth,  the  triangle  E  T  N  is  like  to  the  triangle  E  G  D.  Wherefore  as  the  line!  6  is 
to  the  line  E  N,fo  by  the  4.of  the  fixth,is  theline  G  D  to  the  line  N  T.  Wherefore  the  line  G  D  (or  B  G 
which  is  equal  vnto  it)excedeth  the  line  NT  bythe  leffe  fegment  of  the  halfe  ofB  G.For  the  line  E  G 
did  in  like  fort  excede  theline  E  N.But  thatleffe  fegment  is  the  line  B  R.Wherefore  the  refidue  R  G  is 
equal  to  the  line  T  N.  And  forafmuch  as  FB  G  is  an  equilater  triangle :  the  perpendicular  ST  fbalbe  the 
ftalfe  of  thelihe  St  which  is  drawnefrom  the  eentre,by  the  corollary  of  the  1 2.  of  the  thirteiith:  wher¬ 
fore  the  line  I T  excedeth  the  line  I S  by  his  third  part.  And  forafmuche  as  the  line  S  O  which  coupleth 
thefeftidnsjis  a  parallel  to  the  lineT  N,by  the  2.of  the  fixth.  For  the  equal  perpendiculars  1  T,and  I N 
are  cut  likein  the  povnts  S  &  O :  therfbre  the  triangles  1 T  N&  I S  O,  are  like  by  thd  Corollaiy  of  the 
fecond  of  the  fixth  .W  herfore  as  the  line  I T  is  to  the  line  I  S,fbby  the  4. of  the  fixth  is  the  line  T  N  to 
the  line  S  O .  But  the  line  IT  excedeth  the  line  IS  by  d  third  part:  wherfore  theline  T  N,excedeth  the 
line  S  O  by  a  third  part:  but  the  line  T  N  is  proued  equal  to  the  line  R  G.  Wherfore  the  line  R  G  exce¬ 
deth  the  line  S  O  by  a  third  part  of  himfelf,which  is  G  V.  Wherfore  the  refidue  R  V,is  equal  to  the  line 
S  0,which  is  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the  Icofahedron,  whofe  fide  is  the  line  B  G.  If 
therfbre  halfe  of  the  fide  ofan  Icofahedro,be  deuided  by  an  extreme  &  meane  proportion  :and  if  the 
leffe  fegment  therof  be  taken  away  from  the  whole  fide,and  again e  from  the  refidue  be  take  away  the 
third  part :  that  which  remaineth  /hall  be  equal  to  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  infcribed  in  the 
Icofahedron. 


T he  25.  (propojitibn. 

X 0  proue  that  a  cuhegeuenjs  to  a  trilater  equilater  pyrdmis  infcribed  in  it, 
triple. 

Vppofcthat  the  cubegeuen,beAB  CH  :  and  let  the  pyramis  infcribed  in  it  be  AG  DF. 
Then  I  fay  that  the  cube  A  B  C  H  is  triple  to  the  pyramis  A  G  D  F.  For  forafmuche  as  the 
bafe  A  F  D  is  common  to  the  pyramis  A  FDB  and  A  F  D  G,  the  pyramis  A  F  D  B  fhalbe  fet 

_ without  the  pyramis  A  FDG.  Likewifethe  reft  of  the  bafes  of  the  infcribed  pyramis  are 

common  to  the  reft  of  the  pyramids  fette  without :  which  are  thefe  :  the  pyramis  AGDC  vppon 

the 


Elementes  of  Geometry ^ddei  by  Fhtflas.  FoL^%t 


die  bafe  A  G  D :  the  pyramis  A  G  FE  vpon  the  bafe  A  G  F  •. 
and  the  pyramis  G  D  F  H  vpon  the  bait  G  D  F  i  Which  py¬ 
ramids  taken  without, are  foure  in  number,  equal  and  like 
the  one  to  the  other, by  the  8.diffinition  of  the  eleueth.  For 
euery  one  of  them  is  contained  vnder  thre  halfe  fquares  of 
the  cube,  and  one  of  the  bafesof  the  pyramis  inferibed. 
Wherfore  euery  one  of  the  is  cotained  vnder  the  halfe  bafe 
of  the  cube,&  the  altitudeof  the  cube.  As  the  pyramis  A  E- 
G  F,hath  to  his  bafe  halfe  of  the  fquare  E  H, namely,  the  tri¬ 
angle  E  G  F,&  hath  to  his  altitude,  the  altitude  of  the  cube, 
namely, the  line  A  E.  Wherfore  the  faydpyramis  is  the  fixth 
part  of  the  cube.  For  if  the  cube  be  deuided  into  two  prif- 
mes,by  the plaine C  B  F  G,the prifme ACBGEF,fhalbe  tri¬ 
ple  to  the  pyramis  AEGF,hauing  one  &  the  felfe  fame  bafe 
with  it  EGF,and  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude  E  A, by  the 
firil  corollary  of  the  7  -of  the  twelueth.  W  herefore  the  fayd 
outward  pyramis  AEGF  is  the  fixth  part  of  the  Whole  cube. 
Wherfore  alfo  the  fame  pyramis  together  wyth  the  other 
threoutwarde  pyramids  A  F  D  B,A  G  D  C,and  GDFH,lhal 
containe  two  third  partes  of  the  cube.  Wherfore  the  refi- 
due,namely  ,the  pyramis  inferibed  A  GDF,  ihal  contain  one 
third  part  of  the  cube.  And  therefore  conuerfedly  the  cube 
fhallbe  triple  to  it:  wherefore  weliaue  proued  that  a  cube 
geue  triple  to  a  trilater  &  equilater  pyramis  inferibed  in  it. 


ft  The  26.  Tropojition. 


To  prone  that  a  trilater  equilater  pyramis  is  duple  to  an  Odohedron  in * 
feribed  in  it. 

Et  there  be  taken  a  trilater  Pyramis  ABCD :  whofe  fixe  fides  let  be  cut  into  two  e« 
quail  partes,  in  the  pointes  E,K,F,L,G,and  H  :  inferibing  thereby  an  Odohedron  in 
the  pyramis,  by  the  i.ofthe  fiuetenth  .  Wherefore  the  pyramids  AEG  H,B  E  FK, 
C  F  G  L,  &  D  KH  L,  fell  without  the  Odohedron  infcribed,by  the  fame  fecond  of  the 
fiuetenth .  But  the  outward  Pyramids  (  namely,  A  E  G  H,  and  the  three  other)are  like 
’  vnto  the  whole  pyramis,  by  the  /.definition  of the  eleuenth.For  the  bafes  of  the  whole 
^pyramis  are  by  parallellines  drawen  in  theta  cutinto  like  triangles,by  the  Corollary  of 
the  i.ofthe  fifth,  of  Which  the  fore  fayd  pyra¬ 
mids  arc  made .  Whefeford  the  whole  pyramis 
is  to  euery  ohC  of  them  in  treble  proportion  of 
that  ifi  Which  the  fides  of  like  proportion  are, 
by  the  8  .of  the  twelfth  But  by  conftrudion,the 
proportion  of  the  fide  AB  to  the  fide  AEis 
duple  .  Wherefore  the  whole  pyramis  ABCD 
is  oduple  to  the  pyramis  AEG  H,andfo  is  it  to 
eiiety  one  of  the  pyramids  Which  are  equall 
to  Ae6h.  For  duple  proportion multiplyed 
into  it  felfe  twife  maketh  oduple.  Wherefore  it 
folldWeth  that  the  4-pyramids  A  E  GH,B  E  F  Ks 
CFG  L,and  DKH L, taken  together,make the 
halfe  of  thd  whole  pyramis  ABCD  .  Where¬ 
fore  the  refidue,  namely,  the  Odohedron  E  G- 
I K  H  F,  is  the  other  half  of  the  pyramis.Whfer- 
fofe  the  pyramis  is  duple  to  the  Odohedron. 

Wherefore  we  haue  proued  that  a  trilater  e- 
quilater  pyramis  is  duple  to  an  Odohedron  in» 
feribed  in  it. 


ft  The  27.  Tropojition. 

T 0  prone  that  a  Cube  is  fextuple  to  an  Odohedron  inferibed  in  it 


DBB.hu 


1 


Dtm<mFlr4- 
tm . 


"The  fixtentb  ‘Boofy  of  the 


Et  there  be  taken  a  cube  ABCDjEFGH:  whofe  4.  Handing  lines  A  E,B  F,C  H,"&  D  G, 
let  be  cut  into  two  equall  partes  in  the  pointes  I,K,M,L  :  and  by  thofe  pointes  let  there  be 
extended  a  plaine  K  L  M I :  which  {hall  be  a  fquare,  and  parallel  to  the  fquares  BC&FH, 
by  the  1  y  .of  the  eleuenth  .  Wherefore  in  it  {hall  be  the  bafe  which  is  common  to  the  two 
pyramids  of  the  Odohedron  inferibed  in  the  cube,  by  that  which  was  deraonllrated  in  the 
third  of  the  fiuetenth  .  Let  that  bafe  be  N  P  R  Q,  coupling  > 

the  centres  of  the  bafes  of  the  cube :  and  vpon  that  bafe  let  ^ 

befetthetwo  pyramids  of  the  Odohedron,which  let  be 
N  P  QJl  S,  ana  N  P  QjtT  .  And  forafmuch  as  thofe  two 
pyramids  taken  together,  haue  their  altitude  equall  with 
the  altitude  of  the  whole  cube,echof  them  a  part  hath  to 
his  alttiude  halfe  the  altitude  of  the  cube, namely,  halfe  of 
the  fide  of  the  cube,as  the  line  K  B  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  3 
fquare  K»L  M I  is  double  to  the  fquare  N  R  Q_P,  by  thei  47, 
of  the  firii :  the  other  fquares  of  the  cube  {hall  alfo  be  dou¬ 
ble  to  the  fquare  N  R  QJ5 »  And  forafmuch  as  the  cube,  as 
it  was  manifclt  by  the  laif  ofthe  fiuetenth,  is  refolued  into  - 

fixe  pyramids,  whofe  bafes  are  the  bafes  of  the'cube,&:the  ^ 

altitudes  the  lines  drawen  fro  the  centre  to  the  bafes,which 
are  equal!  to  halfe  the  fide  of  the  cube  *.  it  followeth  that  e- 
uery  one  ofthe  fixe  pyramids  ofthe  cube,  hauing  his  bafe 
double  to  the  bafe  of  eche  of  the  pyramids  ofthe  Odtohe- 
dron,  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude  that  thefaid  pyramids  of 
the  Odohedro  haue,is  double  to  cither  of  the  pyramids, of 
the  odohedro,by  the  6 .of  the  twelfth  .  And  forafmuch  as 
euery  one  of  the  pyramids  of  the  cube  is  equall  to  the  two 
pyramids  of  the  Odohedron, the  fixe  pyramids  of  the  cube 
{hall  be  fextuple  to  the  whole  Odohedron  .  Wherefore  it 
is  manifeft,tiutacube  is  fextuple  to  an  Odohedron  inferi¬ 
bed  in  it. 


f  The  28.  Tropojition. 


T 0  prone  that  an  OSiohedron  is  quadruple  fefquialter  to  a  Cube  inferi * 
bed  in  it  . 

Vppofe  that  the  Odohedron  geuen  be  ABCDEF:  and  let  the  cube  inferibei  in  it  be 
G  H I K,  V  Qjl  S .  Then  I  fay,  that  the  Odohedron  is  quadruple  fefquialtcr  to  the  cube 
inferibed  in  it .  Forafmuch  as  the  lines  drawen  from  the  centre  ofthe  Odohedron, of  of 
the  Sphere  which  containeth  it,  vnto  the  centres  of  the  bafes  of  the  Odohedron,afepfo- 
ued  equall,  by  the  a  1  .of  the  fiuetenth  :  and  the  angles  of  the  cube  are  fet  in  the  centres 
of  thole  bafes,  by  the  4.  of  the  fiuetenth  :  it  followeth,  that  the  felfe  fame  right  lines  are 
drawen  from  one  and  the  felfe  fame  centre  of  the  cube  and  of  the  Odohedron :  for  they  haue  eche  one 
and  the  felfe  fame  centre,  by  the  Corollary  ofthe  ai.of  the  fiuetenth  .  Let  that  centre  be  the  pome 
T  .  Wherefore  the  bafe  B  D  F  C,which  cutteth  the  Odohedron  into  two  equalland  quadrilater  pyra¬ 
mids,  by  the  Corollary  ofthe  14.  ofthe  thirtenth,  {ball  alfo  cut  the  cube  into  two  equall  partes ,  by 
the  Corollary  (of  the  3  9  .of  the  eleuenth  .  For  it  paffeth  by  the  centre  T,by  that  which  was  demonflra- 
ted  in  the  i4.of  the  thirtenth  .And  forafmuch  as  the  bafe  of  the  cube  is  in  the  4*  centres  of 

the  bafes  of  the  pyramis  A  B  D  F  C,  a  plaine  LNOM,  extended  by  thofe  pointes,  {hall  be  parallel  to 
the  plaine  B  D  F  C,  by  that  which  was  demonltrated  in  the  4.of  the  fiuetenth,  and  {hall  cut  the  pyra¬ 
mis  in  the  pointes  L,N,0,M  :  and  the  lines  LN,BD,  and  N  0,D  F,  fhall  be  parallels,  fo  alfo  {hall  the 
lines  O  M,  F  C,  and  L  M,  B  C  :  and  the  fquare  G  H I K  of  the  cube  {hall  be  inferibed  in  the  fquare 
LNOM,  by  the  fame .  Wherefore  the  fquare  LNOMis  duple  to  the  fquare  G  HI  K,  by  the  47. 
ofthe  firft  .  From  the  folide  angle  A,  let  there  be  drawen  to  the  plaine  fuperficies  B  D  F  C,  a  perpen¬ 
dicular,  which  let  fall  vppon  it  in  the  point  T,and  let  the  fame  perpendicular  be  AT,cutting  the 
plaine  L  N  O  M  in  the  point  P  .  Anditfliallalfo  bea  perpendicular  to  the  plaine  LN  O'M,  by  the 
Corollary  of  the  14.  of  the  eleuenth .  Againe  from  the  angle  B  A  D  of  the  triangle  A  D  B,  let  there 
be  drawen  by  the  centre  H  of  the  triangle,  to  the  bafe  a  line  A  H  X .  Wherefore  the  line  AX  is  fet 
quialter  to  the  line  AH,  by  the  Corollary  ofthe  iz.of  the  thirtenth  .  Wherefore  the  line  A  His 
duple  to  the  line  HX  .  But  the  other  lines  AB, AD,  A F, AC,  and  the  perpendicular  APT, are 
cut  like  vnto  the  line  A  HX,  by  the  ,17,  ofthe  eleventh  :  Wherefore  the  line  AP  is  double  to  the 
line  PT.  Wherefore  the  line  A  P  is  the  altitude  of  the  cube,  for  the  line  P  T  is  the  halfe  thereof. 


Element es  of  Geometry, added  by  F tufas.  Fol.\fy 


And  forafmuch  as  vpon  the  bafe 
G  H I K  of  the  cube,and  vnder  the 
altitude  A  P  of  the  jfame  cube,  is 
fet  the  pyramis  A  G  H I K:  the  faid 
pyramis  is  the  third  part  of  the 
cube,by  the  Corollary  of  the  7*of 
the  twelfth  .  But  vnto  the  pyramis 
A  G  H I K  the  pyramis  ALNOM 
is  duple,  by  the  6.  of  the  twelfth, 
for  the  bafe  of  the  one  is  double  to 
the  bafe  of  the  other  .  Wherefore 
the  pyramis  A  L  N  O  M  is  two  third 
partes  of  the  cube.  And  forafmuche 
as  the  pyramids  ALNOM,  andD 
A B  D  F  C,arelike, by  the  redefi¬ 
nition  of  the  eleuenth  :  therefore 
they  are  in  triple  proportion  of 
that  in  which  the  fidesoflike  pro¬ 
portion  A  H  to  A  X,  or  A  L  to  AB, 
are,  by  the  Corollary  of  the  8.  of 
the  twelfth  .  But  the  fide  A  Bis 
proued  to  befefquialter  to  the  fide 
A  L  .  Wherefore  the  pyramis  A- 
B  C  D  F  is  to  the  pyramis  ALN- 
OM,asi7.isto  8.  (that  is,  in  fef¬ 
quialter  proportion  tripled  :  for 
thequantitie  or  denomination  of 
fefquialter  proportion  ,  namely , 

j  -L-  multiplied  into  it  felfe  once  maketh  2-^-,which  againe  multiplyed  by  j~  maketh  3~s 
thatis,  ir.to  8. )  .Butofwhat  partes  the  pyramis  ALN  O  Mcontaineth8,ofthe  fame  the  cube  con¬ 
tained!  i  z. :  namely,  is  fefquialter  to  the  pyramis.  Wherefore  of  what  partes  the  cube  containeth  n,of 
the  fame  the  whole  Odohedron  (which  is  double  to  the  pyramis  A  B  D  F  C  )  containeth  J4  .  Which 
J4.  hath  to  n  .quadruple  fefquialter  proportion  .  Wherefore  the  whole  Odohedron  is  to  the’cube  in¬ 
fcribed  in  it,  in  quadruple  fefquialter  proportion  .  Wherefore  we  haue  proued  that  an  Odohedron  ge- 
«en  is  quadruple  fefquialter  to  a  cube  infcribed  in  it. 

<{[  A  Corollary. 


An  OSiohedron  is  to  a  cube  infcribed  in  it,  in  that  proportion  that  thefquares 

of their fldes  die.^oi  by  the  i4.of  this  booke,  the  fide  of  the  Odohedron  is  in  power  quadruple 
fefquialter  to  the  fide  of  the  cube  infcribed  in  it. 


T  o  prone  that  an  offohedrogeuejs  * tre * 
decuple  fefquialter  to  a  trilater  equila* 
ter  pyramis  inferibetlin  it. 


Et  the  odohedron  geuen,  be  A  B  :  in  which  let 
there  be  infcribed  a  cube  FCED,  by  the  4.of  the 
fiuetenth,  and  in  the  cube  let  there  be  infcribed 
a  pyramis  FEGD,by  the  r  .of  the  fiuetenth.  And 
forafmuche  as  the  angles  of  the  pyramis  are  (by 
the  fame  firftof  the  fiuetenth)  fet  in  the  angles  of  the  cube: 
and  the  angles  of  the  cube  are  fet  in  the  centres  of  the  bafes 
of  the  Odohedron,  namely,in  the  poyntes  F,E,C,D,G  by 
the  4  of  the  fiuetenth.  Wheifore  the  angles  of  the  pyramis, 
arefetin  the  centres  F,C,E,D  of  the  odohedron.  Where¬ 
fore  the  pyramis  FEDG  is  infcribed  in  the  odohedron 
(by  thed.of  the  fiuetenth.^  And  forafmuche  as  the  odohe¬ 
dron 


*  TbdtUSt 


Demnftra- 

tio, 7. 


T hefixtenth  "Booke  of tin 


A 


dron  A  B  is  to  the  cube  FC  ED,  infcribed  in  it  quadruple 
fefquialter  (  by  the  former  propofitio)  :and  the  cube  CDEF 
is  to  thepyramis  F  ED  G  infcribed  in  it  triple,  bythe  ij.of 
booke:  wherefore  three  magnitudes  being  gcuen, namely, 
theoftohedron,  the  cube  and  thepyramis,  the  proportion 
of  the  extremes^  namely,  of  theottohedron  to  the  piramis) 
is  made  of  the  proportions  of  the  m  canes,  (namely,  of  the 
o&ohedron  to  the  cube,and  of  the  cube  to  the  pyramis,)as 
itis  eafie  to  fee  by  the  declaration  vpon  the  lo.diffinition  of 
the  fiueth .  Now  then  multiplying  the  quantities  or  dep. o mi 
nations  of  the  proportions  (namely,  of  the  odlohedron  to 

the  cube  which  is 4  A-,and  of  the  cube  to  thepyramis, 
which  is  3)as  was  taught  in  the  diffinition  of  the  fixth,there 
flialbe  produced  13'  -^namely, the  proportion  of  the  o£to 

hedron  to  the  pyrantis  infcribed  in  it,For  4  —^multiplyed 

hy  3  .produce  13  Wherefore  the  O&ohedron  is  to  the 
pyramis  infcribed  in  it  in  tredecuple  fefquialter  proportion. 

Wherefore  we  haueproued  that  an  Octohedron  is  to  a  tri- 
lacer  equilater  pyramis  infcribed  in  it,  in  tredecuple  fefqui- 
al  ter  proportion. 

\ 

i  fj  The  3  ofPropoJttion . 

T 0 prone  that  a  trilater  equilater  Tyramis,  is  noncuple  to  a  cube  in 
ink. 


Vppofe  that  thepyramis  geuen,  be  ABC  D,  whole  two  bafes  let  be  A  B  C,  and  D  B  C, 
ana  let  their  centres  both  e.poynts  G  and  I.And  from  the  angle  A, draw  vnto  the  bale  B- 
Ca  perpendicular  AE  :  likewife  from  the  angle  D  draw  Vnto  the  lame  bale  B  C,aper- 
pendicuiar  DE;and  they  fhalconcurre  in  the  fe&ion  E  by  the  3 .'of the  third -and  in  them 
Ibalbe  the  cetres  G  and  I,  by  the  corollary  of  the  firfi  of  the  third.  And  foralmuch  as  the 
line  A  D  is  the  fide  of  the  pyramis,the  lame  A  D  lhall  be  the  diameter  of  the  bale  of  the 
cube  which  cotaineth  thepyramis,by  the  r.of  the  fiueteth.  J[_ 

Draw  the  line  G I.  And  forafmuch  as  the  line  G I  coupleth 
the  centres  of  .die  bafes  of  the  pyramis  :  the  faide  line  G I 
flialbe  the  diameter  ofthebafe  of  the  cube  infcribed  in  the 
pyramis  by  the  i8ofthe  fiuetenth.  And  fbrafmuche  as  the 
line  A  G  is  double  to  theline  G  E,  by  the  corollarye  of  the 
twelueth  of  the  thirtenth :  the  whole  line  A  E  lhal  be  triple 
to  the  line  G  E  :  and  fo  is  alfo  the  line  D  E  to  the  line  I  E» 

Wherefore  the  lines  AD  and  G I  are  parallels,  by  the  2. of 
thefixth.  And  therefore  the  triangles  A  ED, and  G  E I  are 
like.by  the  corollary  of  the  fame.  And  forafmuch  as  the  tri¬ 
angles  A  E  D,and  G  E I  are  like, the  line  AD fhalbe  triple  to 
the  line  GI,by  the  4.ofthefixth.But  the  line  AD  is  the  dia¬ 
meter  of  the  bafeofthe  cube  circumfcribed  about  the  py¬ 
ramis  ABC  D,and  the  line  GI  is  the  diameter  of  the  bafe  of the  cube  infcribed  in  the  pyramis  ABCD: 
but  the  diameters  of  the  bafes  are  equemultiplices  to  the  fides(namely,are  in  power  duple)  .Wherfore 
the  fide  of  the  cube  circumfcribed  about  the  pyramis  ABCD,is  triple  to  the  fide  of  the  cube,  inferibedi 
in  the  fame  piramis, by  the  1  y  .of  the  fiueth :  but  like  cubes  are  in  triple  proportion  the  one  to  the  other 
of  that  in  which  their  fides  are,  by  the  33  .of  the  eleuenth  rand  the  fides  are  in  triple  proportion  the  one 
to  the  other:  Wherfore  triple  taken  thre  times  bringeth  forth  twenty  feuencuple,which  is  27.ro  r:for 
tire  4,termes  17.9.3.1 ,  being  fet  in  triple  proportion  •  the  proportioned?  the  firft  to  the  fourth  ,namely,  of 
27. to  i.flbalbe  triple  to  the  proportion  of  thefirifto  the  fecond,  namely, of  27.  to  9, by  the  lo.diffinition 
of  the  fiueth:  which  proportion  of  zf.to  1  .is  the  proportio  of  thefides  tripled/which  proportio  abb  is 
found  in  like  folides.  Wherefore  of  what  partes  the  cube  circumfcribed  cpntaineth  27  .of  the  fame, the 
cube  infcribed  contained  one  .•  but  of  what  partes  the  cube  circumfcribed,containeth  27.  of  the  fame, 
thepyramis  infcribed  in  it,containeth  9.  by  the  zy. of  this  booke:  wherfore  of  what  partes  thepyramis 
ABC  D  containeth  ,9.of  the  fame,  the  cube  infcribed  in  the  pyramis,  containeth  one.  Wherefore  we 
haiie  proued  that  a  trilater  and  equilater  pyramis, is  nonecuple  to  a  cube  infcribed  in  it. 

The 


Element es  of  Geometry, added  by  F tufas.  FoL^fa 

f  The  3  ifPropofition. 

An  Octahedron  hath  to  an  Icofohedron  infer ibed  in  it,  that  proportion, 
lehich  two  hafes  of the  Ooiohedron  haue  to  fine  hafes  of the  Icofahedron. 

Vppofe  that  the  odohedron  geuen  be  A  B  G  D,and  let  the  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  it, be  F- 
G  H  M  K  L I O .  Then  I  fay  that  the  odohedron  is  to  the  Icofahedron,  as  two  bafes  of  the 
odohedron,arc  to  fiue  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron  .For  forafmuche  as  the  folide  of  the  odohe- 
dron  confifieth  of  eight  pyramids,fet  vpon  the  bafes  of  the  odohedron,and  hauing  to  theyr  p  «  , 
altitude  a  perpendicular  line  drawne  from  the  centre  to  the  bafe:  let  that  perpendicular  be  ER,  or  ES,  .  ' 

being  drawne  from  the  centre  E  (which  centre  is  common  to  either  of  the  folides3  by  the  corollary  of 
the  n.of  the  fiuetenth)to  the  centres  of  the  bafes,namely,  to  the  poyntes  Rand  S.i  Wherefore,  for  that 
thre  pyramids  are  equal  and  like3they  fhalbe  equal  to  a  prifme  fet  vpon  the  felfe  fame  bafe3  and  vnder 
the  felfe  fame  altitude, by  the  corollary  of  thefeuenthof  the  twelueth.  Butvnto  this  prifme  is  double 
that  prifme  which  is  fet  vpon  the  felffame  bafe, and  hath  his  altitude  duple,  namely,thc  whole  line  RS 
by  the  corollary  of  the  aj'.of  the  eleuenth  -.for  it  is  equal  to  the  two  equaland  like  prifmes  whereof  it  is 
compofed.Wherfore  the  prifme  fet  vpo  the  bafe  of  the  odohedron,and  hauing  to  his  altitude  the  line 
R  S  is  equal  to  fix  pyramids, fet  vpon  fix  bales  of  the  Odohedron,  and  hauing  to  their  altitude  the  line 
ER.  So  there  remaine  two  pyramids  (for  in  the  odohedron  are  8  . bafes)  which  fhall  be  equal  to  the 
,prifme  which  is  fet  vpon  the  third  part  of  the  bafe  of  the  odohedron, ana  vnder  the  altitude  R  S.  For 
prifmes  vnder  one  and  the  felfe  fame  altitude3are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other3as  are  their  bafe*, 
by  the  corollary  of  the  7  of  the 

twelueth  .  Wherefore  the  two  ^ 

prifmes  which  are  fet  vppon  the 
bafe  of  the  odohedron,  and  vp¬ 
on  a  third  part  therof,  and  vnder 
the  altitude  R  S3  are  equal  to  the 
8.  pyramids  of  the  Odohedron, 
or  to  the  whole  folide  of  the  oc- 
tohedron .  And  forafmuch  as  the 
Icofahedron  inferibed  in  the  oc- 
tohedron,  hathe  his  bafes  fet  in 
the  bafes  of  the  Odohedron,  by 
the  i7.ofthefiuetenth;itfollow- 
eth  that  the  pyramids  fet  vppon 
the  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron,  & 
hauing  to  their  toppes  one  and 
the  felfe  fame  centre  E,  are  con¬ 
tained  vnder  the  felfe  fame  alti¬ 
tude,  that  the  pyramids  of  the 
odohedron  are  cotained  vnder. 
namely, vnder  the  line  ER,or  ES. 

And  therefore  a  prifme,  fet  vpon 
the  bafe  ofthe  Icofahedron,  and 
hauing  his  altitude  double  to  the 
altitude  of  thepyramis,  namely, 
the  whole  line  R  S,  is  equal  to 

fixe  pyramids  fet  Vpon  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron,  and  vnder  the  altitude  E  R  or  E  S,  as  we  haue  pro-* 
ued  in  the  odohedron.Wherfore  the  20. pyramids, let  vpon  the  20.bafes  of  the  Icofahedron,  are  equal 
to  thre  prifmes  fet  vpon  the  bafe  ofthe  Icolahedron,and  vnder  the  altitude  R  S,  and  moreouer  to  an  o- 
ther  prifme  fet  vppon  a  thirde  part  of  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron  and  ynder  the  fame  altitude  R  S, 

Which  prifme  is  a  thirde  part  of  the  former  prifme, by  the  corollarye  ofthe  7.  of:  the  twelueth  :  for 
their  proportion  is  as  the  proportion  of  the  bafes  .Wherfore  two  prifmes  fet  vpon  the  bafe  ofthe  odo- 
hedron,and  a  third  part  therof,and  vnder  the  altitude  R  S,is  to  4,prifmes  fet  vpon  three  bafes  ofthe  I- 
cofahedron,and  a  third  part  thereof,and  vnder  the  fame  altitude  RS,  in  the  fame  proportion  that  the 
bafes  are,  that  is, as  4.third  partes  of  the  bafe  of  the  Ododron  (which  are  equal  to  one  bafe,  and  —  J 
to  ten  third  partes  of  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron  (which  are  equal  to  thre  bafes  &  — ^or  as  two  third 

partes  of  the  bafe  of  the  Odohedron,  are  to  fiue  thirde  partes  of  the  bafe  of  the  Icofahedron.  But 
two  thirde  partes  of  the  bafe  of  the  Odohedron,  are  to  fiue  thirde  partes  of  the  bafe  of  the  Icofc- 
hedron,  as  two  bafes  are  to  fiue  bafes(by  the  iy.of  the  fifth,  for  they  are  partes  of  equemultiplices:) 

And  two  prifmes  of  the  Odohedron  are  to  4.priimes  of  the  Icofahedron  ,  as  the  folide  of  the 
Odohedron  is  to  the  folide  of  the  Icofahedron,  when  as  eche  are  equal  to  eche  of  the  folides: 

Wherefore  (by  the  it.  ofthe  fiuech)  the  folide  of  the  Odohedron,  is  to  the  folide  ofthe  Icofahedron 
inferibed  in  it,  as  two  bafes  of  the  Odohedron,  are  to  fiue  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron  .  An  Qc- 

CCC.j.  tofaedron, 

9  Of 


Conttntfthn* 


Vtmonftrt- 

thn. 


The  ftxtenth  Hooke  ofth 


e 

xohedron  therfore  is  to  an  Icofahedron  infcribed  in  it*  in  that  proportion,  that  two  bafcs  of  the  O$o- 
hedron,are  to  £ue  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron. 

If  The  32.  Trbpofition. 

T he proportio  of the  folide  of  cm  Icofahedron  to  the  folide  of  a  foodecahe* 
dr  on  infcribed  in  it ,  confifteth  of the  proportion  of  the fide  of the  Icofahe* 
dr  on  to  the  fide  of the  Cube  contained  in  the  fame  fphere ,  and  of the  pro * 
portion  tripled  of  the  diameter  to  the  line  "Which  conpleththe  centers  of 
the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  a  t>odecahedron,whofe  diameter  let  be  H  I,  and  let  the  Icofahe¬ 
dron  contained  in  the  fame  fphere  be  A  B  G  C,  whofe  dimetient  let  be  A  C  .And  let  the 
right  line  which  coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes  be  B  G  .  And  let  the  dodeca¬ 
hedron  infcribed  in  the  Icofahedron  be  that  which  is  fee  vpon  the  diameter  B  G,  by  the 
f.  of  the  fiuetenth  .  And  let  the  fide  of  the  cube  beD  E,and  let  the  fide  of  the  Icoiahe- 
dron  be  D  F,both  the  fayd  iblides  being  deferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fphere.  The 
I  lay  that  the  proportion  of  the  folide  of  the  Icofahedron  ABCG  to  the  folide  of  the  dodecahedron 
fet  vpon  the  diameter  B  G ,  infcribed  in  it,  confilleth  of  the  proportion  of  the  line  D  F  to  the  line  D  E, 
and  of  the  proportion  tripled  of  the  line  A  C  to  the  line  B  G  .  For  forafmuch  as  the  folide  of  the  Icofa¬ 
hedron  A  B  G  C  is  to  the  folide  of  the  dodecahedron  HI,  being  contayned  in  one  and  the  felfe  lame 
fphere ,  as  D  F  is  to  D  E, 
by  the  H .of the  fourtenth 
But  the  dodecahedron 
whofe diameteris  H  I,is 
the  dodecahedron 


to 

whole  diamer  is  B  G ,  in 
treble  proportio  of  that 
in  which  the  diameter 
H I  is  to  the  diameter  B  - 
G ,  by  the  corollary  of 
the  i7.of the  twelfth:  8c 
the  lines  H I  and  AC  are 
equall  by  fuppofition 
(namely ,  the  diameters 
of  one  and  the  felfe  fame 
fphere)  .Wherefore  as  H 
Iis  toB  G,  foisACto 
B  G.  Wherefore  the  pro¬ 
portion  ofthe  extremes, 
namely,  of  the  Icoiahe* 
dron  A  B  G  C  to  the  Do¬ 
decahedron  fet  vppon 
the  diameter  B  G  which 
coupleth  the  centres,co- 
fifleth  (by  the  y  .diffiniti- 
on  of  the  fixt)of  the  pro¬ 
portions  of  the  meanes, 
namely, of  the  proportio 

ofthe  Icofahedron  A  B  C  G  to  the  dodecahedron  H I  (which  is  oneand  the  fame  with  the  propomoa 
ofD  F  to  D  E  Jand  of  the  proportion  of  the  fame  H I  to  the  other  dodecahedron  fet  vpon  thediameter 
B  G,infcribed  in  the  fame  Icofahedron  A  B  G  C,by  the  fame  y.  of  the  fiuetenth  :  which  proportion  is 
triple  to  the  proportio  of  the  line  H I  (or  the  line  A  C)to  G  B  which  coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppo¬ 
fite  bafes  ofthe  Icofahedron .  The  proportion  therefore  of  the  folide  ofthe  Icofahedron  to  the  Ibude 
of  a  Dodecahedron  infcribed  in  it,confifteth  of  the  proportion  ofthe  fide  ofthe  Icofahedron  to  the 
fide  ofthe  Cube  contayned  in  the  fame  fphere ,  and  of  tne  proportion  tripled  ofthe  diameter  to  the 
line  which  coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron. 

The  33'  (Propofition. 

The  folide  of a  {Dodecahedron  excedeththe  folide  of  a  Cube  infcribed  in 

it 


c 


Elementes  of  Geometry , added  by  Flujlas.  Fol.^o. 

itjby  a  parallelipipedon  3  whofe  bafe  1 tanteth  of  the  bafe  of  the  (jibe  by  d 
third  part  of the  lejfe figment }and  ‘tyhofi  altitude  "tyanteth  of the  altitude 
of the  (jibe  }  by  the  lefie  figment  of the  lejfe  figment  ^of  halfe  the  fide  of 
the  Cube. 


Orafmuch  as  by  the  17.  of  the  thirtenth,aiid  8.  of  the  fiuetfinth,it  was  mamfefh,that  the  bafe 
|j  ^S^^ofa  cube  iiiFcribedin  a  dodecahedron, doth With  his  fides  fubtend  the  angles  of4.pentagor,s 
a  oc  u  rrin  g  at  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fide  of  the  dodecahedron :  let  that  bale  of  the  cube  be  A-  ConUvtlEthlfa 

jjj  C  D :  and  let  the  fide  wherac  4.bafes  of  the  dodecahedron  eircumfcribed  concurre,be  E  G : 

which  fhall  contayne  a  folide  A  E  B  D  G  C  fet  vpon  the  bafe  A  B  C  D.Diuide  the  fides  A  B  and  D  C  in¬ 
to  two  equall  partes  iri  the  poyntes  L  and  N.And  draw  the  line  L  N,  which  is  a  parallel  to  the  fide  E  G, 
as  it  was  manifefl  by  the  i7.of  the  thirtenth.The  perpendiculars  alfo  E  R  and  G  O  which  couple  thofe 
parallels, are  eche  equall, to  halfe  of  the  fide  E  G,and  eche  is  the  greater  fegment  ofhalfe  the  fiae  of  the 
cube ,  and  therefore  the  whole  line  EG  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  whole  lineLN  the  fide  of  the 
cube(by  thedorefayd  17. of  the  thirtenth)  .  By  the  poyntes  R  and  O  ,  draw  vnto  the  fides  A  B  and  C  D 
parallel  lines  F  H  and  I K.  And  draw  thefe  right  lines  E  F.,E  H,G  I  and  G  K.  Now  forafmuch  as  the  two 
lines  FH  &  ER  touching  the  one  the  other  are  parallels  to  the  tWo  lines  I K  and  GO  touching  alfo  the 
one  theother,&  not  being  in  the  felfe  fame  playne  with  the  two  firft  lines :  therfore  the  playne  fuperfi-  tioru 
cieces  E  F  H  and  G I K  patting  by  thofe  lines  are  parallels ,  by  the  ij.of  the  eleuenth;  which  playnesdo 
cutte  the  folide  AEBDGC.  Whererefore  there  are  made  fower  quadrangled  pyramids  fet  vpon  the 
redangleparallelogramesLH,LF,NK,andNI,  and  hauing  their  toppes  the  poyntes  E  andG  .  And 
forafmuch  as  the  triangles  GOK  and  E  R  H  are  equall  and  like, by  the  4*of  the  firlt ,  nam  ely,  they  con- 


Exler.din  the 
figure  a  line 
from  the  point 
E  to  the  point 
& 


fayne  equall  angles  compreheded  vnder  equall  fides,and  they  are  parallels  by  confiruflion,  being  fet  in 
the  playnes  G I K  and  E  F  H :  the  figures  G  K  H  E,0  K  H  R,and  GORE  fhall  be  parallelogrammes,  by 
the  diffinition  of  a  parallelogramme.and  therefore  the  folide  GOKERHisa  prifme,  by  the  1 1  .dffini- 
tion  of  the  eleuenth.And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  the  folide  G  O I E  R  F  be  proued  to  be  a  prifme.And 
forafmuch  as  vpon  equall  bafes  NO  KG,  and  R  L  B  H,and  vnder  equall  altitudes  O  G  and  R  E  are  fet 
pyramids :  thofe  pyramids  fhall  be  equall  to  that  pyramis  which  is  fet  vpon  the  bafe  C  K I D  (  which  is 
double  to  either  of  the  bafes  N  O  KC,andRLB  H)and  vnder  the  fame  altitude  O  G ,  by  the  6.  of  the 
twelfth  .  And  forafmuch  as  the  fide  G  E  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  C  B,  the  line  K  H ,  which  by 
the  33  .of  the  firlfis  equall  to  theline  G  E,£hall  be  the  greater  fegment  of  the  fame  line  C  B,  by  the  i.of 
the  fourtenth  .  Wherefore  the  refidues  C  K  and  H  B  fhall  make  the  leffe  fegment  of  the  whole  lineC- 
B.But  as  the  greater  fegment  K  H  is  to  the  two  lines  C  K  and  H  B  the  leffe  fegment,  fo  is  the  reftangle 
parallelogram  me  O  H  to  the  two  rectangle  parallelogrammes  O  C  and  H  L,by  the  1  .of  the  fixt.Wher- 
fore  the  leffe  fegment  of  the  parallelogram  me  N  B ,  fhall  be  the  two  parallelogrammes  O  C  and  H  L. 
Put  the  line  KM  double  to  theline  KC  and  draw  theline  MS  parallel  to  the  line  C  N.  Wherefore  the 
parallelogramme  O  K  M  S  is  equall  to  the  parallelogrammes  O  CandH  L,by  the  i.of  the  fixth.  Wher- 
fore  the  pyramis  fet  vpon  the  bafe  O  K  M  S  contayneth  two  third  partes  of  the  prifme  fet  vpon  the  felfe 
fame  bafe,  by  the  4  .corollary  of  the  7.of  the  twelfth  .Wherfore  the  prifme  which  is  fet  vpon  two  third 

CCC.ii.  partes 


Extend  in  the 
figure  a,  line 
from  the  point 
E  to  the  point 
B. 


The fixtenth  Tiookf  of  the 

partes  of  the  bafe  O  K  M  S  is  equall  to  the  two  pyramids  N  O  K  C  G  and  R  L  B  H  E.For  the  fedions  of 
a  prifme  are  one  to  the  other ,as  the  fedions  of  the  bafe  are ,  by  the  firft  corollary  of  the  ay .  of  the  ele- 
uenth.But  the  fedions  of  the  bafe  are  as  the  fedions  of  the  line  C  B  or  K  M,by  the  t  .of  the  fixe.  Wher- 
fore  the  two  pyramids  N  O  K C  G  and R  L  B  H  E,adde  vnto  the  prifme  G  O  K  E  R  H  two  third  partes 
of  the  prifme  fet  vpon  the  bafe  O  K  M  S  .And  forafmuch  as  the  line  K  M  is  the  lefie  fegmet  of  the  whole 
line  B  C(for  it  is  equall  to  to  the  two  lines  C  K  and  HB),  and  the  prifme  fet  vpon  the  bafe  O  K  H  R  is 
cutte  like  vnto  the  line  KM,  namely ,  in  eche  are  taken  two  thirdes ,  as  hath  before  bene  proued  :  the 
prifme  equall  to  the  two  pyramids,fliall  adde  vnto  the  prifme  G  O  K  E  R  H, which  is  fet  vpon  the  grea- . 
ter  fegment  K  H,  two  thirds  ofthe  lefie  fegment .  Wherefore  in  the  line  B  C  there  fliall  remayne  one 
third  part  of  the  lefie  fegment:  and  therefore  in  the  rectangle  parallelograinme  NB  which  is  halfe  the 
bale  of  the  cube,  there  fliall  remayne  the  fame  third  part  of  the  lefie  fegment  .  And  by  the  famereafon, 
may  we  prone  that  in  the  other  pyramids  ONDIG,andRLAFE,  and  in  the  prifme  GOIERFis 
left  the  felfe  lame  excefle  of  the  bafe  LAN  D,  namely,  the  third  part  of  the  lefie  fegment .  Wherefore 
the  whole  prifme  contavned  betwene  the  triangles  I G  K  and  F  E  H,and  ynder  the  length  of  the  greater 


fegment  and  two  third  partes  of  the  lefie  fegment  of  B  C  the  fide  of  the  cube ,  is  equall  to  the  folide 
compofed  of  4.bafes  ofthe  dodecahedron  and  fet  vpon  the  bafe  ofthe  cube.  Wherfore  the  bafe  of  that 
prifme  wanteth  of  the  whole  bafe  of  the  cube  onely  a  third  part  of  the  lefie  fegment :  and  the  altitude 
of  that  prifme  was  the  line  G  Oywhich  is  the  greater  fegment  ofhalfe  the  fide  ofthe  cube .  And  foraf¬ 
much  as  vnto  the  triangle  I G  K ,  is  double  the  rdangle  parallelogram  m  e  fet  vpon  the  fame  bafe  I  K„ 
(the  fide  of  the  cube)  and  vnder  the  altitude  G  O ,  by  the  41 .  of  the  firfi:  it  folio  weth  that  three  redan- 
gle  parallelogrammcs  fet  vpon  the  fame  bafe  I  K,the  fide  of  the  cube ,  and  vnder  the  altitude  O  G  the 
greater  fegment  ofhalfe  the  fide  of  the  cube.are  fex  tuple  to  the  triangle  I G  K .  Wherefore  thofe  three 
redangle  parallelogram  mes  doo  make  one  redangle  parallelogram  me  fet  vpon  the  bafe  I K  and  vnder 
the  altitude  of  the  line  G  O  tnpled.But  by  the  7-  diffinition  ofthe  eleuenth,there  are  fixeprifmes  equal 
and  like  vnto  the  forefayd  prifme,being  fet  vpon  eueryone  of  the  fixe  bafes  of  the  cube :  which  prifmes 
are  in  proportion  the  one  to  the  other  as  their  bafes  are  by  the  5  .corollary  of  the  7.of  twelfth.  Where¬ 
fore  the  folide  compofed  of  thefe  fixe  prifmes,  fliall  want  of  the  bafe  A  B  C  D  the  third  part  of  the  Idle 
fegment,and  taking  his  altitude  of  the  forefayd  redangle  parillelogramme, the  fayd  altitude  fliall  be  e- 
quall  to  three  greater  fegmentes(one  of  which  is  G  O)of  halfe  the  fide  of  the  cube. 

Now  refteth  to  proue  that  thefe  three  fegmentes  want  of  the  fide  of  the  cube  by  the  lefie  fegment 
ofthe  lefie  fegment  ofhalfe  the  fide  of  the  cube .  Suppofe  that  A  B  the  fide  ofthe  cube  be  diuided  into 
the  greater  fegment  A  C,and  into  the  lefie  fegment  C  B(by  the  jo.of the  fixt)  .  And  diuide  into  two  e- 
quall  partes  the  line  A  Cin  thepoynt  G,  ana  the  line  C  Bin  the  poyntE  .And  vnto  the  line  CG  put 
the  line  C  L  equall .  Now  forafmuch  as  thclines  A  G  and  G  C  are  the  greater  fegmentes  of  halfe  the 
line  A  B,for  eche  of 
them  is  the  halfe  of 

the  greater  fegment  f - ~~Z  t  Z  a 

ofthe  whole  line  A-  &  Q  U  L 

B:  the  lines  E  Band 
E  C  fliall  be  the  lefie 

fegmentes  of  halfe  the  line  A  B. Wherefore  the  whole  line  C  L  is  the  greater  fegment ,  and  the  line  C- 

Eis 


Elementes  of Geometry , added  by  Flufias,  FoL\$6* 

Eis  the  leffe  fegment  .But  as  the  line  C  Lis  to  the  line  C  E,fo  is  the  line  C  E  to  therefidueEL  .  Wher^ 
fore  the  line  E  L  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  line  C  E,or  of  the  line  E  B  which  is  equal!  vntoft.Wher- 
for  e  the  refidue  L  B  is  the  leffe  fegment  of  the  lame  E  B  (  which  is  the  Idle  fegm  enc  of  halfe  thefideof 
the  cube)  .  But  the  lin  es  A  G,G  C ,  and  C  L  are  three  greater  fegmentes  of  the  halfe  of  the  whole  line 
A  B :  which  thre  greater  fegmentes  make  the  altitude  of  the  forefay  d  folide :  wherefore  the  altitude  of 
the  fayd  folide  wanteth  of  A  B  the  fide  of  the  cube  by  the  line  L  B,which  is  the  leffe  fegment  of  the  line 
B  E.Which  line  B  E  agavne  is  the  lelfe  fegment  ofhalfe  the  fide  A  B  of  the  cube  .  Wherefore  the  fore- 
fayd  folide  confi  fling  of  the  fixe  folides, whereby  the  dodecahedron  exceedeth  thecube  infcribed  in  it, 
is  fet  vpon  a  bafe  which  wanteth  of  the  bafe  of  the  cube  by  a  third  part  of  the  leffe  fegment,  and  is 
vnderan  altitude  wanting  of  the  fide  of  the  cube  by  the  leffe  fegment  of  theleffe  fegmentofhalfe  the 
fide  of  the  cube.The  folide  therefore  ofa  dodecahedron  exceedeth  the  folide  of  a  cube  infcribed  in  it, 
by  a  parallelipipedon,  whofebafe  wanteth  of  the  bafe  of  the  cube  by  a  third  part  of  the  leffe  fegment, 
and  whofe  altitude  wanteth  of  the  altitude  of  thecube  ,  by  the  leffe  fegment  ofthe  lefle  fegment  of 
halfe  the  fide  of  the  cube. 

«ff  A  Corollary. 

A  t Dodecahedron  is  double  to  a  Cube  infcribed  in  it,  taking  away  the  third 
part  of the  leffe fegment  of the  cube, and  moreouer  the  lejfe  Jegment  of  the  left 
fegment  ofhalfe  of that  excejfe.  For  if  there  be  geuen  a  cube,  from  which  is  cut  of  a  folide  let 

vpon  a  third  part  ofthe  leffe  fegment  ofthe  bafe,andvnder  one  and 'the  fame  altitude  with  thecube: 
that  folide  taken  away  hath  to  the  whole  folide  the  proportion  of  the  fedtion  of  the  bafe  to  the  bafe,  by 
the  ja.ofthe  eleuenth.  Wherefore  from  the  cube  is  taken  away  a  third  part  of  the  leffe  fegment  .  Far- 
ther,forafmuch  as  the  refidue  wanteth  ofthe  altitude  ofthe  cube, by  the  leffe  fegment  ofthe  leffe  feg¬ 
ment  ofhalfe  the  altitude  or  fide, and  that  refidue  is  aparallelipipedon,if  it  be  cut  by  a  plaine  fuperfieies 
parallel  to  the  oppofite  plaine  fuperficieccs,cutting  the  altitude  of  the  cube  by  a  point  ,it  Iball  take  away 
from  that  parallelipipedon  afolide,hauing  to  thewhole  the  proportion  of  the  fection  to  the  altitude,by 
the  5  .Corollary  oi  the  ij.  ofthe  eleuenth  .  Wherefore  the  exceffe  wanteth  of  the  fame  cube  by  the 
third  part  ofthe  leffe  fegment,  and  moreouer  by  the  leffe  fegment  ofthe  leffe  fegment  of  halfe  of 
that  exceffe. 

f  The  34-  Tropofition. 

The  proportion  of the folide  of a  (Do  decahedron  to  the  folide  of  an  Icofa * 
hedron  infcribed  in  it,  confifieth  ofthe  proportion  tripled  of  the  diameter 
to  that  line  lohicbempfeth  the  oppofite  hafes  of the  (Dodecahedron,  and  of 
the  proportion  of the fide  ofthe  Cube  to  the  fide  of tfa  Icofahedron  infer i* 
bed  in  one  and  the felfe fame  Sphere. 


Wppofe  that 
A  H  B  C  K 
•  be  a  Dpde- 
' cahedron, 
whofe  diameter  let  be 
A  B  :  and  let  the  line 
which  cpupleth  the  ce- 
tres  of  the  oppofite  ba- 
fesbeKH:  and  let  the 
Icofahedron  infcribed 
in  the  Dodecahedron 
ABC, beDEF  :  whofe 
diameter  let  be  D  E. 
Now  forafmuch  as  one 
and  the  felfe  fame  circle 
cotaineth  thepentagon 
of  a  Dodecahedron,  & 
the  triangle  of  an  .Ico¬ 
fahedron  deferibed  in 
one  and  the  felfe  fame 
Sphere,  by  the  M-of  the 
fourtenth:  Let  thatcir- 


cce.iij. 


de 


T)emon8r<t~ 

tm. 


cTheJixtenth  BooJ^e  ofth 


e 

cle  bel  G  O.Wherfore 
I O  is  the  fide  of  the 
cube ,  and  I G  the  fide 
of  the  Icofahedron,  by 
the  fame.The  I  fay.that 
the  proportion  of  the 
Dodecahedron  AHB- 
C  K  to  the  icofahedron 
DEF  inferibed  in  it,co- 
filieth  of  the  proportio 
tripled  of  the  line  A 
to  the  line  KH,  and  of 
the  proportion  of  the 
line  I O  to  the  line  I G. 

For  forafmuch  as  the  I- 
cofahcdron  D  E  F  is  in- 
feribed  in  the  Dodeca- 
hedro  A  B  C,b y  fuppo- 
fitio,  the  diameter  D  E 
ihalbe  equal  to  the  line 
KH,by  the  7  .of  the  fiue- 
tenth  .  Wherefore  the 
Dodecahedron  fet  vpo 
the  diameter  KH  fhall 
beinferibedin  thefame 
Sphere,  wherein  rhe  I- 
-cofahedron  D  E  F  is  in¬ 
feribed:  bntthe  Dodecahedron  AHBCKis  ro  the  Dodecahedron  vpon  the  diameter  KH  in  tri¬ 
ple  proportion  ofthat  in  which  the  diameter  A  Bis  to  the  diameter  KH,by  the  Corollary  ofrhe  17. of 
the  twelfth  :  and  thefame  Dodecahedron  which  is  fet  vpon  thediameter  K  H,  hath  to  the  Icofahedron 
DEF  (which  is  fet  vpon  the  fame  diameter,  or  vpon  a  diameter  equall  vn,to  it,  namely  .D  E  )  that  pro¬ 
portion  which  I O  the  fide  of  the  cube  hath  tol  G  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,  inferibed  in  one  &  the 
felfe  fame  Sphere,  by  the  8  of the  fouretenth .  Wherefore  the  proportion  of  the  Dodecahedron  A  H- 
B  C  K  to  the  Icofahedron  D  E  F  inferibed  in  it,conf  Acth  of the  proportion  tripled  of  the  diameter  A  B 
to  the  line  K  H,  which  coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes  ofthe  Dodecahedron  (which  proper- 
tionis  thatwhich  the  Dodecahedron  AH  BC  Khath  to  the  Dodecahedron  fet  vpon  the  diameter  K  H) 
and  ofthe  proportion  of  1 6  the  fide  of  the  cube  to  I G  the  fide  ofthe  Icofahedron  (  which  is  the  pro¬ 
portion  of  the  Dodecahedron  fet  vpon  the  diameter  K  H  to  the  Icofahedron  DEF  deferibed  in  oneand 
the  felfe  fame  Sphere  )  bv  the  y.  definition  of  the  fixth.The  proportion  therefore  ofthe  folide  of  a  Do¬ 
decahedron  to  the  folide  of  an  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  it,  confifteth  of  the  proportion  tripled  ofthe 
diameter  to  that  line  which  coupleth  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  Dodecahedron, and  ofthe  proportion  o  f 
the  fide  of  the  cube  to  the  fide  ofthe  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  one  and  the  felfe  fame  Sphere. 


T  he  3  s.  Tropojition. 

The  folide  of  a  (Dodecahedron  containeth  of  a  Tyramis  circumfcribeda* 
bout  it  two  ninth  partes,  taKingaway  a  third part  of one  ninth  part  ofthe 
lejfe  fegment  (  of  aline  diuidedby  an  extreme  and  meant  proportion) 
and  moreouer  the  leffe fegment  of the  left e fegment  of  half e  there f due. 


jM'fc^fhath  beneproued  that  the  Dodecahedron,together  with  the  Cube  inferibed  in  it  is  contai- 
#3  in  one  anti  the  felfc  famc  pyramis,by  the  Corollary  of  the  firft  of  this  booke .  And  by  the 

IS*  KSj  Corollary  ofthe  33.ofthis  booke,  it  is  manifefl,  that  the  Dodecahedron  is  double  to  the 
®9»J3wfame  cube,  taking  away  the  third  part  ofthe  leffe  fegment, and  moreouer  thelefTefegmenc 
of  the  leffe  fegment  ofhalfe  the  refidue,or  of  thisexceffe.  But  a  pyramis  is  to  the  fame  cube  inferibed  in 
it  nonecupIe,by  the  3o.of  this  booke.  Wherefore  the  Dodecahedron  inferibed  in  the  pyramis, and  con¬ 
taining  the  fame  cube  twife,takingaway  the  felfe  fame  third  of  the  leffe  fegment ,  and  moreouer  the 

f  rtr  t-no  ^  1 1  u  " _  C’  1* .  1  ^ 


jl  hc  ioiiuc  tacrcrurc  or  a.  i^uuecanearon  con  tain  cm  ora  ryramis  circunucriDed  about  it  two  mntii 
partes,taking  away  a  third  part  of  one  ninth  part  ofthe  lefle  fegm  en  t  (  of  aline  dinided  by  an  extmere 
and  meane  proportion  )  and  moreouer  the  leffe  fegment  of  the  leffe  fegment  ofhalfe  the  refidue. 

fThe 


Elmentes  ofCjeometry*>added  by  Fluftas.  FoL^jj* 

f  T he  36.  Tropofition. 

jfti  OStohedron  exceedeth  an  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  it t  by  a parallelipi* 
pedon  fet  Vpon  the  fquare  of  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron }  and  hailing  to 
his  altitude  the  line  which  is  the  greater  fegment  of  halfe  the  fimidiame* 
ter  of  the  OSiohedron. 

Vppofe  that  there  be  an  Octahedron  ACB  CFPL  t  in  which  let  there  be  inferibed  an 
Icofahedron  HKEGMXNVDS  QJT ,  by  the  1 6.  of  the  fiuetenth  .And  draw  the  dia¬ 
meters  A  Z  R  C,B  RO  IF,  and  the  perpendicular  K  O  parallel  to  the  line  A  Z  R .  Then 
I  fay,that  the  Octahedron  A  B  C  F  P  L  is  greater  then  the  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  it, by 
a  parallelipipedon  fet  vpon  the  fquare  of  the  fide  HK  or  GE,  and  hailing  to  his  altitude 
the  line  K  O  or  R  Z  2  which  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  femidiameter  A  R.  Forafmuch 
as  in  the  fame  16.  it  hath  bene  proued,that  the  triangles  KD  G  and  KEQ_are  deferibedin  the  bates 
APFandALF  of  the  OCtahedron :  therefore  about  the  folide  angle  there  remaine  vppon  thebafe 
F  E  G  three  triangles  K  E  G,K  F  E,and  K  F  G,which  containe  a  pyramis  K  E  F  G  .  Vnto  which  pyramis 
{hall  be  equall  ana  liJce  theoppofitepyramis  MEFG  fet  vpon  the  fame  bafeFEG,by  the  8. definition 
©ftheeleuenth .  And  by  the  fame  reafon  fhall  thereat  euery  folide  angle  of  the  OCtahedron  remayne 
two  pyramids  equajj  an'<i  like  ;  namely,  two  vpon  the  bafe  A  H  K,  two  vpon  the  bafe  B  N  V,two  vpon 
the  bafe  D  P  S,and 
moreouer  two  vp¬ 
on  the  bafe  T. 

Now  the  there  fhal 
be  made  twelue 
pyramids,  fet  vpon 
a  bafe  contained  of 
the  fide  of  the  Ico¬ 
fahedron,  and  vn- 
der  two  leffe  feg- 
mentes  of  the  fide 
of  the  OCtahedron 
containing  a  right 
angle,  as  for  exam- 
ple'the  bafe  G  E  F, 

And  forafmuch  as  _ 
the  fide  G  E  fubte-  8 
ding  a  right  angle, 
is,  by  the  47.  of  the 
firll,  in  power  du- 

f»le  to  either  of  the 
ines  E  F  and  F  G, 
and  fo  the  fide  K  H 
is  in  power  duple 
to  either  of  the 
fides  A  Hand  A  Kt 
and  either  of  the 
lines  AH,  A K, or 
EF,FG,is  in  pow¬ 
er  duple  to  eyther 
of  the  lines  AZ  or 
ZK  which  cotayne 

a  right  angle,  made  in  the  triangle  of  bafe  A  H  K  by  the  perpendicular  A  Z.  Wherfore  itfolloweth  tha? 
the  fide  G  E  or  H  K,is  in  power  quadruple  to  the  triangle«E  F  G  or  A  H  K  .  But  the  pyramis  KEF  Gjha- 
uing his  bafe  EFGintheplaine  F  LB  P  of  the  OCtahedron,  fhall  haue  t6  his  altitude  the  perpendicu¬ 
lar  K  O  (by  the  4.  definition  of  the  fixth  )  which  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  femidiameter  of  the 
O£tahedron,by  the  t6 .of  the  fiuetenth .  Wherfore  three  pyramids  let  vnder  the  fame  altitude  and  vpon 
equall  bafes, ihall  be  equall  to  one  prifme  fet  vpon  the  fame  bafe, and  vnder  the  fame  altitude,  by  the  1,,- 
Corollary  of  the7.of  the  twelfth.  Wherefore  4.prifmes  fet  vpon  the  bafeGEF  quadrupled  (  which  is 
equall  to  the  fquare  of  the  fide  G  E  )  and  vnder  the  aftitude  K  O  (  or  R  Z  the  greater  fegment  which  is 
equall  to  K  O  )  fhall  containe  a  folide  equall  to  the  twelue  pyramids,  which  twelue  pyramids  make  the 
exceffe  of  the  OCtahedron  aboue  the  Icofahedron  rnferibed  in  it .  An  OCtahedron  therefore  excedeth 
an  Icofahedron  inferibed  in  it,  by  a  parallelipipedon  fet  vpon  the  fquare  of  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron, 
and  hauing  to  his  altitude  the  line  which  is  the  greater  fegment  of  halfe  the  femidiameter  of  the  QCta- 
hedroft. 

Corollary, 


l Conttruftion* 


VenmUra* 
tion . 


TetiSruftion. 


■FerUpartof 

theismon-* 

Jimm * 


Thefixtmth  Hooke  of  the 

A  CoroUaiy. 

ji^jramis  exceedeth  the  double  of  an  Icofahedron  inferibed but }by  afo* 
lide  fet  Vpvn  the  fquare  of  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron  infer ibed  in  it  yand  hquing 
to  his  altitude  that  "tvhole  line  oflvhich  the fide  of  the  Icofahedron  is  the  greater 

fegmet.  For  it  is  manifeft  by  the  ip.of  the  fiueteth,that  an  odtohedro  &  an  Icofahcdro  inferibed  in  it 
are  inferibed  in  one &the  felffame  pyramis.lt  hath  morcouer  beneproued  in  the  of  this  boke,thac 
a  pyramis  is  double  to  amodtohedro  inferibed  init.  Wherforethe  two  excefies  of  the  two  odiohedrons 
(vnto  which  the  pyramis  is  eq«al)aboue  the  two  Icofahedrons(itifcribed  in  the  faid  two  odiohedrons) 
being  brought  into  an  folide,the  faid&Iide  fhalbe  fet  vpon  the  felfe  fame  fquarc  of  the  fide  of  the  Ico- 
£ahedron,and  fhall  haue  to  his  altitude  the  perpendicular  K  O  doubled  :  whofe  double  coupling  the 
oppofite  fides  H  K  and  X  M  maketh  the  greater  jegmeat  the  fame  fide  of  the  Icofahedron,  by  thefirft 
and  fecand  corollaryofthe.14.6f  tlie  fiuetenth. 


The-37  .^ropofition. 

Ifm  a  triangle  hauing  to  his  hafe  a  rational  line  fet>  the  fides  be  cowmen* 
fumble  in  power  to  the  bafe,  and  fromtihe  toppe  be  dralon  to  the  bafea pern 
pendicular  line  cutting  the  bajeiThefeCiions  of  the  bafe  fhall  be  commen* 
furable  in  length  to  the  whole  bafi ,  and the perpendicular  fhall  be  cowmen* 
furablem  power  to  the  fold  lohole  bafe. 

Vppofc  that  there  he  a  triangle  A  B  G,  whofe  bafe  B  G  let  be  a  rational  line  fet  of  purpofe. 

_  And  let.the  fides  A  B  and  A  G  be  vnto  the  fame  B  G  commenfurable  at  the  leaf!  in  .power. 
lj  Andfrom  the  toppe  A,draw  vnto  the  bafe  2  G,a  perpendicular, cutting  the  bafe  in  the  point . 
IP. Then  I  fay  that  the  fediions  of  the  bafe,  -are  commenfurable  in  lengthe  to  the  wliole  line 
B  G,and  thatihe  perpendicular  A  P,is  vuto-thefame  bafe  B  G  comenfurable  at  the  leall  inpower  .Pro¬ 
duce  on  either  fide  the  line  B  G  to  the  poyntes  C  and  E.  And  vnto-.the  iine  A  G  put  the  line  G  E  equal, 
sad  vnto  the  line-A  B  put  the  line  B  C  .equal  .And  vpon  the  lines  CB,B  G  and  G  E  defcrfbefquares  B- 
K,B  D,and  GJL.And  from  the  greater  of  the  fquares  of  tbelines  A  B  or  A  G,  which  let  be  GL  cut  of  a 
parallelograxrune  E  M  equal  to  tholcife fquare  B  K  (by  the 45. of  the firli:)  And  (by  thefame)  vnto  the 
refidue  G'M ,lec  there  be  applied  vpon  the  line  G  E>  an  equall  rediangle  paratlelogramme  QD.Now  for- 
afmuch  as  the  angles  APB  and  A  P  G  are  right  angles, therfore (by  the  47 .of  the  firli)the  line  AG  con- 
taifleth  in  power  the  two  lines  A  P  and  P  G,and  the  line  A  B  the  two  lines  A  P  and  P  B  .Wherfore  how 
much  the  line  A  G  contaiaeth  in  power  more  then  the  line  A  B,fo  much  alfo  doth  the  line  PGeontam 
in  power  more  then  the  line  B  P :  namely,  taking  away  the  common  fquare  of  A  P,  there  is  left  the  ex- 
ceue  of  the  fquare  of?  Gaboue  the  fquare  of  BP.  Butrhe  fquare  of  A  G  (which  is  G  L)  exceedeth  the 
fquare  of  A  B  (namely  ,the  fquare  B  K)  by  the  rediangle  parallelogram  me  GMorO  D,t>y  confirudlion* 
Wherfore  the  fquarc  of  P  G  exceedeth  the  fquare  of  B  P,by  the  rediangle  paralleiogrammeO  D.And 
forafmuch  as  vnto  the  fquares  of  A  B  and  A  G,are  equal  the  fquares  of  A  P  and  P  B,aud  of  APandP- 
G:and  their  excelfe  is  taken  away^iamelyjthe  rediangleparallelogrammeOD  :  there  fhallbe  left  the 
fquares  of  A  P  and  P  O  equal  to  rhefquares  of  A  P  and  P  B.And  taking  away 1  the  fquare  of  A  P  which 
is  comon,the  refidues 
•namely,  the  fquares  of 
BPandPQ  Ihalbee- 
qual  :  and  therefore 
■their  fides(namely,the 
lines  B  P  and  P  O)  are 
equal.  And  forafmuch 
as  the  fquares  G  L  and 
BK  arefby  fuppofitio) 
rational,  and  therefore 
comefurable  their  ex- 
ceffe  OD,fhalbe  com- 
ttiefurable  vnto  the  by 
the  ij  .of  the  teth.  And 
therfore  i  t  is  rational! 
by  ihe£.  diffinicion  of 
thefeth.  Wherfore  the 
rational  parallelogram 
OD,being  applied  vp- 
bn  the  rational  line  G~ 

D  (orBG)maketh  the 


K 


bredth 


Elementes  of Geometry  padded  by  Fluffs* 

Ihredth  O  G  rational  and  comenfbrable  in  legtlrto  the  whole  line  B  G,by.  the  20.of  the  tenth.But  if  the 
whole  line  B  G  be  commenfurable  to  one  of  the  partes  O  G,the  lines  B  0,0  G,and  B  G  fhall  be  com¬ 
menfurable, by  the  fame  ly.of  the  tenih.Wherfore  alio  the  line  OG  fhalbe  commenfurable  to  the  half 
of  the  lineB  O, namely, to  the  line  P  0,orP  B, by  the  iz&f  the  tenth.  And  forafmuch  as  the  two  lines 
P  OandO  Gan.  commenlurable,the  whole  line  P  G  fhalbe  commenfurable  to  the  line  P  Oporto  the 
lineP  B,by  the  fame  15. of  thetenth.VVherfore  either  of  the  lines  P  G  andPB  fhall  be  comenfurable 
vnto  the  whole  line  PB,by  the  fame.  Wherefore  the  lines  BG,PB  and  P  G  haue  the  one  to  the  other 
that  proportion  which  numbers  haue^by  the  y.of thirtenth.  Wherfore  the  fedions  P  B  and  P  G  of  the 
bafeB  G  are  commenfurable  in  len.nh  to  the  fame  bafe,by  the^.of  the  tenth.  ,  ,  ' 

And  now  that  the  perpendicular  A  P  is  commenfurable  in  power  to  the  bafe  BG,  is  thus  pro- 
ued  .  Forafmuch  as  the  fquare  of  A  Bis  by  fuppofition,  commenfurable  to  the  fquai  eof  BG  :  and 
vnto  the  rational  fquare  of  A  Bis  commenfurable  thefational  fquare  of  B  P(by  the  12  .of  the  eleuenth) 
Wherfore  the  refidue,namely,the  fquare  ofP  A  is  commenfurable  to  the  fame  fquare  of  B  P,  by  the 
2. part  of  the  ty  of  the  eleuenth  .Wherefore  by  the  ivof  the  tenth, the  fquare  of  P  A  is  commenfurable 
to  the  whole  fquare  ofB  G.  Wherefore  the  perpendicular  A  P  is  commenfurable  in  power  to  the  bafe 
B  G,by  the  3  .diffinition  of  the  tenth:  which  was  required  to  be  proued. 

In  demonfirating  of  this,  we  made  no  mentidn  at  all  of  the  length  ofthefides  AB  and  A  G,bi)C 
only  of  the  length  of  the  bafeB  G:  for  that  the  line  B  G  is  the  rational  line  firftfet :  and  theothenlines 
A  B  and  A  G  are  fuppofed  to  be  commenfurable  in  power  only  to  the  line  B  G .  Wherefore  if  that  be 
plainely  demonftrated,when  the  fides  are  commenfurable  in  power  only  to  the  bale, much  more  eafily 
wil  it  follow,if  the  fame  fides  be  fuppofed  to  be  commenfurable  both  in  length  and  in  power  t©  the 
bafe :  that  is. if  their  lengthes  be  exprelfed  by  the  rootcs  of  fquare  nombers. 

A  Corollary,  x. 

By  the former  things  demonfirated }  it  is  nianifejl  that  if from  the  powers 
of the  bafeyind  of one  of the fides  fie  taken  away  the  power  of the  other f demand 
if the  halfe  of the  power  remaining  fie  applied  fipon  the  lohole  bafe  fit Jloall  make 

the  bredth  that feet  ion  of the  bafe  'which  is  coupled  to  the  fir  ft  fide .  For  from  the  po¬ 
wers  of  the  bafe  B  G,and  of  one  of  the  fides  A  G,thar  is, from  the  fquares  BD  and  GL,the  power  of  the 
other  fide  A  B,namely  the  fquare  B  K  (or  the  parallelogramme  E  Mistaken  away.  And  of  the  refidue, 
(namely, of  the  fquare  B  D,and  of  the  parallelogramme  O  D,or  D  Rywhich  by  fuppofition  is  equal  vn¬ 
to  O  D)  the  halfe  (namely  sof  the  whole  FR/which  is  PD,  for  the  lines  G  Rand  PE  are  equal  to  the 
lines  G  O  and  P  0)is  applied  to  the  whole  lineB  GorGD  :  and  maketh  the  bredthe  the  line  P  G  the 
fedion  of  the  bafe  B  G, which  fedbori  is  coupled  to  the  firfi  fide  ‘A.  G.  And  by  the  fame  reUfon  in  the  ci¬ 
ther  fide, if  from  the  fquares  BD  and  BK  be  taken  away  the  fquare  G  L,  there  {hall  remaine  the  rectan¬ 
gle  parallelogramme  E  O :  For  the  parallalelogratrtm e-E-M  is  equal  to  the  fquare  B  K,  and  the  parallel©- 

framme  G  M  to'the  parallelogramme  O  D.  Wherefore  F  P  the  halfe  of  the  rtfidue  F  O,  maketh  the 
redth  B  P,which  is  coupled  to  the firfi fide  taken  A  B; 

#  A  Corollary .  2, 

;  A  ^  * 

If a  perpendicular  dr  alone  from  an  angle  of  a  triangle  do  cut  the  bafe : 
the  fedions  are  to  the  other  fides  in  poioetproportionall  by  an  A* 

Vithmetical proportion.  For  it  was  proued  that  the  excefle  of  the  power? 
of  the  lines  A  G  and  A  B  is  one  and  the  fame  with  theexceffe  of  the 
powers  of  the  lines  P  G  and  P  B  .If  therfore  the  powers  do 
equally  excede  the  one  the  other,,  theylhali  by 
an  Arithmetical  proportion,  be 
proportional!, 

\  *  j.  I  v  *  a  ,  *  ^  _ 

.  .  ■ 

The  ende  of  the  fixtenth  Booke  • 

of  the  Elementes  of  G  eometrie  added 

'  " . by  F/vjSat. 


Second  part 
of  the  Tie* 
monftwnm* 


I&fidodmht* 
dron . 

Exefiebedrom 


Fhflasfif  mixt  and 

Sft?  A  briefe  treatife,  added  by  Fluflas,  of  mixt  and 

compofcd  regular  folides. 

Egular  folides  are  fayd  to  be  compofod  and  mixt,  when  ech 
of  them  is  tranfformed  into  other  folides,  keeping  ftillthe 
forme,  number,  and  inclination  of  the  bafes,  which  they 
before  had  one  to  the  other  :fome  of  which  yet  are  tranf- 
formed  into  mixt  folides,  and  other  fome  into  fimple.  Into 
mixt,  as  a  Dodecahedron  and  an  Icofahedron:  whichare 
tranfformed  or  altered,  if  ye  diuidetheir  fides  into  twoe- 
quall  partes,  and  take  away  the  folide  angles  fubtendedof 
plaine  fuperficiall  figures  made  by  the  lines  coupling  thofe 
middle  fedions :  for  the  folide  remayning  after  the  taking  away  of thofe  folide  an¬ 
gles,  is  called  an  Icofidodecahedron ,  If  ye  diuide  the  fides  of  a  cube  and  of  an 
Odohedron  into  two  equall  partes,  and  couple  the  &dions,the  folide  angles  fub- 
tended  of  the  plaine  fuperficieces  made  by  the  coupling  lines,  being  taken  away, 
there  (hall  be  left  a  folide,which  is  called  an  Exodohedron.  So  that  both  of  a  Do¬ 
decahedron  andalfo  of  an  Icofahedron,  the  folide  which  is  made,fhall  be  called 
an  Icofidodecahedron:  and  hkewifethe  folide  made  of  a  Cube  &  alfb  of  an  Odo- 
hedron,fhall  be  called  an  Exodohedron .  But  the  other  folide,  namely,a  Pyramis 
(or  Tetrahedron  )  is  tranfformedlnto  a  fimple  folide :  for  if  ye  diuide  into  two 
equall  partes  cuery  one  of  the  fides  of  thepyramis,  triangles  defcribed  of  the  lines 
which  couple  the  fedions,  and  fubtending;  and  taking  away  folide  Angles  of  the 
pyramis,  are  equall  and  like  vnto  the  eqoilater  triangles  left  in  euery  one  of  the 
bales:  of  all  which  triangles  is- produced an  Odohedron,  namely,  a  fimple  and 
not  a  compofed  folide  .  For  the  Odohed:  >n  hath  fower  bales,  like  in  number, 
forme^nd  mutuall  inclination  with  the  bales  of  the  pyramis :  and  hath  the  other 
fower  bales  with  like  fituation  oppofite  and  parallel  to  the  former.  Wherefore  the 
application  of  the  pyramis  taken  twife,  maketh  a  fimple  Odohedron,  as  the  other 
fo'iides  make  a  mixt  compound  folide. 


fFirfi  Definition. 

An  Exodohedron  is  a folide  figure 
eight  equi later  and  equall  triangles 

f  Second  {Definition . 


contained  of  fixe  equall  f quarts,  and 


An  Icofidodecahedron  is  a  folide  figure,  contained  lender  twelue  equi* 
later  equall  andequiangle  Pentagons  , and  twentie  equall  and  equilater 
triangles . 

For  the  better  vnderftanding  of the  two  former  definitions,and  alfo  of  the 
two  Propofitions  following,  I  haue  here  fet  two  figures,  whofe  formes,  if  ye  firft 

deferibe 


ilinps  ow? 


fThefirH  (probleme. 

.....  "  •  - 

equilater  and  equiangle  exofifohedron ,  and  to  contaym  it 
geumiand  to prone  that  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  is  double  to 
of the feiyd  exo&ohedron. 


ere  geuen,  whofe  diameter  let  be  A  B .  And 
about  the  diameter  A  B  let  there  be  delcribed  a  fquare  by  the  lixth  of 
the  fourth.-and  vpon  the  fquare  let  there  be  delcribed  a  cube  by  the  15.  Vfe  ex0"e~ 
ofthethirtenth:whichletbeCDEF  QTVR  :  and  let  the  diameter 
thereofbe  QR,and  the  Centre  S.And  diuide  the  fides  of  the  cube  into  two  equal! 
parteSjin  the  poyntes  G,H,I,K,L,M,N,0,P.&c.And  couple  the  middle  fe&ions 
by  the  right  lines  I  N,N  0,0  P,P  I  and  liich  like,which  liibtend  the  angles  of  the 
fquares  orbafes  of  the  cube:  and  they  are  equall  by  the  4.  firft,  and  contalne  right 
angles,as  the  angle  N  IP.  For  the  angle  NID  which  is  at  the  bafe  of  the  Ifolceles 
triangle  N  D  I,is  the  halfe  ofa  right  angle,  and  lo  likewifeis  the  oppofite  angle  R~ 
IP.y/herefore  the  relidue  N I P  is  a  right  angle,and  fo  the  reft.  Wherefore  N I P- 
O  is  a  fquare.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  mall  the  reft  N  M  L  K,K  G  H I  &c.infcribed 

DDD.ij.  in 


compofid regular fol'tdes. 

deferibe  vpon  palled  paper  or  fuch  like  matter,  and  then  cut  them  and  folde  them 
accordingly,  they  will  reprefent  vnto  you  the  perfect  formes  of  an  Exo&ohedron 
and  of  an  Icolidodecahedron. 


/ 


A  <~ 


V> 


That  the  ixoe- 
tabedmi  it 
cmuynsdin  a 
fphere. 


That  the  exoc- 
tohedmt  is 
contained  in 
the  fphere 
geuen ♦ 

That  the  dia¬ 
meter  of tire 
fphere  is  doa¬ 
ble  to  the  fide 
of  the  exotic- 
bedron* 


A  Flufias^ofmixt  and 

in  thebafes  of  the  cube,be  fquares:  and  they  fhall  be  fixe  in  number  ,  according  to 
the  nuber  of  the  bales  of  the  cube. 

Agayne  forafmuch  as  the  triangle 
KIN  fubtendeth  the  folide  angle 
D  of  the  cube ,  and  Iikewife  the  tri¬ 
angle  KGL  the  folide  angle  C,  & 
fo  the  reft, which  fubtend  the  eight 
folide  angles  of  the  cuberand  thefe 
triangles  are  equall  and  equilater, 
namely, being  made  of  equall  fides 
Sc  they  are  the  limmits  or  borders 
of  the  fquares ,  and  the  fquares  the 
limmits  or  borders  of  the,  as  hath  V 
before  bene  proued:  wherefore  L- 
MNOPHGKis  an  exo&ohedro, 
by  the  diffinition ,  and  is  equilater, 
for  it  is  contayned  of  equall  fub- 
tendent  Iines:it  is  abb  equianglc, 
for  euery  folide  angle  thereof,  is 
contayned  vnder  two  fuperficiatl  angles  of  two  fquares ,  and  two  fuperficiall  an¬ 
gles  of  nvo  equilater  triangles. 

And  now  forafinuch  as  the  oppofite  fides  and  diameters  of  the  bales  of  the 
cube  are,parallels,  the  playne  extended  by  the  right  lines  QJP,  Y  R,  fhall  be  a  pa- 
rallelogramme .  And  for  that  alfo  in  that  playne  lyeth  QR  the  diameter  of  the 
cube,and  in  the  fame  playne  alfo  is  the  line  M  H ,  which  diuideth  the  fayd  playne 
into  two  equall  parts  ,and  alfo  coupleth  the  oppofite  angles  of  the  exo&ohedron 
thisline  M  H  therefore  diuideth  the  diameter  into  two  equall  partes ,  by  the  co¬ 
rollary  of  the  34-of  the  firft ,  and  alfo  diuideth  it  felfe  in  the  fame  poynt ,  which  let 
be  S,into  two  equall  partes,  by  the  4  of  the  firft .  And  by  the  fame  reafbn  may  wc 
proue  thatthe  refbofthe  lines,  which  couple  the  oppofite  angles  of  the  exo&ohe- 
dron  ,  doo  in  S  the  centre  of  the  cube  diuide  the  one  the  other  into  two  equall 
parts.for  euery  one  of  &e  angles  of  the.  exo&ohcdron  are  let  in  euery  one  of the 
bafes  of  the  cube .  Wherefore  making  the  centre  the  poynt  S, and  the  fpace  S  H 
Or  S  M,defaibe  .a  fphere,  and  it  lliall  touch  euery  one  of  the  angles  cquediftant 
from  the  poynt  S, 

And  forafmuch  as  A  B  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  geuen ,  is  put  equall  to  the 
diameter  of  the  bafe  of  the  cube,name!y,to  the  line  R  T ,  arid  the  fame  line  R  T  is 
equall  to the  line  M  H,by  the  33.  of  the  firft:  which  line  M  H  coupling  the  oppo¬ 
fite  angles  of  the  exoftohedron ,  is  drawne  by  the  centre:  wherefore  it  is  the  dia¬ 
meter  of  the  fphere  geuen  which  contayneth  the  exo&ohedron. 

f  inally  forafmuch  as  in  the  triangle  R  F  T ,  the  line  P  O  doth  cutte  the  fides 
into  two  equall  partes, it  fhall  cu  tte  them  proportionally  with  the  bafes,namely,as 
F  R  is  to  F  P,  fo  fhall  R  T  be  to  P  O,  by  the  2 .  of  the  fixth .  But  F  R  is  double  to  F- 
P,by  fuppofmon :  wherefore  R  T,  or  the  diameter  H  M ,  is  alfo  double  to  the  line 
P  O  the  fide  of  the  exodohedron.Wherefore  we  haue  deferibed  an  equilater  &  e- 
quiangle  exotftohedron,and  comprehended  it  in  a  fphere  geuen,and  haue  proued 
that  the  diameter  of  the  fphere  is  double  to  the  fide  oftheexo&ohedrom 


The 


4 


compofed  regular folide  s,  FoL/^6 o* 

fTbe  2.  Trobleme, 

T o  defcribe  an  equilater  &  equiangle  Icofidodecabedron }  <zsr  to  coprebend 
it  in  a  Jpbere  geuemand  to proue  that  tbe  diameter  being  diuided  by  an  ex* 
treame  and  meane  proportion  ,maketb  tbe  greater  figment  double  to  tbe 
fide  of  tbe  Icofidodecabedron. 


egeuen  beNL,and  (by  the  30. 
n  extreame  and  meane  proporti¬ 
on  in  the  poynt  I:  and  the  greater  fegment  thereof  let  be  N I.  And  vpo 

_ the  line  N I  defcribe  a  cube  by  the  15.  of  the  thirtenth :  and  about  this 

cube  let  there  becircumfcri-  .  F 

bed  a  dodecahedron ,  by  the 
iy.of  the  thirtenth  :  &  let  the 
fame  be  ABCDEFHKMO. 

And  diuide  euery  one  of  the 
fides  into  two  equall  parts  in 
the  poynts  Q^R,  S,  T,  V,X, 

Y,Z,P,  e,s}G.  &c <  and  couple^ 
the  fedions  with  right  lines, 
which  fhall  fubtend  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  pentagons ,  as  the 
lines  PG,GV,VQ,QJ,Y- 
R,R  Q,V  T,T  X,X  V,and  fo 
the  reft. Now  forafmuch  as 
thefe  lines  fubtend  equall  an¬ 
gles  of  the  pentagons ,  and 
thofe  equall  angles  are  con- 
tayned  of  equall  fides(name- 
ly  of  the  halues  of  the  fides 
of  the  pentagons :  therefore 
thofe  fubtending  lines  are  equalfby  the  4.of  the  firft.  Wherefore  the  triangles  G- 
QV,  Y  QR ,  V  X  T,  and  the  reft  which  take  away  folide  angles  of  rhe  dodecahe¬ 
dron,  are  equilater .  Agayne  foraflnuch  as  in  euery  pentagon  are  deferibed  fiue  e- 
quall  right  lines, coupling  the  middle  fe&ions  of  the  fides,as  are  the  lines  QV,V- 
T,  T  S,  S  R,R  Qj.  they  defcribe  a  pentagon  in  the  playne  of  the  pentagon  of  the 
dodecahedron  :and  the  fayd  pentagon  is  contayned  in  a  circle, namely, whole  cen¬ 
tre  is  the  centre  of  a  pentagon  of  the  dodecahedron .  For  the  lines  drawne  from 
that  centre  to  the  angles  of  this  pentagon  are  equall,  for  that  they  are  perpendicu¬ 
lars  vpon  the  bales  cutte,by  the  12. of  the  fourth.  Wherefore  the  pentagon  QR  S- 
T  V  is  equiangle, by  the  1 1  .of  the  fame.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  may  the  reft  of  the 
pentagons  deferibed  in  the  bales  of  the  dodecahedron  be  proued  equall  and  like. 
Wherefore  thofe  pentagons  are  i2.in  number :  And  forafmuch  as  the  equall  and 
like  triangles,  doo  fubtend  and  take  away  20.  folide  angles  of  the  dodecahedron, 
therefore  the  fayd  triangles  fhall  be  2  o  .in  nuber.  Wherfore  we  haue  deferibed  an 
Icofidodecahedro  by  the  diffinitio,which  Icofidodecahedrois  equilater,  for  that 
all  the  fides  of  the  triangles  are  equal  &  comon  with  the  petagonsrand  it  is  alfo  e- 
quiangle .  For  euery  one  of  the  folide  angles  is  made  of  two  fuperfidall  angles  of 
an  equilater  pentagon,and  of  two  fuperHciall  angles  of  an  equilater;  triangle. 

DDD.iij.  Now 


Vppofe  that  the  diameter  of  the  fpher 
of  the  fixth )  diuide  the  line  N  L  by  a 


Coto&rtiBion 
of  the  Icofi - 
dodecahedron . 


Flufiasjofmixt  and 


That  the  TccfL 
dodecahedron 
is  contained 
inthefphers 
gmn% 


That  the  dia¬ 
meter  being 
decided  by  an 
extreme  a  nd 
meane  proper- 
tion'&c* 


N  ow  let  vs  proue  that  it  is  contained  in  the  Sphere  geuen, whofe  diameter  is 
N  L .  Forafmuch  as  perpendiculars  drawenfro  the  centres  of  the  Dodecahedron, 
to  the  midle  fe&ions  of  his  fides ,  are  the  halfes  of  die  lines,  which  couple  the  op- 
police  midle  fedions  of  the  fides  of  the  Dodecahedron,by  the  3.  Corollaiy  of  the 
2  7.  of  the  thirtenth:  which  lines  alfo,by  the  fame  Corollaiy, do  in  the  centre  diuidc 
the  one  the  other  into  two  equal!  partes :  therefore  right  lines  drawen  from  that 
point  to  the  angles  of  the  Icofidodecahedron  (  which  are  fet  in  thofe  midle  fedi- 
ons  )  are  equall :  which  lines  are  30.  in  number  according  to  the  number  of  the 
fides  of  the  Dodecahedronrfor  euery  one  of  the  angles  of  the  Icofidodecahedron 
are let  in  the  midle  ledions  of  euery  one  of  the  fides  of  the  Dodecahedron.Wher- 
fore  making  the  centre  the  centre  of  the  Dodecahedron,  and  the  fpace  any  one  of 
the  lines  drawen  from  the  centre  to  the  midle  fedions,  deferibe  a  Sphere,and  it 
fhallpafle  by  all  the  angles  of  the  Icofidodecahedron,and  fhall  contained. 

And  forafinuch  as  the  diameter  of  this  folide,  is  that  right  line,  whofe  grea¬ 
ter  fegment  is  the  fide  of  the  cube  inferibed  in  the  Dodecahedron,  by  the  4.  Co¬ 
rollary  of  the  17.  of  the  thirtenth,  which  fide  is  NI,by  fupppfition .  Wherefore 
that  folide  is  contayned  in  the  Sphere  geuen  whole  diameter  is  put  to  be  the 
line  N  L. 

N  ow  let  vs  proue  that  the 
greater  fegment  of  the  diame¬ 
ter  is  duple  to  QV  the  fide  of 
this  folide .  Forafmuch  as  the 
fides  of  the  triangle  A  E  B  are 
in  the  pointes  Qjmd  V  diui- 
ded  into  two  equall  partes, ^ 
the  lines  QV  and  BE  are  pa¬ 
rallels,  by  the  Corollary  of 
the  3  9. of  the  firft.  Wherefore 
as  AE  is  to  A  V,lb  is  EBlto 
V  Q_,  by  the  2.  of  the  fixth. 

But  the  fine  AE  is  double  to 
the  line  A  V .  Wherefore  the 
line  B  E  is  double  to  the  line 
QV :  by  the  4.  of  the  fixth. 

N  ow  the  line  B  E  is  equall  to 
N  I,or  to  the  fide  of  the  cube, 
by  the  2.  Corollary  of  the  17. 
of  the  diirtenth ,  which  line 


N I  is  the  greater  fegment  of  the  diameter  NL.  Wherefore  the  greater  fegment 
of  the  diameter  geuen,  is  double  to  the  fide  of  thelcofidodecahedron  inferibed  in 
the  Sphere  geuen .  Wherefore  we  haue  deferibed  an  equilater  and  equiangle  Ico- 
fidodecahedron,and  contained  it  in  a  Sphere  geuen,and  haue  proued  that  the  di¬ 
ameter  thereof  being  diuided  by  ah  extreme  and  meane  proportion/maketh  hys 
greater  fegment  double  to  the  fide  of  the  Icofidodecahedron. 


f  An  aduertijment  ofFluJfas. 

To  the  vnderftanding  of  the  nature  of  this  Icofidodecahedron ,  ye  muft  well 
conceaue  the  paflions  and  proprieties  of  both  thofe  folides,  of  whole  bales  it  con- 
fifteth,namely,  of  the  Icofahedron  and  of  the  Dodecahedron.  And  although  in  it 

the 


compofedregukr folides.  Fol  461. 

the  bafes  are  placed  oppofaely,yethauethey  oneeo  the  other  one  &the  feme  in* 
clination .  By  reafon  wherof  there  lie  hidden  in!  it  thea6fions  and  paflions  of  the  o- 
ther  regular  folides .  And  I  wouldhaue  thoughtit  notimpertinent  to  thcpurpofa 
to  haue  fet  forth  the  infcriptions  and  circumfcripcions  of  this  folide^f want  of time 
had  not  hindred .  But  to  the  end  the  reader  may  the  better  artaine  to  thevnder- 
ftanding  therof ,  I  haue  here  following  briefly  fetforth,  how  it  may  in  or  about  c* 
ueryonc  of  the  hue  regular  folides  be  infcribed  orcircumfcribed :  by  thchelpe 
whereof  he  may,  with  finall  trauaile  or  rather  none  arall,  fb  that.he  haue  well  pev- 
fed  and  confidered  the  demonftrations pcrtayning  to  the  forelayd  fiue  regular  fo¬ 
lides,  demonftrate  both  the  infcription  of  the  fey d  folides  in  it,  and  the  infcription 
of  it  in  the  fayd  folides. 

^  Of  the  infcriptions  and  circumfcriptions  of 

an  Icofidadecahedroii. 

An  Icofidodecahedron  may  containe  the  other  hue  regular  bodyes.  For  it 
will  receaue  the  angles  of  a  Dodecahedron^n  the  centres  of  the  triangles  which 
fubtend  the  folide  angles  of  the  Dodecahedron:  which  folideangles  are  2o.in  nu- 
ber,and  are  placed  in  the  fame  order  in  which  the  folide  angles  of  the  Dodecahe¬ 
dron  taken  away  or  fubtended  by  them, are .  And  by  that  reafon  it  fhall  receaue  a 
Cube  and  a  Pyramis  contayned  in  the  Dodecahedron :  when  as  the  angles  of  the 
one  are  fet  in  the  angles  of  the  other. 

An  Icofidodecahedron  receaueth  an  O&ohedron,  in  the  angles  cutting  the 
fixe  oppofite  fedions  of  the  Dodecahedron,  euen  as  if  it  were  a  fimple  Dode¬ 
cahedron  . 

And  it  contained!  an  Icofehedran,pIacing  the  n.angles  of  the  Icofehedron 
in  the  felfe  feme  centres  of  the  i2.Pentagons. 

It  may  alfo  by  the  feme  reafon  be  infcribedin  euery  one  of  the  fiue  regular  bo* 
dies :  namely , in  a  Pyramis, if  ye  place  4.triangular  bales  concentricall  with  4;bafes 
of  the  Pyramis, after  the  feme  maner,that  ye  infcribed  an  Icofehedro  in  a  Pyramis* 
So  Hkewife  may  it  be  infcribedin  an  O&ohedron,  if ye  make  8. bales  thereof  con* 
centricall  with  the  8  .bales  of  the  O  61  ohedron .  It  fhall  alfo  be  infcribed  in  a  Cube, 
if  ye  place  the  angles  which  receaue  the  O&ohedroninfcribed  init,  in  the  centres 
of  the  bafes  of  the  Cube .  Moreouer,  ye  fhaltinfcribe  ir  in  an  Icofehedron,  when 
the  triangles  compafedin  of  the  Pentagon  bales,  are  concentricall  with  the  trian- 
gles,which  make  a  folide  angle  of  the  Icofehedron .  Finally,  it  fhall  be  infcribed 
in  a  Dodecahedron,  if ye  place  eueiy  one  of  the  angles  thereof  in  the  midle  facti¬ 
ons  of  the  fides  of  the  Dodecahedron,according  to  the  order  of  theconftrudi- 
on  thereof. 

The  oppofite  plaine  fuperficieces  alfo  of  this  folide  arc  parallels .  For  the  op¬ 
pofite  folide  angles  are  fubtended  of parallel  plaine  fuperficieces  ,as  well  in  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  Dodecahedron  fubtended  by  triangles,  asin  the  angles  of  the  Icofehe¬ 
dron  fubtended  of  Pentagons,  which  thing  may  cafily  bedemonftrated.  More¬ 
ouer  in  this  folide  arc  infinite  properties  &  palfions,  fpringing  of  the  fohdeswher- 
ofitis  compofed. 

Where§>rc  it  is  manifefi  that  a  Dodecahedron  Scan  Icofehedron,  mixed,  are 

tranfformed 


'  Fltifksjfmixt  and 

mnfibimed  into  one  &  thefelfe  fame  folide  of  an  Icofidodecahedron.  A  cube  ah 
fo  and  an  odohedro  are  mixed  and  altered  into  an  other  folide,  namely,  into  one 
and  the  lame  Exo&ohedron .  But  a  pyramis  is  tranfformcd  into  a  fimple  and  per- 
fed  folide,namely  into  an  O  dohedron. 

It  we  will  frame  thcfetwo  folides  ioyned  together  into  one  folide,  this  onely 
mud  we  obferue. 

In  the  pentagon  of  a  dodecahedron  infcribe  a  like  pentagon, fo  that  let  the  an¬ 
gles  of  the  pentagon  infcribed  be  let  in  the  midle  fedions  of  die  lides  of  the  pen¬ 
tagon  circmnfcribed,and  then-  vpon  the  laid  pentagon  infcribed,  let  there  be  fet  a 
folide  angle  of  an  Icolahedron,  and  fo  obferue  the  felfe  lame  order  in  eueiy  one 
of  the  bales  of  the  Dodecahedron:  and  the  lolide  angles  of  the  Icolahedron  fet 
vpon  thefe  pentagons  lhall  produce  a  folide  confiding  of  the  whole  Dodecahe¬ 
dron, and  of  the  whole  Icolahedron.In  like  fort,ifin  euerybafe  of the  Icolahedro, 
the  lides  being  diuided  into  two  equall  partes  be  infcribed  an  equilater  triangle, 
and  vpon  euery  one  ofthofe  equilater  triangles  be  fet  a  folide  angle  of  a  Dodeca¬ 
hedron:  there  lhall  be  produced  the  felfe  fame  folide  confiding  of  the  whole  Ico- 
fahedron,  &  of  the  whole  Dodecahedron. 

And  after  the  dime  order,ifin  the  bafes  of  a  cube,  be  infcribed  fquares  fubten-  • 
ding  the  folide  angles  of  an  Q  dohedron,  or  in  the  bafes  of  an  Odohedronfoe  in 
feribed  equilater  triangles  fubteding  the  folide  angles  of  a  cube, there  lhall  be  pro¬ 
duced  a  folide  corifiding  of  either  ofthe  whole  folides,namely,ofthe  whole  cube 
and  ofthe  whole  Odohedron. 

But  equilater  triangles  infcribed  in  the  bafes  of  a  pyramis,  hauing  their  angles 
fet  in  the  midle  fedions  of  th  elides  ofthe  pyramis, and'  the  folide  angles  of  a  pyra¬ 
mis  fet  vpon  thefayd  equilater  triangles, there  lhall  be  produced  a  folide,  confi¬ 
ding  of  two- equal  and  like  pyramids. 

And  now  if  in  thefe  folides  thus  compofed,  ye  take  away  the  folide  angles, 
there  lhalbe  redored  againe  the  fird  compofed  folides :  namely,  the  folide  angles 
taken  away  from  a  Dodecahedron  and  an  Icolahedron  compofed  into  one,  there 
lhalbe  left  an  Icofidodecahedron  :the  folide  angles  take  away  from  a  cube, and  an 
odohedro  copofed  into  one  folide5there  lhalbe  left  an  exodhedro.Moreouer  the 
folide  angles  taken  away  from  two  pyramids  compofed  into  onefolide,  there  fhal 
be  left  an  Odohedron. 

•  ,/;• ;  :  . . •  ■  S  V-J  1  t; ! ( i  >jit 

( _  ...  .  •  - 

Flujpas  after  this  fetteth  forth  certaine  pafiions  and  properties  of  the  due  fim¬ 
ple  regular  bodies:which  although  he  demondrateth  not, yet  are  they  not  hard  to 
be  demondrated,if  wc  wel  peafe  and  conceiue  that,  which  in  the  former  bobkes 
hath  bene  taught  touching  thofe  folides. 

O  f the  nature  of  a  trilater  and  equilater  Pyramis, 

A  trilater  equilater  Pyramis, is  deuided  into  two  equal  partes,  by  three  equal 
fquares,which  in  the  centre  of  the  pyramis  cutte  the  one  the  other  into  two  equal 
partes, and  perpendicularly, and  whole  angles  are fet  in the  midle  fedions  of  the 
fides  ofthe  pyramis.  From  a  pyramis  are  taken  away  4.  pyramids  like  vnto  the 
whole,  which  vtterly  takeaway  the  fides  of  the  pyramis,  and  that  which  is  left 


compofed  reg 


Glides . 


Fol.\6i . 

is  an  odohedro  infcribed  in  the  pyramys  in  which  all  the  folides  infcribed  in  the 
pyramis  are  contained.  A  perpendicular  drawn e  from  the  angle  of  the  pyramis 
to  the  bafe, is  double  to  the  diameter  of  the  cube  infcribed  in  it.  And  aright  line 
coupling  the  midle  fedions  of  the  oppofite  fides  of  the  pyrami$,is  triple  to  the  fide 
of  the  felfe  fame  cube.  The  fide  alfo  of  the  pyramis  is  triple  to  the  diameter  of  the 
bafe  of  the  cube.  Wherefore  thefame  fide  of  the  pyramis  is  in  power  duple  to 
the  right  line  which  cpupleth  the  midle  fedions  of  the  oppofite  fides.  And  it  is 
inpowerfefquialterto  the  perpendicular  which  is  drawne  from  the  angle  to  the 
bafe.  Wherefore  the  perpendicular  is  in  power  fefquitertia  to  the  line  which  con- 
pleth  the  midle  fedions  of  the  oppofite  fides.  A  pyramis,and  an  Odohedron  iir- 
fcribed  in  it, alfo  an  Icofahedron  infcribedin  thefame  Odohedron,  doo  contains 
one  and  the  felfe  fame  fphere. 


. '  >  tx; 


b 

4® 

5* 

6. 

•7* 

8, 

f. 


Ofthe  nature  of  an  Octohedron. 

Foure  perpendiculars  of  an  Odohedron, drawne  in  4.bafes  thcrofff  onitivb  i . 

oppofite  angles  ofthe  faid  Odohedron,  and  coupled  together  by  thofe  4. bales, 
defcribe  a  Rhombus, or  diamond  figure :  one  of  whole  diameters  is  in  power  du¬ 
ple  to  the  other  diameter.For  it  hath  the  fame  proportio  that  the  diameter  of  the 
Odohedron,hath  to  the  fide  of  the  Odohedron.  An  Octohedron  &  an  Icofahe¬ 
dron  infcribed  in  it,do  containe  one  and  the  felfe  fame  fphere.  The  diameter  of  3  * 
the  folide  of  the  Octohedron, is  in  power  fefquialter  to  the  diameter  of  the  circle  3  * 

which  containeth  the  bafe: and  is  in  power  triple  to  the  right  line  which  coupleth  4. 

the  cetres  ofthe  oppofite  bafes  rand  is  in  power  *duple  fuperbipartiens  tercias  to  *  That  is 
the  pcrpedicular  or  fide  ofthe  forefaid  Rhombus  rand  moreouer  is  in  legth  triple  tob 
to  the  line  which  coupleth  the  centres  of  the  next  bafes.  The  angle  of  the  inch-  * ' 

nation  of  the  bafes  of  the  Octohedron,  doth  with  the  angle  of  the  inclination  of 
the  bafes  ofthe  pyramis,make  angles  equal  to  two  right  angles. 


6 . 


Of  the  nature  of  a  Cube. 


The  diameter  of  a  cube, is  in  power  fefquialter  to  the  diameter  of  his  bafe: 
and  is  in  power  triple  to  his  fide :  and  vnto  the  line  which  coupleth  the  centres  of 
the  next  bafes,it  is  in  power  fextuple.  Moreouer  the  fide  ofthe  cube  is  to  the  fide 
ofthe  Icofahedron  infcribed  in  it,  as  the  whole  is  to  the  greater  fegment  :  vnto 
thefideoftheDodecahedron,itisas  the  whole  is  to  the  leffe  fegment:  vnto  the 
fide  ofthe  Odohedron, it  is  in  power  duplerand  vnto  the  fide  of  the  pyramis,it  is 
in  power  fubduple.  Moreouer  the  cube  is  triple  to  the  pyramis  :  but  to  the  cube 
the  Dodecahedron  is  in  a  maner  duple.  Wherfore  the  fame  Dodecahedron  is  in  a 
maner  fextuple  to  the  fayd  pyramis. 


1. 

2. 
3- 

4. 

5* 

7* 

8. 


Of  the  nature  of  an  Icofahedron. 


,  Fiue  triangles  of  an  Icofahedron, do  make  a  folide  angle,  the  bafes  of  which 
triangles  make  a  pentagon.  If  therfore  from  the  oppofite  bafes  of  the  Icofahedron 

EEE.i.  be 


1. 


3- 

4* 

f* 

7- 

8. 


so. 

Ii* 


Fluflasjfmixt  and 

be  taken  the  other  pentagon  by  them  defcribed,thefe  pentagons  fhall  in  fuch  fort 
cut  the  diameter  of  the  Icofahedron  which  eoupleth  the  forfaid  oppofite  angles, 
that  that  part  which  is  contained  betweene  the  plainesof  thofe  two  pentagons, 
fhalbethe  greater  fegment: and  the  refidue  which  is  drawne  from  the  plaineto 
the  angle  fhall  be  the  leffe  fegment.If  the  oppofite  angles  of  two  bafes  ioyned  to- 
gether,be  coupled  by  a  right  line,  the  greater  fegment  of  that  right  line  is  the  fide 
of  the  Icofahedron .  A  line  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  Icofahedron  to  the  an- , 
gles,is  in  power  quintuple, to  halfe  that  line  which  is  take  betwene  the  pentagos, 
or  of  the  halfe  of  that  line  which  is  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  circle  which  co- 
tayneth  the  forefaid  pentagon:  which  two  lines  are  therefore  equal! .  The  fide  of 
the  Icofahedron  contayneth  in  power  either  of  them ,  and  alfo  the  leffe  fegment, 
namely,the  line  which  falleth  from  the  folide  angle  to  the  pentagon  .  The  diame¬ 
ter  of  the  Icofahedron  contayneth  in  power  the  whole  line ,  which  eoupleth  the 
oppofite  angles  of  the  bafes  ioyned  together,  and  the  greater  fegment  thereof 
namely ,  the  fide  of  the  Icofahedron .  The  diameter  alfo  is  in  power  quintuple  to 
the  line  which  was  taken  betwene  the  pentagons ,  or  to  the  line  which  is  drawne 
from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  circle  which  contained!  the  pentagon 
copofed  of  the  fides  of  the  Icofahedron.  The  dimetient  contayneth  in  power  the 
right  line  which  eoupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bales  of  the  Icofahedron, 
and  the  diameter  of  the  circle  which  contayneth  the  bafe  .  Moreouer  the  fayd  di¬ 
metient  contayneth  in  power  the  diameter  of  the  circle,  which  contayneth  the 
pentagon ,  and  alfo  the  fine  which  is  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  fame  circle  to 
the  circumference:  Thatis,itis  quintuple  to  the  line  drawne  from  the  centre  to 
the  circumference.The  line  which  eoupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes,con 
tayneth  in  power  the  line  which  eoupleth  the  centres  of  the  next  bafes ,  and  alfo 
the  reft  of  mat  line  of  which  the  fide  of  the  cube  inferibed  in  the  Icofahedron  is 
the  greater  fegment .  The  line  which  eoupleth  the  middle  fedions  of  the  oppofite 
fides,is  triple  to  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  inferibed  in  it .  Wherefore  if  the 
fide  of  the  Icofahedron ,  and  the  greater  fegment  thereof  be  made  one  line,  the 
third  part  of  the  whole, is  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  inferibed  in  the  Icofahe¬ 
dron  f 


Of  the  nature  of a  Dodecahedron, 

The  diameter  of  a  dodecahedron  contayneth  in  power  the  fide  of  the  dode¬ 
cahedron,  and  alfo  that  right  line,  vnto  which  the  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the 
leffe  fegment,  and  the  fide  of  the  cube  inferibed  in  it  is  the  greater  fegmet :  which 
line  is  that  which  fubtendeth  the  angle  of  the  inclination  of  the  bafes ,  contayned 
yrider  two  perpendiculars  of  the  bafes  of  the  dodecahedron.If  there  be  taken  two 
bales  of  the  dodecahedron  djftant  the  one  from  the  other  by  the  length  of  one  of 
the  fides,a  right  line  coupling  their  centres ,  being  diuided  by  an  extreme  and 
meane  proportion ,  maketh  the  greater  fegment  the  right  line  which  eoupleth  the 
centres  pfthe  next  bales. If  by  the  centres  of  fiue  bales  fet  vppon  one  bale,  be 
drawne  a  playne  fuperficies,and  by  the  centres  of  the  bafes  which  are  fet  vpon  the 
oppofite  bale  be  drawne  alfo  a  playne  fuperficies,  and  then  be  drawne  a  right  line 
coupling  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafes,that  right  line  is  fo  cut ,  that  eche  of  his 
partes  fet  without  the  playne  fuperficies,is  the  greater  fegment  of  that  part  which 
is  contayned  betwene  theplayncs ,  The  fide  of  the  dodecahedron  is  the  greater 


fegment  of  the  line  which  fubtendeth  the  angle  of  thepentagott.  A  perpendicular 
line  drawne  from  the  centre  of  the  dodecahedron  to  one  of  the  bafes,is  in  power 
quintuple  to  half  the  line  which  is  betwene  the  playnes  :  And  therfore  the  whole  6. 
line  which  coupleth  the  centres  of  the  oppofite  bafcsps  in  power  quintuple  to  the 
whole  line  which  is  betwene  the  fayd  playnes  .The  line  which  fubtedeth  the  - 

‘  angle  of  thebafe  of  the  dodecahedro,  together  with,  the  fide  of  the  bafe,are 
in  power  quintuple  to  the  line  which  is  drawne  from  the  cetre  of  the 
circle, which  contayneth  the  bafe,to  the  circumference.  A  fedi-  g ( 

on  ofafphere  contayniug  three  bafes  of  the  dodecahedron 
taketh  a  third  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  fayd  fphere. 

The  fide  of  the  dodecahedro  n ,  and  the  line  which 
fubtendeth  the  angle  of  the  pentagon,  are  e- 
quail  to  the  right  line  which  coupleth  the 
middle  fe&io’ns  of  the  oppofite  fides  of 
the  dodecahedron. 

GO . 


f  The  endeof  theElementes  ofGeometrie, 

of  the  mod:  auncient  Philofbpher 

Eftciide  of  Megara. 

EEE.ij. 


Fault  es  efcaped. 

X,-|  Aruaiie  not  ( gentle  reader  )  that  faultes  here  following, haue  efcaped  in  the  corre&ion  of  this 
’  booke.  For, for  that  the  matter  in  it  contayned  isflraunge  to  our  Printers  here  in  England,not  ha¬ 
lting  bene  accullomed  to  Print  many.or  rather  any  bookes  contayning  fuch  matter,which  eaufeth  them 
to  be  vnfurniihed  of  a  corrector  fkilfull  in  that  art :  I  was  forced,  to  my  great  trauaile  and  paine,to  cor¬ 
rode  the  whole  booke  my  felfe » And  in  de'ede  fometimesfor  want  of  Argus eyes,  and  iuite  confiderati- 
on  .nocwitManding  mv  diligence  in  correcting,  faultes efcaped  through  me  :  fometimes  alfo  for  lacke 
of  diligence  in  the  Printer  to  amend  mycorrediions/aukes  remayned  vncorreded  by  his  meanes  .  So 
that  betwene  vs  both  thefe  faultes  haue  efcaped  vncorre&ed  :  which  faultes  yet, to  fay  the  trouth,for 
the  moil  part  are  fuch,  as  a  very  young  iludent  without  noting  them  vnto  him,  mought  ealily  ofhira 
felfe  finde  and  corre&e.And  this  I  dare  boldly  affirme, that  not  many  bookes, if  any,  concerning  this  art 
in  other  tounges,Greke,Latine,or  I  tali  an  .a:  e  with  fo  fewe  faults  of  importance  Printed ,  as  this  booke 
is  .  The  triall  wherof  i  referre  to  them  whitrh  ha  e  red  any  bookes  of  this  arte  in  other  toynges,  &r  lhall 
happen  hereafter  to  read  this .  And  as  touching  thefe  faultes  to  be  cone£ted,I  would  wiihe  you  (good 
reader)  beforeyou  beginne  to  read  anv  of  the  1 6. bookes  in  this  volume  contained.,  firil  to  amend  the 
faultes  in  that  booke  which  you  will  read,  according  as  theyarehere  fignified  vnto  you.  Whereyou, 
ihall  findein  what  bookejeafe, fide, and  line,  both  the  fault  efcaped  is,& alfo  howitis  to  be  ccrredled. 
And  if  you  happen  in  reading  to  finde  any  more  faultes  not  here  mentioned,  as  peraduenture  you  may, 
for  that  dmers  faultes  were  vtterly  fo  eafie  and  light  to  corredte,  that  I  would  not  note  them,&  befides 
-  that,  no  one  man  chough  he  be  neuer  fo  diligent  and  circumfpe&e  can  efpieall  thinges,  I  trull  you  will 
therefore  impute  no  blame  either  vnto  me  or  to  the  Printer,but  gently  amend  and  corredlthem,accep* 
ting  our  good  minde,which  was  to  haue  had  the  booke  palfed  to  your  handes  vtterly  without  fault,  as 
touching  the  Prin  ting. 


Fol.  Fag.  Line.  Faultes.  Carre /Fed. 

Errata  Lib.  i. 


I 

1 

4 1  ?  point  B  ,as  Cans  pane 

'point  C  .as  Campane 

3 

1 

zz  all  lines  dr  atone 

.  all  right  lines 

3 

X 

28  lines  drawers  to  the 

right  lines  eh  awe  to 

fuperfictes 

the  circumference 

9 

1 

42  |  lines  A  B  and  A  C} 

lines  A  B  and  B  C 

*y 

1 

i  y  ’  are  tip  nail 

are  proued  e  snail 

zo 

2 

28  (hj  the  fir  ft 

(  by  the  fourth 

i  t 

1 

39  i  the  centre  C. 

the  centre  E 

24 

2 

6  \  If  fovper  right 

If  two  right 

ay 

■  a 

3  fi* ft  petition 

fiueth  petition 

■w 

z 

7  14.16.32.64  -ffic. 

4-8.n5.32.64.gfe. 

Si 

\  1 

3  9  the  triangle  A7  G 

the  triangle  KjG 

S  4 

ay  (bjfhe  44. 

(by  the  tfZ. 

V 

1  1 

.1  23  and  C  B  G  is  the 

and  C  G  B  is  the 

In  fiede  of  f  Inflates  through  out  the 

whole  bookg  head  Unfits. 

Errata  Lib. 

2. 

6o 

a 

z 9  Gnomon  F  G  E  H 

Gnomon  A  ft  I(~D 

i 

30  G  oomon  E  H  F  G 

Gnomon  E  C  if  O 

69 

1 

18  1  the  whole  line 

the  whole  figure 

76 

z 

9  |  the  diameter  C  D 

the  diameter  AHF 

Errata  Lib.  3 

0 

81 

1 ! 

36  J  angle 

e  quail  to  the  angle 

?a 

1 1 

la  ft  1  the  line  AC  is  ‘  \ 

the  line  A  F  is 

Errata  Lib. 

4- 

no 

2 

10  C  D  tottche th  the 

E  D  touche th  the 

1 

12  fide  of  the  other 

angle  of  the  other. 

try 

r 

z  1  and H B 

andH  E 

117 

2 

44  the  angle  AC  D 

the  angle  A  C  B 

xx8 

1 

1 

2  into  ten  eptiall 

into  two  eepuall 

Fol. 

Pag 

Line 

Fattltes . 

Cor  relied. 

I2T 

1 

31 

C  D,andE  A , 

CD,DE,0EA, 

•24 

’ "  I 

aj> 

the  fir  ft 

the  third. 

126 

X 

43! 

Errata  Lib. 

it  maketh  zz. 

T* 

I  it  maketh  24. 

11 9 

I 

more  then  17  by  y .  |  more  then  17.bg)  7. 

In  ftede  of  the  figure  of  the  6. definition 
draw  snthe  maget  a figure  life  'vnto  thts. 

' 


A  B 


C  D 


G 


1 

F 


H 


*34 

2 

4 

As  AB  is  to  At ft  is 
C  D  to  C 

HI 

2, 

laft 

But  if  If,  excede  M, 

As  AS  is  to  B,fo  is 
CDtoD 

But  tf  H  excedeM , 
Its 


t  Faukes  efcaped \ 


Fol. 

Pag. 

Line 

Fdultes. 

Corretted. 

*43 

2 

In  the  figure  adde  to  the  line  N  a  line  e- 

quail  to  the  Itne  C  .  Alfa  dtuide  the 

line  G  H  into  three  equall  partes  .And 

in  the  line  D  put  out  the prtcke  tewar- 

des  one  of  the  endes  therof. 

15:1 

1 

29 

9n toasts  to  D 

[  fnto  B  as  C  ts  to  D 

2 

*3 

before  this  particle 

:  [ then  by  euerfionfis 

left  out  this  fentcce\and  tf dlfs  the  pro- 

portion  of  the fecond  to  the  third  in  the 

firfi  order,  be  greater  then  the  proporti- 

on  of  the  fecond  to  the  thtrdin  the  lat- 

ter  order ]] 

1 

In  the  figure  of  the  7 ,  Propofition,  in  ftede 

of  the  lines  H ,C  ,G ,1 which  are  put  finder 

the  lines  A,B ,C ,drawe  two  lines  accor- 

ding  to  the  tneafure  of  thefe  two  lines. 

H- 

Errata  Lib. 

6. 

W 

1 

3* 

grdme  A  B  G  D 

grame  AC  G  D 

181 

1 

3 

the figment 

the  fellor 

4 

the  fegment 

the fell  or 

Errata  Lib.  7.  8.  andp. 

107 

i 

2 

XT. of  the fiueth 

XT .of the fieuenth 

11 6 

1 

lafi 

meafure  the  leafl 

meafure  the  lafi 

222 

1 

firfi 

the  lefie  fhall 

the  lafi  fhall 

114 

2 

23 

an  odde  number . 

an  euen  number 

Errata  Lib.  io. 

141 

1 

28 

to  a  number 

toafquare  number 

242 

1 

.  3 

be  commenfuralle 

be  incomenfurable 

145 

1 

39. 

ofleffie 

of  th  e  lefife 

2*3 

2 

3* ; 

a  fencircle 

a  femi  circle 

158 

1 , 

25  ■ 

lines  A  B  and  D  B 

lines  A  D  and  D  B 

158 

2 

1 6 

lines  A  B  and  B  G 

lines  A  B  and  B  C 

259 

1 

40 

H  E  and  A  F 

H  E  and  H  F 

161 

1 

D  If  is  rationall 

D  If  is  irrationall 

D  E  is ir rationall 

D  E  is  rationall 

184 

2 

12  ^ 

E  is  a  rationall 

I  is  a  rationall 

290 

1 

34 

C  D  nor  the  line 

E  Dmr  the  ltne 

300 

1 

37’ 

lines  C  D  andiD  F 

lines  C  F  and  D  F 

301 

1 

3* 

commenfiurable 

mcommen fur able 

.306 

1 

24. 

jropKtytciliSs, 

zrofijfxcflu'cc. 

2* 

that  isjAcquifiue- 

that  ts ,  Acquifi- 

b 

tiuely 

Errata  Lib.  n. 

3T4 

a  i 

33 

‘he  fide  B  F 

the  fide  D  F 

320 

1 

12 

finder  fioure  plume 

Sender  fixe  plaine 

17 

fnder  foure  plaine 

fnder  fixe  plaine 

33° 

2 

33 

L  H  B  M,and  fo 

LG  B  M,and fo 

338 

In  the  figure  sn  the 

line  LRAEHMN 

in  fiede  of  the  let - 

ter  R  put  the  let- 

ter  If 

347 

2 

4* 

JV,T,d,andf y 

V,T,h^end  Cfi 

Fol.  Pag.  Line.  Fault es.  Corrected. 

Errata  Lib.  12 » 


3*3 

368 

380 

388 


10 


■T-9 


B  A,D  A,D  C,  I  B  J,B  C.D  C, 

In  the  figure  infiedeofthe  letter  R  put  the 
letter  £fi 

Ift  the  fecond figure  extend  the  line  D  G 
to  the  point  3 

Earthmeaf tires  \  j  Earthmeafurers 


Errata  Lib.  13. 


40° 

I 

*3 

’  in  the  circle  F 

40  6 

%; 

ji'7  power  ble  to 

407 

l 

.48 

lines  If  I,EM.>ZN)t 

V and  NT.  -  ' 

lafi  1  Ifl  ana  D  S 

409 

1 

34 

line  V  a, which 

410 

I 

33 

rH,mv,B]v;wq, 

34 

C  Z ,  and  C  B . 

4I2 

I 

1(5 

lines  A  fl 

24 

line  B  T  is  equall 

413 

2 

22 

contatneth  fixe ,  of 
fuch  parts  the  fide 
of  the  pyramis  co- 
tainetb  fewer 

in  the  circle  H 
power  treble  to  ' 
ltncsJfI,EM,Z'N, 
and  N  H 
If  I  and  A  S 
ling  Z  a, which 

rH,Hvs,Bjyjvc. 
cz,zy,py  r  b. 

lines  A  II 
line  B  W  is  equall 
contatneth  in  power 
fixe ,  of  finch  partes 
the fide  of  the  py 
ramts  contatneth 
in  power  fewer 


Errata  Lib.  14.  Hypf. 


417 

l 

I  4* 

\felfe  fame  circle 

j  felfe  fame  Sphere 

* 

1  43 

fame  circle 

[fame  Sphere 

Errata  Lib.  14.  Fluflas. 

4^7 

2 

1  42 

in  fefquitertia 

in  fubfefquitertiit 

43° 

X 

1  20 

to  the  line  E  N 

to  the  line  A  N 

1  *i 

the  line  F  G  H  I M 

the  cube  F  G  HIM 

Errata  Lib.  15. 

440 

1 

10 

lirteEH) 

line  e  fl) 

2 

42 

lines  A  T,and 

lines.  AT,  T  G, 

444 

I 

In  t  hefigu  re  in  fiede 

# 

of  the  letter  G  put 
the  letter  T 

*4 

Strider  the  fide,  of 

Crider  the  fide  D  G 

Errata  Lib.  16. 

447 

I 

wherefore  the  line\  wherforethefquare 

.Al  . 

of  the  line  A I 

448 

2 

14 

tn  a  pyramts 

in  an  Oclchedron 

4*8 

X  | 

7 

whole  line  P  B, 

whole  line  G  £ 

zAT  LONpON 


ouer  Alderigate  beneath  Saint  Martins. 


C  Thefe  Bookes  arc  to  be  folde  at 
his  ihop  vnder  the  gate. 


I57°* 


I 


•  >$■ 


- 


\ 


v\  V4 


f  V  . 


-  / 


V 


'  i 


t 


K 


) 


I 


- 


a 


-  -3  :  -  K>?V::; 


,  •  ■ ;  .'  '-'•  ,  :■'  '  '. 

•  •  *•<  .  --  - :  :■  ’  .  ■••  - 


V  '  ~  '  vv-  iV-^AS: 


SHIS  l 


- 


«« i-  -r-’^  ' 


•  "■  .3'-"  , 


‘ 


1 1  „  *  w 


■■*■■■  ‘.v  . 


P;;» 


...  ,- ...,  , ,,  ...  v/x-  ;%g 

■■  f' 

■  '  i  .  :  r‘  -  -  ‘  %■ 


■>.'■,  j  '  , .■  t,  ■■  -  .  '• 

.-,  - 


■  / 

■  ••  }\M} 


'  -  .'  x-' 

* 


\ 


“.T  ’ 


■  ■  *'  • 


■•■  '  ..  ’  •  ;-■■ 


(  '. ; v'  '^.v 


•'  ■■•  ■'.  ■  v.-v.’-v  ■  •  ' 

.IS.-'-  *  -  ■  i  . 
J*. 


-.,  X."  ■  -  .  ...  "  V-V’ 

:  .  . 


ft  ■  ^ 


H*  4-,v; 


Lillis 


3K®3B3K5S»E®^aES 


*1 


I 


I 


