8) 


s and Tranflati 


10N 


e 


Coll 


f 
(, 


"2 "_ 
. 


1 H 


OF THE 


WORLD: 


DIALOGUES 


W herein the T'wo 


GRAND. SYSTEMES 


Of PTOLOMY and COPER NN ICU S 
are - largely diſcourſed of : - 


Andthe R E ASO NS, both Phyloſophical and Phy/ical., 
as well on the one ſide as the other, impartial 
and mndefunit ely propounded : 


By GALILEUS GALILEUS LINCELUS, 


A Gentleman of FLORENCE : Extraordinary Profeſſor of 
the Mathemwaticks in the UNIVERSITY of PISA; and 
Chief Mathematicianto the GRAND DUKE of TUSCANT. 


Engliſbed fromthe Original Italian Copy, by THOMAS SALUSBURY. 
Amberry  ALtcinous, Piltar Priter 
Aid) t\5v934pror xa TH ty wpn PV MENAGIT bLNgcoDay. 


SnNnEca, 


Inter nullos magic quam inter PHI LOSOPHOS efſe debet #&qua LIBERTAS, 


= L OND 0 N, S 
Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOUR NE. MDCLAL. 


* 
_—_ 


. ”> 
= 
P -. 
* ; * a k 
". Fo = = mY 
= % \ - , 
_ ". ' % wa - 
__ y ® . , : 
: * 
j* V 
. - 
—_— 
, 
- 
- , 
a 
= 4& 
% - 
a _ 
«6 IF) k # 2 : 
»£ " 
” - 
- 
. 
7+ -. " " 
: + * pI? ' 
. \ 
. e F 
" 
F 
% 
©, 
- { &@” 5 
% - 
« *h 
= , E ” 
: * 
4 _< : es 
on 4 # = 
" £ 
_- 
LE 
LS 
T. 
w } Ls 
* - . 
Z a "—y - 
z o 
() 
- 
=y 
. 
p - 
þ . 
+ ® 
* 
"_ = 
- 3 . £Zs 
_— —_— _—_ 
F————— CT en . — US. Ae ys 
Y * a . " - $3.67 EE.” _ - 
———— m—_ U - comm, wo - 
. "— | "” , 


To the moſt Sercnc Grand Du k x: 
Ro O F 


_— 


CT. 
a% 


þ 
Fay 


IITI? 
USA 


= 


athouſfand ? andyerit is a common Proverb , One «Man is 
worth a thouſand, when as a thouſand are not worth one. This diftercnce 
hath dependence upon the difterent abilitics of their Inrelle- 
tua's ; which I reduceto the being , or not being a Philcolo- 


pher; in regard that Philoſophy as being the proper food of 


ſuch aslive by it,diſtinguiſheth a Man from the common El\« 
ſence of the Vulgarin amore or leſs honourable degree accord- 


ing tothe varicty of that dict. In this ſence he that hath the 
higheſt looks, is of higheſt quality ; and the turning over of 
the great Volume of Nature , which is ihe proper Object of 
Philoſophy is the way to make one look high: in which Book, 
although whatſoever we read , as being the Work of AL- 
mighty God , istherctore moſt proportionate ; yet notwith- 
ſtanding that is more abſolute and noble wherein we more 
plainly deferne his art and kill. The Conſtitution of the Purters, 
among all Phyſical points that fall within Humane Compre- 
henſion, may, in my opinion, be preterred to the Precedency : 
for if that in regard of univerſal extent it excell all others , it 
ought as the Rule and Standaril of the reſt to goc betorc 
them in Nobility. Now if evet any perſons might challenge 
'0 be fionally diſtinguiſhed for Intellectuals from other men; 


Pto 1: 


Ptolomey and (Copernicus were they that have had the honourto 
{ee fartheſt into, and diſcourſe moſt profoundly of the Worlds 
Syfleme. About the Works of which famous Men theſe Dia- 
lous being chicfly converſant, I conceived it my duty to De- 
dicate them only to Your Highneſs. For laying all the weight 
upon theſe two , whom I hold to be the Ableſt Wits 5 
havelctt us their Works upontheſe Subjects ; to avoid a Sole- 
ciſmein Manners, I was obliged to addreſs them to Him,who 
with me, is the Greateſt of all Men, from whomthey can re- 
ccive cither Glory or Patrociny. And if theſe twoperſons 
havelo farre illuminated my Underſtanding as that this m 
Book may ina great part be confeſſed to belong tothem , Ka 
may 1t alſo be KANO to belong to Your Highneſs, unto 
whoſc Bounicous Magnificence I owe the time and leaſure I 
had to write it, as alſo unto Your Powerful Aſſiſtance, (never 
weary of honouring me) the means that at length Lhaye had-- 
to publiſh it. May Your Highneſs therefore be pleaſed roaccept 
of it according to Your accuſtomed Goodneſs ; and if an 
thing ſhall be found therein, that may beſubſervient ns 
the information or ſatisfaction of thoſe that are Loyers of 
Truth; let them acknowledgeit to be due to Your Self, who are 
ſo expertin doing good, that Your Happy Dominion cannot 
{hew the man that 1s concerned in any of thoſe general Cala- 
mitics that diſturb the World;ſothat Praying for Your Proſpe- 
rity , audcontinuance in this Your Pious and Laudable Cu- 
ſome, | humbly kiſs Your Hands 


Your eMoft Serene Highneſſes 


Moſt Humble and moſt devoted 


Servant and Subje&t 


GALILEO GALILETI. 


To the Noble ind moſt perfedtly Accompliſhed 


SJOHN DENHAM 


Knight of the Noble Order of the 


And Surycyor General of his Ma*'* Works, &c. 


0] o If 


27 2x5 Humbly begge your Pardon for 
29 F3z bringing this Book under your Pro- 
21 ky tection. Were it a V Vork of my 

W—” own,orlany thing but the Tranſla- 
tour,lshould maſftermy Thoughts toa meaner 
Dedication, But being a ColleCction of ſome of 
the greateſt Maſters in the V Vorld,and never 
made English till now , IconceivedI might 
ſooner procure their V Velcome to a perſon ſo 
eminent for Noble Candor , as well as for all 
thoſe Intellectual Excellencies wherewith 
Your Rich Soulis known to be furnished. I 
reſolyd tobe as kind to this Book as I could, 


and 


and ſeriouſly conſidering which way to effect 
It , Tat laſt concluded toprefix Your Name, 
whom His Majeſty and all his Subjects, (who 
have a higher Senſe and Judgement of Excel- 
lent Parts) know beſt able to defend my Im- 
pertections. And yet confeſs there's one 
thing makesagainſt me, which is your eminent 
Integrity andgreat Aﬀection to Truth, where,- 
by my Lapſesin a V Vork ofthis Nature might 
juitly deſpair of Shelter , but that the Excel- 
lency of Your Native Candor ſtrives for Pre- 
dominancy over all Y our great Abilities. For 
*tis all-moſt impoſſible to think what Your 
Matchleſs V Vitisnot able to Conquer,would 
Your known Modeſty but give leave: there- 
fore Galilens, Kepler,and thoſe other Worthies 
in Learning are now brought before You in 


[nglish Habit , having changd their Latine, 
[talian and French,whereby they were almoſt 


Strangers to our Nation,unleſs to ſuch as You, 
who ſo perfectly maſter the Originals. Iknow 
you have ſo much and great imployment for 
His Majeſty , and his good Subjetts that 1 shall 
not robb you of another Minutes loſs ; beſides 
the liberty of ſubſcribing my Self; 


SIR, 


Your Hononrs 


Moſt Humble , 
and 
Moſt obedient Servant 


THOMAS SALUSBURY. 


MATHEMATICAL 


COLLECIIONS 


A ND 


TRANSLATIONS: 


THE FIRST 


TOM E- 


IN TWO PARTS. 


— OGG GG_— —_— — 


THE FIRSI PART; 


Containing , 


 L Garit xus Gar1teus Hor SYSTEM of the 
WORLD. 


IT. Garitzus Hy EPISTLE t the GR AND 
DUTCHESSE MOTHER concerning the Au- 
thority of Holy SCRIPTURE in Philoſophical 
Controver ſes. 

TILJonannss Knzerzaus His Keconcalings of SCR I- 
PTURE Texts, &c. 

I. Divacus 3 STtunica Hy Reconcilings of SCR [- 
PTURE Texts, &c. * 6. 


p. P.A. Fosearinus Hi Epiſtle to Father FANTONTS, 
reconciling the Authority of SCRIPT URE., and Fuds- 
ments of Drvines alledged againſt this SY ST E M. 


—— — — — — 
—— 


By THOMAS SALUSBURY, Eſq. 


[ 


LONDON, 
Printed by W1rttianm LevzOuRN, wpcLlxl. 


J 4 
Hh 1 +4 e - 


F 
= 
i 
. 
= 
# 
< 
Fg \ . 
» # G 
. » } 
- 
P Ne - 4 
_ - - 
* 'S # 
* - 
- 
. 
% 
* 
- © 
Ys w ”Y 
” 
* 
CT 
4 - 
3 
oo 
©, 
- 
- 
- 
- 
* 
- 
— = _ ” - 
—_— # , 
| 4 $9 kg : BY = —_— "we Aa. - ' 
_ - —. _ * LS 
; x Rn - ſy eoen———_—_— TT —_——— = = 
— ——_ —— a _ 9 
—_ — — 6 R « 


MATHEMATICAL. 


COLLECTIONS 


TRANSLATIONS. 


True FIRST | 
1OME 
THE FIRST PART: 


Containing, | 


], Gartittus Garitzus, His SYSTEM E of the 
IWorld. 


IL, Gariteus, bis EPISTLE wt the GRAN D 
DUTCHESSE Mother concerning the Authority of | 
Sacred SCRIPTURE inPhyloſophical Controverſies. 

III. Jon annzs Keritnus, his Reconcilings of SCR 1- 
PTURE Texts, &c. 


I). Divacus a STuxica, bi Reconcilings of SCR [- 
PTURE Texts, &c. WS TER. 


V. P, A Foscarinus,hy Epiſtle to Father FANCTOAC(US, 
reconciling the Authority of Sacred SCR IPTURE., 
and Fudgments of Drvines alledged againſt, &c. 


ts. 


By THOMAS SALUSBURY, Eſq. 


[CY 


—_ 
——_— 


LONDON, 
Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURNE, MDCLXi: 


- 
4 
4 
F 
© x . 
W179 
maT 4” 
- 
» 
. - 
% 
4% 
£&<. 
== 
- 
% 
, — 
. 
_ — 
_ i nm | — = hes. = 6 _— 
\ k. _ w& ee _ —_ @—O OO— OOO OT AAA = 
_ »_— —_ ww a OO IO OUT _—— 
-— _ # wi - . . a - 
4 — © 


READER, 


ENCR Athematical Learning (to ſpeak nothing touching the neceſsity & delight thereof) h.uÞ bi (> (paring- 
Wy 5 /y imparted to our Countrymen in their native Engliſh , eſpecially the nobler and (nblin;cr part , 
AVAÞ that in Compliance with the Solicitations of ſeveral of my noble and learned Friendsan the lncli- 
VELY nations of ſuch as are Mathematically diſpoſed » more eſpecially thoſe , who either want Time or 
Patience to look into the vulgar and unſtudied —_— , 1 did adventure upon this Work of Colletting & Tranſ- 
lat ing from amons ſt the excellent Pieces that are ſo a ounding in the Italian and French T 01:qnes, ſome of thoſe 
that my own obſervation and the intimation of Friends were moſt uſefull and deſired, am with all moſt w-tnting 
in their Own. : : = | 

[ was, indeed,at firſt ſeriouſly Conſcious, and am now, by experience , fully corvinced how diſproportionate the 

weight of the Enterprize ts to the weakneſs of the Undertaker, bu: yet the Paſs191; I ever had to be ſubſervient to 
my Friends and Compatriots in therr Inquiſition after theſe Sublime Studies, and a Patience which [owe ta the 
Flegme that 15 predominant In my ( onſt1t ut ion, joyned with a ninc-years converſence In theſe [angnages,as JA ſo an 
unhappy and long Vacation that the perſ, ecutions of the late Tyraats Fave me from more advantagions emply Y- 
ments ſo prevailed with me , that I reſolved to improve even my very Confinement to \cive thoſe Friends, whom, as 
the Times then ſtood, Þ conld not ſee, itn 

The Book being for Subjett and Deſign intended chiefly for G entlemen , 1 have bin as careleſs of uſing aſtndied 

Pedantry in my Style ; as careful in contriving 4 pleaſant and beautiful Impreſſion. And when I had conilidered 
the hazard, and computed the charge of the undertaking , If ound it to exceed the ability of a private Purſeeſpee« 
cially of mine , that had bin ſo lately emptied by the hand of wiolemt enemies , and perfidzons friends * wot to 
mahe mention here of the Sums that 4 Loyal Reflexion upon my Princes Aﬀairs had at the ſame time drawn 
from me; and judg'd that the mo#t ſafe, eaſy, and reaſonable way was to rnvite thoſe Perſons who had appeared 
deſirous of the Book, , to be contributary to their own Contentment , by ſubſcribing towards the charge of this Pu- 
blication, | 

And for the better management of the Work,, I joyned to my ſelf a Printer , whoſe Genizs having rendered 
him Mathematical , ard my overtures of profit having intereſſed bis diligence,l was induced to promiſe my ſelf a 
more than common Aſſiſtance from him : aad. at his door 1 with reaſon lay all miſcarriages that concerns his 
Profeſſion in the Baſineſs. | f Bel 

In this work, 1 found more than ordinary Encouragement from. that publick, ſpirited Perſon the Reverend and 
Learned Dr. Thomas Barlow , Provoſt of Queens (ledge Oxtoxd , and Margaret Profeſſor in that I"niver« 
ſity, as alſo from thoſe two able Mat hematitians and my Reall Friends Major Miles Symner, and Mr. Robert 
Wood of Trinity Colledge Dublin , and ſome few others. wheſe Modeſty hath expreſly enjoin'd me a concealmeut 
of their Names. | \ 1 | | 

well, at length I have got tothe end of my firſt Stage;and if I have not rid Poſt, let my excuſe be that my ln 
ſay for my Warrant cauſed me to ſet out late; and being ill mounted,and tn a road full of rubbrz I could not way, 
any ſafety go faſter;, but hope to get it up in the next Stage , for im that I intend to ſhift my Horſes. 

T he names of thoſe Authors and Treatices which I judged would moſt grace our Language , and gratify Stu- 
dents , are particularly expreſt in the General T ule of the two Tomes, Diſtinit Tomes they are as conſiſting of 
ſeveral Piiſwes : Collettions I call thens, becauſe they huve bin ſo publiſhed , diſperſt , ard worn ont of Print, that 
they very rarely meet in one hand : and Tranſlations { own them to be ,, as not pretending to any thing more than 
the diſpoſure and converſion of them ; thoſe Traits only evo-p48 which compeſe the ſecond Part of the ſecond 

ome. 

T he firſt Book, which offers it ſelf to your view 1 this T ome ts that ſingular and unmitable Piece of Reaſon 
and De monſtrationthe Syſteme of Galileo, T he ſubjelt of it is a new and Noble pvrt of «Aſtronomy, to wit the 
Dottrine and H ypotheſis of the Mobility of the Earth and the Stabiliry of the Sun ; the H iftory whereof I ſhall 
hereafter give you at large inthe Life of that fannns Man.Only this by the by; that the Reader may not wonder 
why theſe Dialogues found ſo various entertainment in [taly (for he cannot but have heard that though they have 
been with all veneration valued,read & applauded by the Indicions.y:t they were with much deteſtation perſecuted, 
ſuppreſſed & exploded by the $S ee i, I am to tell him that our Anthor having aſſtened his int imate Friends 
Salviati azd Sagredo the more ſucceſifull Parts of the (' hallenger, and Moderater,he made the famous Commen- 
tator Simplicius to perſonate the Peripatetick, T he Book coming out,and Pope Urban the V I 1 taking his Ho- 
nour to be concern'd as having in his private Capacity bun very poſitive un declaimins againit the Samian Phils. 
ſophy, and now (as he ſuppoſed) being ill delt with by Galileo who had ſunmed up all his Arguments , and put 
them into the month of Simplicius; his Holineſs thereupon conceived an implacable Diſpleaſure againit our «Au 
thor,and thinking no other revenge ſufficient he employed hs Apoſtolical A ut hority,end deals with the C on ſtory 
to condemn him and prof cribe his Book as Heretical ;proſtituting the Cenſure of the Church to his private revenge. 
T his was Galilco's fortune in Italy : Cut had I not reaſon to hope that the Exgliſh will be more hoſpitable ; on the 
account of that Principle which induceth them to be civil to(T ſay not to dote on) Stranoers,, I ſhould fear to be 
charged with imprudence for appearing an Interpreter to that great Philoſopher, And in this confidence I (hall 
forbear to make any large Exordium concerning him or his Book: (x the rather in regard that ſuch kind of Gag- 

deries become not the Gravity of the Subjett ; as alſo knowing how much (coming from me) they mu$t full ſhort of 
the Merits of it, or him: but principally becauſe [ court only perſons of Tulgement & Candoryhat can diſtinguiſh 
between a Native Beauty, and ſpurious Verniſh, This oaly let me premiſe, though more to excuſe my weakneſs in 
the menaging, than to inſinuate my ability in accompliſhing this ſo arduous a Tak that theſe profo::nd Dialos nes 
have bin found ſo uneaſy to Tranſlate, that neither affettation of Novelty could induce the French, ror the 
Tranſlating humour perſwade the Germans to undertake them, Th:s difficulty,as I conceived, was charsed either 
wponthe Intricacy of this mannerof Writing, or upon the fugular Elegance inthe ſtife of Galileo , or elſe rp2n the 


* 
p / m2; (47'S 


miſcarriage of the unfortunate Mathias Berncgge: us who firſt attempted to turn them iuts Latine for the benefit 
of the Learned World, # : . : 

I ſhall not preſume to Cenſure the Cenſure which the Church of Rome paſt upon this Dottrine and its Aſſertor; 
But,on the contrary, my Author having bin indefinite 11 his diſcourſe 1 ſhall forbear t q exaſperate, and attempr 
to reconcile ſuch perſons to this Hypotheſis as devout eſteem for Holy $S criptare , and dutifull Reſpett to C anomcal 
Injunttions hath made to ſtand off from this Opinion : and therefore for their [ akes I have at the end of the Dia. 
logues by way of ſupplement added an Epiſtle of Galileo to Her Mot Serene Highneſs Chriſtina Lotharinga the 
Grand Dutcheſ]e Mother of Tuſcany ; as alſo certain Abſtratts of John Kepler , Mathemarician to two Empe. 
rours, and Didacusa Stunica a famous Divine of Salamanca,with an Epiſtle of Paulo Antonio F5ſcarini « learn. 
ed Carmelite of Naples, that ſhew the Authority of Sacred $ cripture in determining of Phulof, ophical and Nats. 
ral Controverſies : hoping that the ingenious & impartial Reader will mett with full ſatisfattion in the ſame. 
eAnd leaſt what I have ſpoken of the prohibiting of theſe Pieces by the Inquiſition may deterre any ſcrupulous 
perſon from reading of them , 1 —— ſeh inſerted the Imprimatur by which that Office licenced them. And 
for a larger account of the Book, or Author, I refer you to the Relation of his Life, which ſhall bring up the Reare 
mm the Second Tome. | 

What remains of this ,#s that Excellent Diſcourſe of D, Benedetto Caſtelli Abbate di San Benedetto Aloyho, 
concerning the Menſuration of Running Waters,with other Treatiſes of that Learned Prelate,c> of the Super in- 
tendent Corltini., Some may alledge, ard I doe confeſs that I promiſed to publiſh the Life of Galileo 1# this place : 
B ut the great miſcarriages of Letters from ſome Friends in Italy and elſe where , to whom I am a Debtor for ſe. 
weral Remarques,&' from whom I daily expett yet greater Helps concerning the Hiſtory of that famons Perſonage: 
theſe diſappointments,I ſay,joyned with the undemable Requeſt of ſome Friends, who were 1mpatient to ſee Caſtchi 
wm Engliſh , together 2h. a conſideration of the diſproportionate Bulk that would otherwiſe have bin betwixt the 
two Volumes perſwaded me to this exchange, Thus deviation from my Promiſe I hope is Venial , and forthe ex- 
prating of it I plead Supererrogation : having in each Tome made ſo large Aditions (though to my great ex- 
perſe) that they make neer a third part more than I ſtood by promiſe bound to Publiſh.That this 25 ſo wil appearby 
comparing the (Contents I here prefix with the Advertiſment I formerly Printed For not to mention thoſe Epitomes 
of Kepler axd a Stunica,the whole ſecond and following Books of Caſtellizvere not come to my hands at the time of 
my pennins that Paper ;, yet knowing how imperfett rhe Volume would be without them, they being partly a ſup- 
plement to the Theoremes and Problemes which the «Abbot had formerly Printed , and ab; experiments that 
had procured him and his Dottrine a very great Reputation , knowing this I [ay, I apprehended a neceſſity of pu- 
bliſhing them with the reſt : and hope that if y1u think net the ſervice I have done therein worth your 6 40.97 4 ma 
ment , you will yet at leaſt account the encreaſe of my expence a ſufficient extenuation of the Treſpaſs that thoſe 
Additions have forced me to commit upon your Patience in es Time, 

eA's for the ſecond Tome, I have only this to aſſure the Generogs Readers; 1 that I ams very confident I ſhall 
be much more punttual in publiſhing that, than (for the reaſons above related.) I was able to be in ſetting forth 
this: , that they ſhall nnt be ab»ſed im wet gn A. their moneys , (as hath bin wſed m the like caſe) by ſelling 
the remaining Copyes at an under rate ; and # that I have a very great care that no diſeſteem may by my means a- 
+ e unto this way of publiſhing Books , for that it us of excellent uſe in uſhering Great and Coſtly Volumes into 

the World. 

Toſay nothing of the diſadvantages of Tranſlations in general , this of mine doubtleſs is not without it's Er- 
rours,and overſights : but thoſe of the Printer diſcounted, I hope the reſt may be allowed me upon t re of Hu- 
man Imbecilitic,T he truth i,1 have aſſumed the Liberty to note the Miſtakes in the Florid Verſion of Bernegge- 
rus 1» the Margent, not (o much to reproach hins., as ts comunce thoſe who told me that they accounted my pains 
need! eſ. s,having his Latine Tranſlation 6, them.T he [ the the ſ aid of the whole two T omes:but they thereby cakſ, ed 
me to queition their Underſtanding or eracity For ſome 0 the Books were yet never extant : As for inſtance : 
the Mechanicks of Any Des Cartes, 4 Manuſcript which I found amongſt the many other Rarities that en- 
rich the well-choſen Library of my Learned and Worthy F riend Dx Charles Scarburgh; the Experiments of Gra. 
vity,and the Life of Galileo, both my own : Others were cluded in V olumes of great price,or ſo diſperſed that 
they were not to be purchaſed for any money; as thoſe of Kepler,a Stunica, Archimedes, Tartaglia,and rhe Mecha- 
nicks of Galilee: And the remainder,though eaſyer to procure,were harder to be underſtood; as Tartaglia hes notes 
on Archimedes, Torricellio his Dottrine of Projetts,Galileo his Epiſtle to the Datcheſſe of Tuſcany, and above all 
his Dialogues de Motu; (never till now done into any Lan wr $4 were ſo intermixt of Latine and Italian, 
that the difficulty of the Stile, joyned with the eh hay of the Subjeft rendered thim Hnpleaſ, ant if not wholly 
Vnintelligible, to ſuch as were not abſolute Maſters of both the Tongues, | 

To conclude; according to the entertainment that you pleaſe to afford theſe Colleftions,I ſhall be encouraged to 
proceed with the Publication of a large Body of Hydrography;declaring the Hiſtory, Art, Lawes, and Apendages 
of that Princely Study of Navigation, wherein I have omitted nothing of note that can be found either in Dud- 
ley, Fournier, Aurigarius, Nonius, Snellus, Marſennus, Bayfus , Moriſerus, Blondus , Wagoner , abroad, or learnt 
amongit our Mariners at home, touching the Office of an «Admiral, Commander, Pilot, Modelliſt, Shipwright, 
G unner, QC, 


But order requiring that I ſhould diſcharge my firſt Obligation before I contratt a ſecond; I ſhall deteir you no 
longer in the Portall, but put you into poſſeſſion of the Premiſes , 


Novemb. 20, 1661. 


THE 


THE AUDI HD-K:S 


INTRODUCTION: 


Judicious Reader , 


———_— rc vc pd oc ju cc in Rome a ſalutiferow Edi , that , for 

| mal tbe obviating of the dengerous Scandals of the preſent CAge , impoſed a ſea- 
| WAP _— /nblc Silence upon the Pythagorean Optnion of the Mobility of the Earth. 
| -W-f- "I There Wart not Kh as wnadviſedly affirm , that that Decree was notthe produ- 
.: OR con of « ſober Scrutiny but of an ill informed Paſ3ion;& one may hear ſome mut- 
LLCESS Wl zcr that Conſultors altogether ignorant of Aſtronomical Obſervations ought not 
[ans ) TUMN. Wy zo clipp the Wings of Speculative Wits with raſh Probibitions. My zeale can- 
not keep ſilence when 1 hear theſe inconſiderate complaints. I thought fit, as was ng 4c- 
quainted with that prudent Determination, te appear openly upon the Theatre of the World as a Wit- 
neſs of the naked Truth. I Was at that time in Rome; end had not only the audiences , but applauds of 
the moſt Emineut Prelates of that Court, nor Was that Decree Publiſhed without Previous Notice given 
me thereof. Therefore it is my reſolution in the preſent caſe to give Foraign Nations to ſee , that this 
point is as well wnderfood in Italy , and particularly in Rome , as Tranſalpine Diligence can imagine 
it to be: and collefting together all the proper Specnlations that concern the Copernican Syſteme, 
70 let them know, that the notice of all preceded the Cenſure of the Roman Court; and that there 
proceed from this Climate not only DotFrines for the health of the Soul, but alſo ingenious Diſcoveries 
for the recreating of the Mind. 

To this end I have per ſonated the Copernican in this Diſcourſe ; proceeding upon an Hypothe(;s 
purely pre 6 ” all ar1ifcrat wayes v0 repreſent it Stupertour , not to thay of the Im- 
mobility of the Earth ſolurely, but according as tis mentioned by ſome, that retein ntgwore, but the 
name of Peripateticks , and are content, Without going farther , zo adore Shadows, not phileſophitz.ing 
With _— caution, but with the ſole remembrance of four Principles, but badly underſtood. 

We ſhall treat of three principall heads. Firſt 1 will endeavour to ſhe'w that all Experiments that can 

be made upon the Earth are inſuffi cient means to conclude it's Mobility, but are indifferently applicable 
to the Earth moveable or immoveable : and 1 hope that on this occaſion Wwe ſhall difeover many obſer- 
vable paſſages unknown to the CAncients. Secondly Wwe will examine the Celeſtiall Phoenomena 
that make for the Copecnican Hypothelis, 4s if it Were #0 prove abſolutely vittorious; adding by the 
Way certain new Obſervations , Whichyet ſerve only for the Aſtronomical Facility , not for Natural 
Neceſſity. Inthe third place I wil{ propoſe an ingenuous Fancy. 1 remember that 1 have ſaid ma 
years ſince, that the unknown Probleme of the Tide might receive ſome light , admitting the Earths 
Motion. This Poſition of mine paſsing from one to another had found charitable Fathers that 
adopred it for the Iſſue of their own Wit. Now,becauſe no ſtranger may ever appear that defending him- 
ſelf with our armes,ſhall charge us with want of caution in ſo principal an Accident, have thought 
good to lay down theſe probabilities that would render it credible , admitting that the Earth did 
move. T7 hope, that by theſe Con(jderations the World wil come to know, that if other N ations have 
Navigated more than we, we have not fludied leſs than they, that our returning to aſſert the Earths 
Stability, and to take the contrary only for a Mathematical Capriccio, proceeds not from inadvertency 
of what others have though thereof , but (had we noother inducements) from thoſe Reaſons that Pic- 
ty, Rel:gion, the Knowledge of the Divine Omnipotency , and a conſciouſneſs of the incapacity of mans 
Vnderſtanding dictate unto us. 


* 3 With 


Huh all 1 concerved it very proper to expreſs theſe conceits by way of Dialogue, which, as not bein 
baundup 19 the riggid obſervance of Mathematical Laws » grves place alſo to Digreſstons that are 
ſometimes no leſs curtous thanthe principal Argument. | 

1 thanccd to be ſeveral years ſince, at ſeveral times, in the Stupendious Citty of Venice, Where [ 
converſed with Signore Giovyan Franceſco Sagredo of « Noble Extraction, and pierung Wit. There 
came thither ſrom Florence at the ſame time Signore Filippo Salviati, Whoſe leaſt glory Was the Emi- 
nence of his Blood, and Magnificence of his Eſtate : a ſublime Wit that fed not more hungerly upon 
any pleaſure than oz elevated Speculations. In the company of theſe two 1 often diſconrſed of theſe 
matters before a certain Peripaterick Philoſopher who ſeemed to have no geater obflacle in underſtand. 
ing of the Truth, than the Fame he had acquired by CAriſtotelical Interpretations. 

Now, ſeeing that inexorable Death hath deprived Venice and Florence of thoſe two great Lights in 
the very Meridian of their years, 1 aid reſotve, as far asmy poor ability world permit , to perpetuate 
their lives to their honour in theſe leave bripging them tn as \nterlocutors in the preſent Controverſy. 
Nor ſhalithe Hone#t Peripatetick want his plate, to whom for his exceſsrve affettion towards the Com- 
mentaries of Simplicius, 1 thought fit, without mentioning his own Name,to leave that of the Author 
he ſo much reſpetted. Let thoſe two great Souls , ever venerable to my heart, pleaſe to accept this pu- 
blick Monument of my never-dying Love ; and let the remembrance of their Eloquenre aſsiſt me in 
delivering to Poſterity the Conſiderations that. I haveprompifed... 

There caſually happened (as was uſuall) ſeveral diſconn ſes at times between theſe Gentlemen, the 
w/1ch had rather inflamed than ſatisfied m #heir wits the thirſt they had to be learning ; whereupon 
they 100k a diſcreet reſolution to meet together for certain dayes., #n Which all other buſeneſs ſet aſide, 
r1/:cy might betake themſelves more merhodjcally to contemplate the Wonders of God in Heaven,and in 


the Earth : the place appointed for their meeting being in the Palace of the Nyble Sagredo, after the 
due, but very ſhort complements; Signore Salviati began in this manner. 


GALE 


The CONTENTS of the FIRST 


OME 


V. 


DE — 


PART THE FIRST. 


GALILEUS GALILEUS,hisSys: mn ofthe Worrtd: in Four Dratioour s: 

His EPy1STLE to her SERENE HIGHNESSE CHRISTIANA LOTHERINGA 
grAnD DUTCHESSE of TUSCANY, touching the Ancient and Modern 
DocTriINnE of noLY FaTxsRS,and Juvicions Divinss, concerning 
the AuTHoRITY of s$acreDd SCRILP TURE in PHYLOSOPHICAL 
ConTROVERSIES. 

TOHANNES KEPLERUS, his Rz:coxcitinGs of Texts of $sacnro 
SCRIPTURE that ſeem to oppoſe the DoctrIiNE ofthe EarTHs Movie 
TY 2 abſtrated from his InrxoDucTtrtoNn unto his LEARNED CommNs 
TARIFS Upon thePraxner MARS, 

DIDACUS a STUNICA, a learned SPAn1s4 Diving, his REconciltinGs of 
the faid doc TRINE withthe Texts of $acrED ScrrIPTURE ; abſtrafted 
from his CommEnTARIE upon JOB. 

PAULU? ANTON1TuS FOSEARINUS, a Carmetite, his ErrsTLE to 
SEBASTIANUS FANTONUS, the Grnznat of his Orvr R, Concerning 
the PY THAGOREAN and CoPtrnican OPINioN of the voOBLILITY OF 
Tur EaRTH, and STABILITY OF Tys SUN ; and of the xtw SYSTEME 
or CONSTITUTION of the WorLD: in which he recorcileth the Tx xrs 
OF SACRED SCRIPTURE, and AsSERTioNS of Divixts, commonly 
alledged againſt this Oyrinion, 


A Table of the mo#t obſervable Perſons and Matters mentioned in the Firſt Part. 


PART THE SE COND. 
D, BENEDICTUS CASTELLUS, ABBoT or S. Bxextdi1cTtus Artovys rus, his 


Dis coursSE of the MENSURATION oF RunNNiNG WATERS : The Firſt 


Book, 

His LeTTer to GALILEUS, repreſenting the ſtate of the Lake of Pr rucra in 
TusSCANY, 

His GroMETRICAL DEMONSTRATIONS of the MrasuRE of RunxiNG 
WATERS. 

His Discourss of the MENSURATI1ON oF RunNniING WATERS : The Second 
Book. 


Hts ConsS1DERATIONS concerning the Laxz or VENICE. Intwov1scoursts. 

His Rurs for computing the quantity of up and $s ax» that Lax v-FLoovs bring 
down to, and leave inthe Laxs of VENICE, 

His LeTTtx to Father FRANCESCO »1 S. GIVSEPPE, wherein, at the inſtance 
of PRINCE LEOPALDO he delivereth his judgment concerning the turning 
Fiums MoRTo (aRiver near Pits a in TUSCANY ) intothe Sta, and into 
the River S£R CH 10». 

His ſecondLtTTER inanſwer to certain OBJ: c T10Ns propoſed, and v1rF1cute 
TIES obſerved by Si6NnoxE BARTOLOTTI, in that affair of the 
DivtRsS1oNn of FiuME MORTO, 

His Cons1veERATION uponthe DRAINING of the PoNTIxE FexnxXS in CALA- 
BRIA:; 

His Cons1DERATI1ON uponthe rRAINING of the TErniTtoORITES of BOLOG- 
NA, FERR ARA, and ROMAGNA. 

His Letter to D. FERRANTE CESARINT, applying his DocTtaixet to the 
MENSURATILION of the LENGTH, and DISTRIBUTION of theQuaxNTITyY 
of the WaTttrs of Rivers, SyprRINGs, AQurtDucTs, &c. 

D, COR SINUS, SurERINTENDENT of the GENER 41. DRAINS,and PRESIDENT 
of ROMAGNA, his Rx 1ation of the ſtate of the VVartxs in the 
TERRITORIES of BOLOGNA and FERRARA. 

A Table of the moſt obſervable Perſons and Matters mentioned in the Second Parr, 


6.2 The 


l The CONTENTS of the SECOND 


| | () M E. 
4 [| F 


_ PART THE FIRST. 


[\ Treatiſe I, GALILEUS GALILEUS, his MATHEMATICAL DISCOURSES and DEMONS 
| TRATIONS touching two NEvv SCIENCES, pertaining tothe Mr cu as 
NICKS, and LOCAL MOTION: With an APPENDIx of theCtnxrtare of 
| Gravity offome SOLIDS in Four DIaLoGUEs. 


——m—_—_ 
— _ — - 


þ 
, MECHANICKS; a New Pz1ce. 
h F to CHENATUS Dzs CARTES, hisMzcnxanicxs ; tranſlated from his Fxxx cx 
1 MANUSCRIPT; a NewPEice. 


F; A CHIMEDES, his TratDsz Ins1vtnTiBus HuM1Do; With the Notts and 
ke = Dx m ON $TRASIONS of NICOLAUS TARTALEUS, in Two Booxs, 
V. GALILEUS his Dis coursEs of the things that move inor upon the Warrr. 
+ VI. NICOLAUS TARTALEUS his Ixvexntrions for Divine unver WarTts; 
" Rars1nNG OF SHIPS SUNK, &c. in Two Books. 


PART THE SE COND. 


1, EVANGELISTA TORRICELLIUS, his Doctrine or Projects andTaBiEs 
of the Rancrs of oxEAT GunxNs of allſorts; wherein he detes ſundry 
ErRoRsS in GunNtRyY: An EPITOME. 
11 T-.S. his Exyzrximenrts of the comPaRaTIve Gravity or Boviss inthe 
AIRE and WATER. ONT, | 
111, CALILEUS GALILEUS, his Lies : in Five Booxs, 
Boox I, Containing Five Chapters. 
Chap, 1. His Country. 
2» His Parents and Extra{tion, 
3, Histime of Birth, 
4. His firſt Education, . 
5. His Maſters, 
11. Containing Three Chapters, ; 
Chap. 1- His judgment 1a ſeveral Learnings. 
2, HIz Opinions and Doftrine, 
3, His Auditors and Scholars. 
111. Containing Four Chapters. | 
Chap. 1+ His behaviour in Civil Afirs. 
2» His manner of Living, 
3. His morall Virtues. 
4+ His misfortuncs and troubles. 
| 1V. Containing Four Chapters. 
| . (hap. 1, His perſon deſctibed, 
i | 2, His Will and Death, 
| 4 3 His [nycntions. 
4. Nis Writings. 
5. His Dialogues of the Syſteme in pa 


= > - 


rticular,containing Nine Seftions, 


Mt Seition 1+ Ot Aſtronomy in General; its Definiti Prai 7” 
2- Of Aſtronomers : 2 Ch ant raiſe, Original, 
ly Ofthe Demons ofthem. "ical Catalogue of the 
3. Uitne Vodtrine of the Earths Mobility. ec. ; rauity: 
| | and Progreſſe from P Jthagorastor c ons EI 


7 4+ Otthe Followers of Copernices, unto the t; | 
5- Ofthe ſeverall $ yſtemes amongſt "vs ng 
| | 6. Of the Allegations againſt the Copern, Syſteme, in 77 
| | * Arguments taken out of Riccielo, with Anſwers tothem. 
7- Ofthe Allegations tor the Copern.Sylteme in 50 Arguments. 


8. Of the Scriptures Authoriti - 
| Earths mobility, erties produced againſt and tor the 


9. The Concluſion of th 
[| V. Containing Four Chapters. e whole Chapter, 


(i hap. 1. His Patrons, Friends, and Emulators. 
F 2, Authors judgments ot him. 
[ 3- Authors that bave writ tor, or againſt him. 


4 A Concluſionin cerrain RefleFions pan 277 op I 
A Table of the whole Second To ME, wow 145 whe Life, The 


GALIL AatUS 
Galilzus Lynceus, 
H1S” 


SYSTEME 


OF THE 


'WORED. 


ee ts oo at  — — 


- The Firſt Dialogue. : 


C——— 


A 


INTERLOCUTORS. 
SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLIc1Us. 


.SALVIATUS. 


TT T was our yeſterdayes reſolution, and a- 

fl greement,that we ſhould to day diſcourſe 
the moſt diſtinly, and particularly we 
could poſſible, of the natural reatons,and 
their efficacy that have been hitherto al- 
ledged on the one or other part , by the 
maintainers of the Poſitions, AriStotelian, 
and Ptolom4ique 3 and by the followers ( 


» 


DSC <AW 4 nicus reps- 
— | of the Copernican Syſteme : And becauſe teh the Earth 4 


Copernicus placing the Earth among the moveable Bodies of Hea- 
ven, comes to conſtitute a Globe for the fame like to a Planet ; it 
would be good that we began our diſputation with the examina- 
tion of what, and how great the energy of the Peripatcticks ar- 


guments is, when they demonſtrate, that this Hypotheſts 1s nnpol- 
Ae {ible 


Globe like toa PI 4c 


ner, 


2 G. Garit=us, his Syſteme. 


Col-fi4) [uban. fible : Since that iris neceſſaryto introduce in Nature,ſfubſtances 
ce: har «re malte- different betwixt themlelves, tliat is,the Cacleſtial, and Elemenr. 
| ——— y ae ry 3 that 'impaſlible and immortal, this alterable and corruptible. 
i rable, are neceſſary Which argument Ariſtotle handleth in his book De Ceo, inſinu- 
il "12 *f ating iv fit, by ſorhe diſcourſes dependent oncertain general af 
l ſumptions,and afterwards confirming it with experiments and per- 4 
« ticular demonſtrations : qa the ſame method, I will pro- 


pound , and freely ſpeak my judgement, ſubmitring my lelf to 


—__—_ 


T your cenſure, and particulacly to Simplicins, a Stout Champion 
—_— * and coitender for the Ariſtotelian Dofrine. 


Ariſtotle waketh Andthe firſt Step of the Peripatetick argitments 15 that,where A- 
dev gen et rk riſtotle proveth the integrity and perfeCtion of the World, telling 
4 threef-1d demenſi- US , that it is not a ſimple line, nora bare ſuperficies , but a body 
{1 os adorned with Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity 3 and becauſe 
there are no more dimenſions bat theſe three ; The World having 
them, hath all, and having all, is to be concluded perted. And 
againgthat by ſimple length, that magnitude is conſtiturEd, which 
15 called a Line, to which adding breadth, there is framed the Su- 
perticies, and yet further adding the altitude or profoundity, there 
reſults the Body, and afrer theſe three dimenſions there 15 no 
paſling farther,ſo that in theſe three the gntegrity, and to {o.{peak, 
totality is terminated, whick.I might bur with juſtice have requi- 
red Ariſtotle to have proved to me by neceſſary conlequences, the 
rather in regard he was able to do it very plainly, andſpecdily. 
SIMPL. What ſay you to the excellent demonſtrations in the 
Ariſtotles dewn- 2. 3.and 4. Texts, after the definition of Continual ? have you it 
4 iS way ©4, not firſt there proved , that there is no more but three dimenſions, 
i rbree «nd no more, Or that thole three are all things, and that they are every where? - 
| The number thre, APA is not this confirmed by the Dofrine and Authority of the 
bh celeb; ar:d ammg ſt Pytbagorians, who ſay that all things are determined by three, be- 
| thePythagorians p1nning, middle, and end, which is the number of All? And where 
|| leave you that realon, namely, that as it were by the law of Na- 
| ture, this number is uſed in the ſacrifices of the Gods? And wh 
being ſo ditated by nature, do we atribute to thoſe things that 
jt are three, and not to leſle, the title of all? why of two is it aid 
'k both,and not all, unle(s they be three ? And all this Do&rine you 
| have in the ſecond Text. Afterwards in the thicd, Ad pleniorent 
[1h Omne,Totum & ſcientiam, we read that All, the I/hole , and Perfed, are formally 
Perteaum- * one and the ſame; and that therefore onely the Body, amongſt 
magnitudes is perfe& : becaulc it is determined by three, which is 
H All, and being diviſible three manner of waies, it is every way di- 
'F vilible 3 but of the others, ſome are dividible in one manner, and 
it {ome 1n two, becauſe according to the number affixed, they have 
| their diviſion and continuity, and thus one magnitude is continu- 
ate one way, another two, a third, namely the Body , every way. 


1.14 
| j More- 


a> - + 


Or Solid. 


Diatocusg. I. 3 


Moreover in the fourth Text ; doth he not after ſome vther Do- 
&rines, prove it by another demonſtration ? Scilzcet, That no tran< 
ſition is made but according to fone defc& (and (o there is a tran- 
ſition or paſſing from the line to the {uperficies, becauſe the line is 
defe&ive in breadth ) and that it is impoſlible for the perfe& to 
want any thing, it being every way [oz therefore there is no tran- 
fition from the Solid or Body to any other magnitude. Now 
think you not that by all theſe places he hath ſufficiently proved, 
how that there's no going beyond the three dimenſions 5 Length; 
Breadth , and Thickneſs, and that therefore che body or ſolid, 
which hath them all, is perte&? | | 
SALV. To tell you true, I think not my {elf bound by all theſe 
reaſons to grant any more but onely this, That rhat Which hath 
beginning,middle,and end,may,and ought to be called perfea:But 
that then, becauſe beginning, middle,and end,are Three;the num+ 
ber Three is a perfe& number , and hath a faculty of cofiferring 
Perfe&ion on thoſe things that have the ſame, I find no indacement 
to grant 3 neither do I underſtand, nor believe that, for example; 
of feet, the number three is more perfe& then four or tw6 5 hor do 
L conceive the number four co be any imperfe&tion to: the Ele- 
ments : and that they would be more perfe&if they wete three! 
Better therefore it had bcen to have left thefe ſubtleties to the 
Rhetoricians,and to have proved hisintent, by neceflary demonſtra- 
tion; for fo it behoves to doin demonſtrative fciences. | 
SIMPL. You ſeemto ſcorn theſe reaſons, and yet it is all the 
Dodrine of the Pythagorians, who attribute ſo much to numbers , 
and you that be a Mathematician, and believe many opinions in 


the Pythagorick Philoſophy, ſeem now to contemn their My- 
ſteries. | 

SALV. That the Pythagorians had the {cience of nambers in 
high eſteem, and that Plato himſelf admired humane nnderſtand- 
ing, and thought that it pertook of Divinity , for that it under- Plao beld that 
ſtood the nature of numbers, I know very well, nor ſhould 1 be >*mam muder- 


far from being of the ſame opiraon : But that the Myſteries for - = 05. J veiar> 
which Pythagoras and his ({e&, had the Science of numbers in ſuch # #»der#tood num- 
veneration, are the follies thar abound in rhe mouths and writings | 
ofthe vulgar,l no waies credit: but rather becauſe I know that they; 7he 3 ery of 
to the end admirable things might not be -expoſed to the con- {aig or odgge 
tempt, and ſcorne of the vulgar, cenſured as facrilegious, the pub- | 

liſhing of the abſtruce properties of Numbers, and mcommen- Þ* Pagrn ps: 
lurable and irrational quantities , by them inveſtigated ; and'di- ©! chain 
vulged,char he who diſcovered them, was tormented in the other 
World : I believe that ſome one of them to deter the common 
fort, and free himſelf from their inquiſitiveneſs, told them that the 
myſteries of numbers were thoſe trifles , which afterwards did fo 


A 3 ipread 


4 G, Gar11 «us, bis Syſteme. 


ſpread amongſt the vulgar; and this with a diſcretion and ſubtlety 

4, reſembling that of the prudent young man, that tobe freed 

wit from the importunity of his inquiſitive Mother or Wite, I know 
[i| not whether, who preſſed him to impart the ſecrets of the Senate, 
| j | contrived that ſtory , which afterwards brought her and many o. 


ther women fo be derided and laught at by the {ame Senate. | 
2 S1MPL. I will not be of the number of thoſe who are over curi- 
ous about the Pythagorick, myſteries 3 bur adhering to the point 
6% in hand ; I reply, that the reaſons produced by Ariſtotle to prove 
br the dimenſions to be no more than three , ſeem to me conclus+ 
dent, and I believe, That had there been any more evident demon- 
ſtrations thereof, Ariſtotle would not have omitted them. 
bj SAGR. Pat in at leaſt,if he had known,or remembred any more. 
X But you Salviatus would do me a great pleaſure to alledge unto 
me {ome arguments that may beevident,and clear cnough for me 
to comprehend. | 
SALy- I will; and they ſhall be ſuch as are not onely ro be ap- 
prehended by you , but even by Simplicius himlelt : nor onely 
to be comprehended, but are alſo already known , although hap- 
ly unobſerved ; and for the more eafie underſtanding thereof, 
we will take this Pen and Ink, which I ſee already prepared for 
A Geemetricalde- {uch occaſions, and deſcribe a few figures. And firſt we will note 
EE [ Fig. 1. at the end of this Dialog. ] theſe two points AB, and draw 
from the one to the other the curved lines, ACB,and ADB,and the 
rightline AB, I demand of you which of them, in your mind, is 


® that which determines the diſtance between the terms AB, & why? 
[ . SAGR- I ſhould lay the right line, and not the crooked, as well 
| i becauſe the right is ſhorter, as becauſe it 13 one; ſole, and deter- 


minate, whereas the others are infinit,uneqaal,and longer; and my 

| determination is grounded upon that, Thar it is one,and certain. 

| | SALV. We have then the right line to determine the length be- 

| tween the two terms; let us add another right line and parallel to 
AB,which let be CD,[ Fig.2.] fo that there is put between them a 

, ſuperticies,of which I defire you to aſſign me the breadth,therefore 

| departing from the point A, tell me how, and which way you will 

| go,to end in the line C D,and {o to point me out the breadth com- 

| | prehended between thole lines; let me know whether you will 
terminate it according to the quantity of the curved line A E, or 

the right line A F, or any other. 

SIMPL. According to the right A F, and not according to the 

| crooked; that being already excluded from ſuch an uſe. 

| SAGR. ButI would take neither of them, ſeeing the right line 


bp! A F runs obliquely ; But would draw a line, perpendicular to C 
mY D, for this ſhould ſeem to me the ſhorteſt, and the propereſt of 
if infinite that are greater,and uncqual to one another,which may be 

| 1 pro- 


Diatocus I, 


produced from the term A to any other part of the oppoſite line 
C D. | £3 | | 

SA.LV, Your choice, and the reaſon you bring for it in my judg- 
ment i5 moſt excellent ; ſo that by this time we have proved that 
the firſt dimenfion 1s determined by a right line, the ſecond name- 
ly the breadth with another line right alſo, and not onely right, 
but wichall, at right-angles to the other that determineth the 
length, and thus we have the two dimenſions of length and 
breadth, definite and certain. But were you to bound or termi- 
nate a height, as for example, how high this Roof is from the pave- 
ment, that we tread on , being that from any point in the Roof, 
we may draw infinite lines, both curved, and right, and all of di- 
verſe lengths to infinite points of the pavement, which of all theſe 
lines would you make uſe of ? | 

SAGR.I would faſten a line to the Seeling,and with a plummet 
that ſhould hang at it , would let it freely diſtend it ſelf cill it 
ſhould reach well near to the pavement , and the length of ſuch a 
thread being the ſtreighteſt and ſhorteſt of all the lines, that could 
poſsibly be drawn froni the ſame point to the pavement, 1 would 
lay was the true height of this Room. 

SALVv. Very well, And when from the point noted in the pave- 
ment by this pendent thread ( taking the pavement to be levell 

and not declining) you ſhould produce two other right lines , one 

| for the length, and the other Mb the breadth of the ſuperficies of 
theſaid pavement , what angles ſhould they make with the ſaid 
thread ? | 

SAGR. They would doubtleſs meet at right angles, the ſaid 


lines falling perpendicular,and the pavement being very plain and 
levell.- 


SALv. Therefore if you aflign any poiat, for the term from whence 
to begia your meaſure 3 and from thence do draw a right line, as 
the terminator of the firſt meaſure, namely of the length, it will 
follow of neceſlity, that that which is to deſign our. the largeneſs 
or breadth, toucheth the firſt at right-angles,and that that which is 
ro denote the altitude, whichis the third dimenſion, going from the 
ſame point formethalſo with the other two, not oblique but right 
angles, and thus by the three perpendiculars, as by three lines,one, 
certain, and as ſhort as is poſſible, you have the three dimenſions 
AB length, A C breadth, and A D height; and becauſe, clear it 
is, that there cannot concurre any more lines in the ſaid point, ſo 
as to make therewith right-angles , and the dimenſions ought to 
be determined by the ſole right lines, which make between them- 
{elves right-angles; therefore the dimenſions are no more bur 
three, and that which hath three hath all, and that which hath all, 
15 diviſible on all ſides, and that which is (o, is perfe&, &c S Tor 

SIMP: 


"1 


6 | G. Gar1rt=us, his Syſteme. 


'&IMPL. And who ſaith that T cannot draw other lines ? why 
may not I protra& another line underneath, unto the point A, 
that may be perpendicular to the reſt ? 

SALV. You can doubtle(s, at one and the ſame point, make no 
more than three right lines concurre, that conſtitute right angles 
berwcen themſelves. : 

þ SAGR. I ſee what Simplicivs means , namely , that ſhould the 
l ſaid D A be prolonged downward,then by that means there might 
be drawn two others, but they would be the ſame with the firſt 

4 three, differing onely in this, that whereas now they onely touch, 

' 


a. 
_— 


then they would interſe& , but not produce new dimenſions. 
def ater F.4 "7 SIMPLE. I will not ſay that this your argument may not be con- 
hg regs; cludent 3 bur yet this 1 ſay with Ariſtotle, that 1n things natural 
79. it 15 not alwaies neceſſary, to bring Mathematical demonſtrations. 
SAGR. Grant that it were ſo where ſuch proofs cannot be had, 
yet if this caſe admit of them, why do not you ule them ? Bur 1t 
would be good we ſpent no more words on this particular, for [ 
think that Salviatus will yield , both to Ariſtotle, and you, with- 
out farther demonſtration, that the World is a body, and perfeR, 
yea moſt perfett, as being the greateſt work of God. 
SALv. So really it is, therefore leaving the general contempla- 
Par:s«/ theworld tion of the whole, ler us deſcend to the conſideration of its parts, 
vm 1742 which Ariſtotlezin his firſt divifion,makes two, and they very diffe- 
/tial ard El:»er- rent and almoſt contrary to one another ; namely the Caleſtial, 


ing £20) 2 and Elementary : that ingenerable, incorruptible, unalterable,un- 


ens arother. 


'* paſlible, &c. and this expoled to a continual alteration, mutati- 

| on, &c. Which difference, as from its original principle, he de- 

rives from the diveriity of local motions, and in this method he 
? | procecds. 


58 Leaving the ſcn(ible, if I may ſo ſpeak, and retiring into the 
Fo Ideal world, he begins ArchiteQonically ro conſider that nature 
tion of being the principle of motion, it followeth that natural bodies be 


| Local mo 


Tf bree kinds, right, indued-with local motion. Next he declares local motion to be 
þ circular, © Xt of three kinds, namely, circular, right, and mixt of right and cir- 
3 Circular > «xd ular: and rhe two firſt he calleth ſimple, for that of all lines the 
| freight menos circular, and right are onely ſimple ; and here ſomewhat re- 
$ {1 are ſimple, as pro- 


Wi --cixp by fmpte Neraining himſclt, he definerh anew, of ſimple motions, one to be 
20d lines. circular, namely that which 1s made about the medium, and the 
F other namely the right, upwards, and downwards ; upwards, that 
which moveth from the medium; downwards, rhat which gocth ro- 
wards the medi. And from hence he infers,as he may by and ne- 
cefſary conſequence , rhat all ſimple motions are confined to theſe 


, J ks 
aA meg um, « me* 
al0» & Ci7fCa ritcdte 


wrn. three kinds, namely,to the medium, from the medinu, and about 
the medinm ; the which correſponds ſaith he, with what hath been 
laid before of a body,that it alſo is perte&ed by three things,and ſo 


5 


Can 
» 


DriartocGue., IL, 


is its motion. Having confirmed theſe motions,he proceeds ſaying, 
that of natural bodics ſome being ſimple , and ſome compoſed of 
chem ( and he calleth ſimple bodies thoſe , that have a principle 
of motion from nature , as the Fire and Earth ) it follows that 
ſimple motions belong to (imple bodies, and mixt to the com- 
pound yer inſuch ſort, that the compounded incline to the part 
predominant in the compoſition. F 
SAGR. Pray you hold a little Salviatws , for I find fo man 
doubts to ſpring up on all ſides 1n this diſcourſe , that 1 ſhall be 
conſtrained , either to communicate them if I would attentively 
hearken to what you ſhall add, or to take off my attention" fron) 
the things ſpoken, if I would remember objeions. 
SALV. I will very willingly ſtay , for that I alſo run the ſame 
hazard, and am ready at every ſtep to loſe my felf whilſt I ſail be- 
tween Rocks, and boiſterous Waves, that make me, as they ſay, to 


lole my Compaſs; therefore before I make them more , propound 
your difficulties. 


SAGR. You and Ariſtotle together would at firſt rake me a 
little out of the ſenſible World , to tell me of the ArchiteSure, 


The definition of 


Naturegeither im- 


yy or unſcaſo= 


wherewith it ought to be fabricated ; and very appoſitly begin to nbc, produced by 


tell me, that a natural body is by nature moveable , nature bein 
( as elſewhere it is defined ) the principle of motion. But here I 
am ſomewhat doubrtull why Ariſtotle (aid not that of natural box 


dies, {ome are moveable by nature, and others immoveable, for 


that in the definition, nature is ſaid to be the principle of Motion, 
and Reſt; for if natural bodies have all a principle of motion, 
either he might have omitted the mention of Reſt, in the definiti- 
on of nature :or not have introduced ſuch a definition in this place. 
Next, as to the declaration of whae Ariftorte intends by ſimple 
motions, and how by Spaces he determines them,calling thoſe ſim- 
ple, that are made by ſimple lines , which are onely the right, and 
circular, I entertain it willingly 3 nor do I deſire ro tenter the 
inſtance of the Helix,about the Cylinder 3 which in that it is in e- 


Ariſtotle, 


The Helix about 
be (\linder may 
be ſaid tobe a ſim- 


very part like to it ſelf, might ſeemingly be numbred among fim- p! #»- 


ple lines. - But herein I cannot concurre, that he ſhould fo re- 
ſtrain ſimple motions (whilſt he ſeems to go about to repeat the 
ſame definition in other words) as to call one of them the motion 
about the medium, the others Surſum ©» Deorſum, namely up- 
wards and downward ; which terms arc not to be uſed, out of the 
World fabricated, but imply it not onely made , but already in- 
habiced by us; for if the right motion be ſimple, by the ſimplicity 
of the right line, and if the ſimple motion be natural, it is made on 
every ſide, to wit, upwards, downwards, backwards, forwards, td 
the right, to the lefr, and if any other way can be imagined, pro- 
vided it be ſtraight, it ſhall agree to any ſimple natural body 3 or 


if 


s CG. Gar1L =us, bis Syſteme. 


: if not-ſo, then the ſuppoſion of Ariſtotle is deteQive. It appears 
Mb yt - "le; 5 MOrcover that Ariſtotle hinteth bur one circular motion alone to 
Archit«Cure t be in the World, and conſequently but one onely Center, to 
a (920 web P which alone the motions of upwards and downwards, refer. All 
frame to he ruler. Which are apparent proofs, that Ariſtotles aim is, to make white 

black, and to accommodate Archite&ure to the building, and not 

to modle the building according to the precepts of ArthiteCture : 

for if I ſhould ſay that Nature in Univerſal may have a thou- 

ſand Circular Motions, and by conſequence a thouſand Cen- 

ters, there would be alſo a thouſand motions upwards , and 

downwards. Again he makes as hath been ſaid, a timple motion, 

- and a mixt motion, calling ſimple , the circular and rightz and 

mixt, the compound of them two : of natural bodies he calls ſome 

ſimple ( namely thoſe that have a natural principle to ſimple mo- 

tion ) and others compound : and fimple motions he attributes 

to {imple bodies, and the compounded to the compound ; but by 

compound motion he doth no longer underſtand the mixt of right 

and circular, which may be in the World ; but introduceth a mixt 

motion as impoſſible, as it 1s impoſſible to mixe oppoſite motions 

made in the {ame right line, ſo as to produce from them a motion 

partly upwards, partly downwards ; and, to moderate {uch an ab- 

lurdity , and impoſlibility, he aflerts that ſuch mixt bodies move 

Right wotien. ſome” _ ccording to the fimple part predominant : which neceſſitates 
R times ſimpies ar d SB P P Þ! p | 

; ſor-ennc; ix: acs Others to (ay, that even the motion made by the {ame right line is 

| cording to ATiſt» ſometimes limple, and ſometimes alſo compound : ſo that the ſim- 

y plicity of the motion , 15 no longer dependent onely on the {im- 

| plicity of the line. 

| S1MPL. How? Is it not difference ſufficient,that the fimple and 

abſolute are more ſwift than that which proceeds from predomi- 

nion ? and how much faſter doth a piece of pure Earth deſcend, 

| than a piece of Wood ? | J 

i SAGR. Well, Simplicius ; But put caſe the ſimplicity for this 

| cauſe was changed, beſides that there would be a hundred thou- 

4 {and mixt motions, you would not be able to determine the {im- 

| ple; nay farther, if the greater or leſle yelocity be able to alter 

the timplicity of the motion, no ſimple body ſhould move with 2 

| {imple morion ; ſince that in all natural right motions, rhe veloci- 

if ty 15 ever encrealing, and by conſequence ſtill changing the ſimph- 

city , which as it is ſimplicity, ought of conſequence to be immu- 

; table, and that which more 1importerh, you charge Ariſtotle with 

another thing , that in the definition of motions compounded, he 

hath not madc mention of rardity nor velocity , which you now 

inſert for a necctlary and eſſential point. Again you can draw 

no advantage from this rule , for that there will be amongſt the 

mixt bodies ſome, (and that nor a few ) that will move {wiftly, 


PR and 


DiatoGcus 1. 


and others more ſlowly than the ſimple; as for example, Lead, and 
Wood, in compariſon of earth 3 and therefore amongſt theſe mo- 
tions, which call you the f{imple, and which the mix ? 

SIMPL. 1 would call that ſimple motion, which is made by a 
ſimple body, and mixr, that of a compound body. 

SAGR. Very well, and yet Simplicizs a little before you ſaid, 
that the ſimple, and compound motions, diſcovered which were 
mixt, and which were ſimple bodies; now you will have me b 
ſimple and mixt bodies , come to know which is the ſimple, and 
which is the compound motion : an excellent way to keep us igno- 
rant,both of motions and bodies. Moreover, you have allo a little 
above declared, how that a greater velocity did not ſuffice , but 
you ſecka third condition for the deftinement of ſimple motion, for 
which Aviftotle contented himſelf with one alone, namely, of the 
{11mplicity of the Space, or Medium : But now according to you, 
the ſimple motion, ſhall be that which is made upon a ſimple line; 


with a cerrain determinate velocity , by a body fimply moveable. 
Now beit as you pleale, and letus return to Arrftotle, who defi- 


neth the mixt motion to be that compounded of the right, and cir- 
cular, but produceth not any body, which naturally moveth wich 
ſuch a motion. 

SALVv. I come again to Ariſtotle , who having very well, and 
Methodically begun his diſcourſe , bur having a greater aim to 
reſt at, andhit a marke, predefigned in his minde, then that to 
which his method lead him, digreſling from the purpoſe, he comes 
to aſſert, as a thing known and manifeſt, that as to the motions 
direaly upwards or downwards, they naturally agree to-Fire, and 
Farth; and that therefore it is neceflazy, chat beſides theſe bodies, 
which are neer unto us, there muſt be in nature another, to which 
the circular motion may agree : which ſhall be ſo much the more 
excellent by how much the circular motion is more perte&,then the 
ſtreight, but how much more perte& that is than this, he deter- 


mines from the greatneſs of the circular lines perfe&Gion above the ;;, 


right line 3 calling that perfe&, and this imperfe&; imperfeR, be- perfei evrerding 
fo FIttOUGe An 


cauſe if infinite it wanteth a termination, and end : and if it be fi- 


This 1s the bafis, ground work, and maſter-ſtone of all the Fabrick 
of the Ariftotel:an World , upon which they ſuperſtru& all. their 
other properties, of neither heavy nor light, of ingenerable incor- 
ruptible, exemption from all motions , ſome onely the local, &c. 
And all theſe paſſions he affirmet] to be proper to a ſimple body 
that 1s moved circularly ; and the contrary qualities of gravity, 
levity, corruptibility,&c. he aſſigns to bodies naturally moveable 
n a ſtreight line , for that if we have already diſcovered defects in 
the foundation, we may rationally queſtion what foever may far- 

B ther 


CiiCilay lind 


but the rithe im- 


nite, there is yet ſomething beyond which it may be prolonged. perfeit, and why. 


Ke I ttt ttt SC oo ttt. tro A OT <7 ooo Tn 


10 G. Gar1t=us, his Syſteme. 


ther built thereon. 1 deny not, that this which Ariſtotle hitherto 
hath introduced, with a general diſcourſe dependent upon univer- 
{al primary principles, bathbeen ſince in procels of rune, re-1nforced 
with particular reaſons, and experiments 3 all which 1t would be 
neceſſary diſtin&ly to conſider and weigh ; but becauſe what hath 
been ſaid hitherto preſents to ſuch as conſider the ſarae many and 
no (mall difficulties, (and yet it would be necef{ary,. that the pri- 
mary principles and fundamentals,were certain,firm, and eſtabliſh- 
ed, that ſo they might with more confidence be buitle-upon it 
would not be amiſs, before we farther multiply doubts; to tee tf 
haply (as I conje&ure) betaking our ſelves to other wazes we may 
not light upon a more dire& and ſecure method; and: with better 
conſidered principles of Archite&ure lay our primary tundamen- 
tals. Therefore ſuſpending for the preſent the method-08 Ariſto- 
tle, (which we will re-afſume again in its proper place, and parti- 
The-werld & fup- cularly examine 3 ) Ifay, that in the things hicherco affirmed by 
»o{ed by the A4y- Dim 1 agree with him, and admit that the World is a body enjoy- 
thor to be perfettly 11g all dimenſions, and therefore moſt perte&; and I add, that as 
9790 ſuch, it is neceſſarily moſt ordinate, that is, having parts between 
themſelves, with exquiſite and moſt perfect order ditpoſed ; which 
aſſumption I think 1s not to be denied, neither by you or any 
other. 

S1MPL- Who can deny it ? the firſt particular (of the worlds 
dimenſions) 1s taken from Ariſtotle himſelf, and its denominati- 
on of ordinate {cems onely to be aflumed from the order which it 
moſt exaaly keeps. 

m_ mori SALV. Thisprinciple then eſtabliſhed, one may immediately 
wid exaftly ox- COnClude, that if the entire parts of the World ſhould be by their 
dinate. nature moveable , it 18 impoſlible that” their motions ſhould be 
right, or other than circular z and the reaſon is ſufficiently eafie, 

and manifeſt ; for that whatſoever moveth with a right motion, 

changeth place 3 and continuing to move, doth by degrees more 

and more remove from the term from whence it departed, and 

from all the places thorow which it ſucceſlively paſſed; and if 

ſuch motion naturally ſuited with it, then it was not at the be- 

ginning in its proper place 3 and fo the parts of the World were 

not diſpoſed with perte& order. But we ſuppole them to be per- 

te&ly ordinate, therefore as ſuch, it is impoſlible that they ſhould 

by nature change place, and conſequently move in a right moti- 

Right motion by on. Again, the right motion being by nature infinite, for that 
neeure infinite. the right line is infinite and indeterminate, it is impoſſible that 
Altos iy bg any moveable can have a natural principle of moving in a right 
poſſible. line; namely toward the place whither it 1s impoſſible ro arrive, 
Near Hs there being no prz-finite term 3 and nature, as Ariſtotle himſelf 
bletobe effelted. ſaith well, never attempts to do that which can never be done, 
nor 


DiatoGvus I. | I! 
nor eſſaies to move whither it is impollible to arrive. And if any 
one ſhould yet obje&, that albeit the right line, and conſequent- 
ly the morion by 1t 1 producible in infinitum, that j5 to ſay, is in- 
terminate 3 yer nevertheleſs Nature, as one may lay, arbitrarily 
hath aſſigned them ſome terms, and given natural inſtiacts ro 
its natural bodies to move unto the ſame; I will reply, that this 
might perhaps be fabled to have come to pals in the tirſt Chaos, #i2h1moriorgh, 
where indiſtin& matters confuledly and inordinately wandered 8 Chae TO 
to regulate which, Nature very appolitely made uſe of right mo- R&yhr motion & 
tions, by which, like as the well-conſtituted, moving, dildorder {9% * 
themlelves, ſo were they which were before depravedly dilpolcd thn; er of +r- 
by this motion ranged in order : but after their exquitice diftribu- &"* 
tion and collocation, it is impoſlible that there ſhould remain na- 
tural inclinations in them of longer moving in a right motion, 
from which now would enſue their removal from their proper and 
natural place, that is to ſay, their diſordination; we may there- 
fore ſay that the right motion ſerves to condu the matter to cre 
the work 3 but once erected, that it 1s to reſt immoveable, or if | 
moveable, to move it {elf onely circularly. Unleſs we will fay "rnomr noma Frggr i 
with Plato, that theſe mundane bodies, after they had been made ginning i» 47524 
and finiſhed, were for a certain time moved by their Maker, in a + 4*4 «tter- 
« : : f wards circularly, 
right motion, but that after their attaznment ro certain and de- ,;cording ro Plato. 
terminate places, they were revolved one by one in Spheres, pal- 
ſing from the right to the circular motion, whercin they have 
been ever fince kept and maintained. A ſublime conceipt, and 
worthy indeed of Plato : upon which, I remember to have heard * Thus dotb bi» co- 
our common friend the * Lyncean Academick dilcourle in this man- any _ 
ner, if I have not forgot it. Every body. for any reaſon conſtitu- 7 GOIN this 
ted in a ſtate of reſt, but which is by nature moveable, being ſer wk. | , 
at liberty doth move ; provided withal, that it have an inclina- 7 ES Me of 
rion to ſome particular place ; for ſhould it ſtand indifferently af- 74#, hal no: move 
feed to all, it would remain in its reſt, not having greater in- 97x nrgSucp 


incliyation to ſome 


ducement to move one way than another. From the having of particular place. 
this inclination neceſſarily proceeds, rhat it in its moving ſhall con- ,, ,, 
tinually increaſe its acceleration, and beginning with a moſt flow pombe pay oi 
motion, it ſhall not acquire any degree of velocity, before it ons Ok 8 =" 
ſhall have paſſed thorow all the degrees of lels velocity, or grea- Sar got 1c aol 
ter tardity : for paſſing from the ſtate of quier (which is the jn- ##». 
finite degree of tardity of motion) there 15 no reaſon by which a Raga" F ch 
It ſhould enter into ſuch a determinate degree of velocity, before «th thorow all the 
It ſhall have entred into a leſs, and into yet a leſs, before it entred teas Bon? 
Into that : bur rather it ſtands with reaſon, to pal: firſt by thole 

degrees nearcſt to that from which it departed, and from thole to 

the more remote ; but the degree from whence the moveable z-3 + infoire 
began to move, 1s that of extreme tardity , namely of reſt. mp 05 Mare: 


B 2 N ow 


12 | G. Gar1l x us, bis Syſtem. 


Them;veableditl Now this acceleration of motion is never made, but when the 
mh: es ** moveable in moving acquireth it; nor 15 1ts acquilt other than an 
eh »ewer to 11 APProaching to the place defired, to wit, whither 1: natural in- 
Ys clination attracts it, and thither it tendeth by the ſhortelt way ; 
namely, by a right line. We may upon good grounds therefore 
ſay, That Nature, to confer upon a moveable tirſt conſtituted in 
reſt a determinate velocity, uleth to make it move according to 
Nature, to wtre- : : - . : þb ; 
duce in the move. 4 CENtAin time and (pace with a 11ght motion. This pretuppoled, 
able a certam de- Jet us imagine God to have created the Orb v. g. of Jupiter, On 


gree 9 vel), hich he had deterniiied to confer ſuch a certain velocity, which 


made it movin a : ; 
right line, it ought afterwards to retain perry cually uniform. 3 We may with 
Plato lay, that he gave it at the beginning a right and accelerate 
motion, and that it afrerwards being arrived to that intended de- 
bk ans m—_ gree of velocity, he conveted its right, 1nto a circular motion, 
209} ie wy velocity of which came afterwards naturally to be uniform. 
SAGR. I hearken to this Diſcourſe with great delight 3 and I 
believe the content I take therein will be greater, when you have 
(atisfied me in a doubt : that 18, ( which LI do not very well com- 
prchend ) how it of neceflity enſues, that a moveable departing 
Berwixt reſt, and from its reſt, and entring into a motion to which it had a natural 
any aſſigned degree R ; . 
ef velocity, fire IMClInAation, It paſſeth thorow all the precedent degrees ol tardity, 
OIY of leſs ve- comprehended between any afligned degree of velocity, and the 
7 wmerpeſe. ſtate of reſt, which degrees arc infinite ? {o that Nature was not 
able to confer them upon the body of Jupiter, his circular mott+ 
on being inſtantly created with ſuch and ſuch velocity. 
_— SALV. I neither did, nor dare ſay, that it was impoſlible for 


fer a determinare God or Nature to confer that velocity which you {peak of, imme: 
dy” of velccnty, Jiately 3 but this I ſay, that de faHo ſhe did not doit ; 1o that the 
_—  — Id be a work extra-natural, and by conſequence mi- 
oing 1t wou , and by conſequence mi 
raculous. 

$AGR., Then you beheve, that a ſtone leaving its reſt, and en- 
tring into its natural motion towards the centre of the Earth, paſ- 
ſeth thorow all the degrees of tardity inferiour to any degree of 
velocity ? 

S,arty. I do believe it, nay am certain of it ; and fo certain, 
that 1 am able to make you allo very well ſatisfied with the truch 
thereof. | 

SAGR- Though by all this daies diſcourſe I ſhould gain no 
more but ſuch a knowledge, I ſhould think my time very well 
beſtowed. 

SALV- By what I colle& from our difcourle, a great part of 
your (cruple lieth in that it ſhould in a time, and that very ſhort, 
paſs thorow thole infinite degrees of tardity precedent to any ve- 
locity, acquired by the moveable in that time : and therefore be- 
fore we go any farther, I will ſeek to remove this difficulty, which 


{hall 


Dratocuse. 1 12 


ſhall be an eaſje task ; for I reply, that the moveable paſleth by 
the aforeſaid degrees, but the paſſage is made withour ſtaying in Th: mwveable 4» 
any of them 3 io that the paſlage requiring bur one lole inſtant aſa Hehe 
of time, and cvery ſmall time containing intinite inſtants, we ſhall 4cg,ce; of vet:crry 
not want enough of them to aflign its own to each of the infinite vous Faqmne 1 
degrees of tardity; alrhough the time were never 1o ſhort. w_ 

SAGR. Hitherto I apprehend you ; nevertheleſsit is very much 
that that Ball ſhot from a Cannon ( for ſuch I conceive the ca- 
dent moveable ) which yer we ſee to fall with ſuch a precipice, 


that in leſs than ten pulles it will paſs wo aundred yards of al- 


ticude 3 ſhould in its motion be for +! | »..jzovned with fo-{mall a 
degree of velocity, that, (hou! 1 >.1c1nued to have moved 
at that rate without farther 1c cis it would not have paſt 
the (ſame in a day. 

SaLv- You may lay, nor »-! /” 2 «Car, aorin ten, no norina 
thouſand ; as I will endeavour « s you, andallo happily with- 
out your contradiction, to lome v. icatly fimple queſtions that 


I will propound to you. Theretv.- cell me if you make any que- 
ſtion of granting that, that that ball in deſcending gocth increa- 
ſing its impet#s and velocity. 
SAGR. Lammolt certain it doth. 
SaLv. And if 1 ſhould fay that the zmpetus acquired in any 
place of its motion, is ſo much, that it would {uffice to re-carry 
It to that place from which it came, would you grant it ? 
S aGR.- I ſhould conſent to it without contradiction, provided al- 
waies, that it might imploy without unpediment its whole z»:petus 
in that ſole work of re-conduCting it felt, or another equal toit, ro _, PN 
that (olf-{ame height as it would do, in caſe che Earch were bored Moſs readout 
thorow the centre, and the Bullet fell a thouſand yards from the quireth iimperus 
ſaid centre, for I verily believe it would paſs beyond the centre, 5. 20po Be + 
aſcending as much as it had deſcended ; and this I ſee plainly in beighr. y 
the experiment of a plummet hanging at a line, which removed 
from the perpendicular, which is its ſtate of reſt, and afterwards 
let go, falleth towards the ſaid perpendicular, and goes as far be- 
yond it ; or onely ſo much leſs, as the oppotition of the air, and 
line, or other accidents have hindred it. The like I ſee in the wa- 
ter, which deſcending thorow a pipe, re-mounts as much as it had 
deſcended. 
SALv. You argue very well. And for that I know you will nor 
(cruple to grant that the acquiſt of the zw-petvs is by means of the 
receding from the term whence the moveable departed, and its ap- 
proach to the centre, whither its motion tendeth ; will you ſtick 
to yeeld, that two equal moveables, though deſcending by divers 
lines, without any impediment, acquire equal impetys, provided 
that the approaches to the centre be equal ? 5 
$ GR, 


14 _ G. Gar1t «us, bis Syſleme. 


S AGR- I donot very well underſtand the queſtion. 
S ary. I will exprels it berter by drawing a Figure : therefore 
I will ſuppoſe the line AB | in Fig.3. | parallel to the Horizon, 
and upon the point B, I will erect a perpendicular B C ; and atter 
that 1 adde this flaunt line C A. Underſtanding now the line C 
A to bean inclining plain exquiſitely poliſhed, fnd hard, upon 
which deſcendeth a ball perfe&ly round and of very hard matter, 
and ſuch another I ſuppole freely to deſcend by the perpendicular 
CB : will you now confeſs that the impetys of that which de- 
{cends by the plain C A, being arrived to the point A, may be 
equal to the impetus acquired by the other in the point B, after 
the de{cent by the perpendicular C B ? 
The im;erwſityef SAGR.- I reſolutely believe fo: for in effec they have both the 
a MBAS 4 44") fame proximity to the centre, and by that, which I have already 
rs, AT enul,” granted,their unpetuoſitics would be equally ſuthcient to re-carry 
them to the ſame height. 
SaLv. Tell me now what you believe the ſame ball would do 
put upon the Horizontal plane AB * 
Upon an boriz.,n> S$SAGR- It would hie ſtill, the ſaid plane having no declination. 


tall plare the moye- 


able lieth ſtill, SALv. But on the inclining plane C A it would deſcend, but 


with a gentler motion than by the perpendicular C B? 

SAGR. I may confidently an{wer 1n the afhirmative, it ſeem- 
ing to me neceſlary that the motion by the perpendicular C B - 
ſhould be more {wift, than by the inclhning plane C A; yet ne- 
verthelets, if this be, how can. the Cadent by the inclination ar- 
rived to the point A, have as much zpetzs, that 1s, the ſame de- 
gree of velocity, that the Cadent by the perpendicular ſhall have 
1n the point B? theſe rwo Propolitions {eem contradiftory. . 

ve rt SALv. Then you would think it much more falſe, ſhould I 
qual to the veloci- AY that the velocity of the Cadents by the perpendicular, and 
77 by the perpendi- qnclination, are abſolutely equal : and yet this is a Propotition 
cular, and the mo- R 

tion by the perpey= MOT true, As 15 allo this that the Cadent moverth more ſwiftly by 
dicular ſwifter the perpendicular, than by the inclination. 

je thay he ml SAGR. Theſe Propolitions to my cars ſound very harſh : and 

| believe to yours Simplicins ? 

SIMPL, I have the ſame ſcnle of them. 

SALv- I conceit you jeſt with me, pretending not to compre- 
hend what you know better than my {clt : therefore tell me Sim- 
plicius , when you imagine a moveable more {wift than ano- 
ther, what conceit do you fancy in your mind ? 

SIMPL. I fancie one to paſs in the {ame time a greater ſpace 
than the other, or to move equal ſpaces, but 1n lefler time. 

SALy-. Very well: and for moveables equally {witr, what's 
your conceit of them ? | 

S$1MPL-+ 1 fancic that they paſs equal ſpaces 1n equal times. 


SALv- 


Diatocus. I. 


SALV. And have you no other conceit thereof than this ? 
S1MPpL- This I think to be the proper definition of equal mo- 
tions: 

SAGR- We will add moreover this other : and call that equal 
velocity, when the ſpaces paſſed have the ſame proportion, as the 
times wherein. they are paſt, and it is a more univerſal definition. 

SALV. It is ſo: for it comprehendeth the equal ſpaces paſt in 
equa] times, andalfo the unequal paſt in times unequal, but pro- 
portionate to thole ſpaces. Take now the ſame Figure, and apply- 
ing the conceipt that you had of the more haftie motion, tell me 
why you think the velocity of the Cadent by CB, is greater 
than the velocity of the Deſcendent by C A? 

SIMPL: I thinkſo; becauſe in the ſame time that the Cadent 
0H paſs all C B, the Deſcendent ſhall paſsin C A, a part leſs 

than CB. 


SALV- True; and thus it is proved, that the moveable moves 
more {wiftly by the perpendicular, than by the inclination. Now 
conſider, if in this ſame Figure one may any way evince the 0- 
ther conceipt, and finde that the moveables were <qually fwift 
by both the lines C A and C B. | 


S1MPL- Ifcc no ſuch thing; nay rather it ſeems to contradi& 
what was ſaid before. | 

SALy. And what ſay you, Segredws ? I would not teach you 
what you knew before, and that of which but juſt now you pro- 
duced me the definition. 

SAGR- The definition I gave you, was, that moveables may 
be called equally ſwift, when the ſpaces paſſed are proportional 
to the times in which they paſſed ; therefore ro apply the defini- 
tion to the preſent caſc, ic will be requiſite, that the time of de- 
ſcent by C A, to the time of falling by CB, ſhould have the 
ſame proportion that the line C A hath to the line C B; but 
underſtand not how that can be, for that the motion by C B is 
(wifter than by C A. 


SaLty- And yet you mult of necefſity know it. Tell me a little, 
do not theſe motions go continually accelerating ? 


SAGR., They do; but more in the perpendicular than in the 
inchnation. 

SALv- But this acceleration in the perpendicular, 1 it yet not- 
withſtanding ſuch in compariſon of that of the inclined, that 
two equal parts being taken in any place of the ſaid perpendicu- 
lar and inclining lines, the motion in the parts of the perpendicu- 
lar is alwaies more ſwift,than in the part of the inclination ? 

SAGR. Ifay notſo : butlI could take a ſpace in the inclinati- 
on, 1n which the velocity ſhall be far greater than in the like ſpace 
taken in the perpendicular 3 and this ſhall be, if the ſpace 1n the 


perpen- 


Velocities are ſaid 
to be equal, when 


the ſpaces paſſed 


are proportionate t9 


; 
- 


16 


G. Gar11xus, bis Syſteme. 


perpendicular ſhould be taken near to the end C, and in the in- 
clination, far from it. 

SALV. You fee then, that the Propoſition which ſaith, that 
the motion by the perpendicular is more ſwift than by the inchi. 
nation , holds not true univerſally , but onely of the motions, 
which begin from the extremity, namely from the point of reſt: 
without which reſtrifion, the Propoſition would be fo deficient, 
that its very dire& contrary might be true ; namely, that the mo- 
tion in the inclining plane is {wifter than in the perpendicular : 
for it is certain, that in the ſaid inclination, we may take a [pace 
paſt by the moveable in leſs time, than the like {pace paſt in the 
perpendicular. Now becauſe the motion in the inclination is in 
ſome places more, in {ome le(s, than in the perpendicular ; there- 
fore inſome places of the inclination, the time of morion of the 
moveable, ſhall have a greater proportion to the time of the motion 
of the moyeable, by lome places of the perpendicular, than the 
{pace paſſed, eo the. 1pace paſſed : and 1n other places, the pro- 
portion of the time to the time, ſhall be leſs than that of the 
{pace to the ſpace. As for example : two moveables departing 
from their quieſcence, namely, from the point C, one by the per- 
pendicular C B, [in Fig. 4. ] and the other by the inclination C A, 
in the time that, in the perpendicular, the moveable ſhall have 
paſt all C B, the other ſhall have paſt CT leſſer. And therefore 
the time by CT), to the time by C B (which is equal ) ſhall have 
a greater proportion than the line CT ro CB, being that the 
ſame to the leſs, hath a greater proportion than ro the greatr. 
And on the contrary, if in C A, prolonged as much as 1s requi- 
{ite, one ſhould cake a part equal to C B, but paſt in a ſhorter 
time 3 the time 1n the inclination ſhall have a leſ:; proportion to 
the time in the perpendicular, than the ſpace to the (pace. If 
therctore in the inclination and perpendicular, we may ſuppoſe 
(uch (paces and velocities, that the proportion berween the ſaid 
{paces b-: greater and leſs than the proportion of the times ; we 
may calily grant, that there are allo ſpaces, by which the times 
of the motions retain the ſame proportion as the ſpaces. 

SAGR. I amalready freed from my greateſt doubt, and con- 
ceive that to be not onely poſlible, but neceflary , which I bur 
now thought a contradittion : but nevertheleſs 1 underſtand not 
as yet, that this whereof we now are ſpeaking, is one of theſe 
poſlible or neceſſary cafes; fo as that it ſhould be true, that the 
time of deſcent by C A, to the time of the fall by C B, hath the 
lame proportion that the line C A hathto CB ; whence it may 
without contradiction be affirmed, that the velocity by the incli- 
nation C A, andby the perpendicular C B, are equal. 

SALv- Content your ſelf for this time, that I have removed 


your 


Driatocus. L 


your inccedulity ; but for the knowledge of this , expe it at 
ſome other time, namely, when you ſhall ſee the matters concer- 
_ ning local motion demonſtrated by our Academick 5 at which 
| rime you ſhall find it proved, that in the time that the one movea- 
ble falls all the ſpace C B, the other deſcendeth by C A as far 
as the point T, in which falls the perpendicular drawn from the 
point B : and to find where the ſame Cadenr by the perpendi- 
cular would be when the other arriveth at the point A, draw from 
A the perpendicular unto C A, continuing it, and C B unto the 
interfeQion, and that ſhall be the point ſought. Whereby you 
ſce how it 1s true, that the motion by C B is (wifter than by rhe 
inclination C A ( ſuppoſing the term C for the beginning of the 
motions compared ) becauſe the line C B is greater than C T, 
and the other from C unto the interſe&ion of the perpendicular 
drawn from A, unto the line C A, is greater than C A, and 
therefore the motion by it is ſwifter than by C A. But when we 
compare the motion made by all C A, not with all the motion 
made in the fame time by the perpendicular continued, but with 
thar made in part of the time, by the fole part C B, it hinders 
not, that the motion by C A, contirming to deſcend beyond, may 
arrive to A in ſuch a time as is in proportion to the other time, 
as the line C A is to the line C B, Now returning to our firſt 
purpoſe ; which was to ſhew, that the grave moveable leaving 
ics quieſcence, paſſeth deſcending by 'all the degrees of tardity, 
precedent to any whatſoever degree of velocity that it acquireth, 
re-aſſuming the ſame Figure which we uſed before, let us remem- 
ber that we did agree, that the Deſcendent by the inclination C 
A, and the Cadent by the perpendicutar C B; were found to have 
acquired cqual degrees of velocity iti the terms /B and A: now to 
proceed, I fuppoſe you witl- wort cruple to grant, thar upon ano- 
ther plane lefs ſteep than A C5 4s forvexample, A D [in Fig.s.] 
the motion of the deſceadent would /be'yet-more flow than in the 
plane- A C. So that it is not any whit dubitable, but rhat'there 
may be planes ſo little elevated above the Horizon A B, that the 
moveable, namely the ſame ball ,-:irr any the longeſt time may 
reach the poirit A,which being to move by the plane A B;an infi- 
nite tine would not fuffice': and the'motion'is made always more 
ſlowly, by how much the declination'ib leſs. It muſt be therefore 
confeſt, that there may be a point rakew/upon the term B, ſo near 
to the ſaid B, that drawing from thence to the point A a plane, 
the ball would not paſs it in a whole year. It'is' requifite next 
for you to know, that the impetu##; namely the degree of velo- 
city the ball is found to have acquired when it arriveth at the 
point A,is ſuch,that ſhouldir-continue to'move with this ſelf-ſame 
degree uniformly,thar is to ſay,without accelerating-or retarding) 
in 


17 


13 GC. Gatitzus, bis Syſeme. 


in as much more time as 1t was jn coming by the inclining plane; it 
would paſs double the ſpace of the plane inclined : namely (for 
example) if the ball had paſt the plane D A in an hour, con- 
tinuing to move uniformly with that degree of velocity which ir 
is found to have in its arriving at the term A, it ſhall pals in an 
hour a ſpace double the length D A 3 and becauſe ( as we have 
ſaid) the degrees of velocity acquired in the points B and-A, by 
\ the moveables that depart from any point taken in the perpendicu- 
lar C B, and that deſcend, the one by the inclined plane, the 0- 
ther by the ſaid perpendicular, are always equal : therefore the 
cadent by the perpendicular may depart from a term fo near to B, 
that the degree of velocity acquired in B, would not ſuffice (ſtill 
maintaining the ſame) to condudt the moveable by a ſpace dou- 
ble the length of the plane inclined in a year, nor 1n ten, no nor 
in a hundred. We may therefore conclude, that it it be rrue, 
that according to the ordinary courſe of nature a moveable, all 
external and accidental impediments removed, moves upon an 1n- 
clining plane with greatcr and greater tardity, according as the 
inclination ſhall be leſs ; ſo that in the end the tardity comes to be 
infinite, which is, when the inclination conchudeth 1n, and joyneth 
to the horizontal plane 3 and if it be true likewiſe, that the de- 
gree of velocity acquired in ſome point of the inclined plane, is 
equal to that degree of velocity which is found to be in the move» 
able that deſcends by the perpendicular , in the point cut by a 
parallel to the Horizon, which paſſeth by that point of the incli- 
ning plane ; ic muſt of neceſlity be granted, that the cadent de- 
parting from reſt, paſſeth thorow all the infinite degrees of tar- 
dity, and that conſequently, to acquire a determinate degree of 
velocity, it is necelary that it move firſt by right lines, deſcend- 
ing by a ſhort or long ſpace, according as the velocity to be acqui- 
red, ought to be either leſs or greater, and according as the plane 
on which it deſcendeth'is more or leſs inclined ; fo that a plane 
may be given with ſo ſmall inclination, that to acquire in it the 
aſſigned degree of velocity,it muſt firſt move in a very great ſpace, 
and take a very long time; whereupon in the horizontal plane,any 
how little ſoever velocity , would never be naturally acquired, 
ſince that the moveable in this caſe will never move : but the 
The circular m- motion by the horizontal line, which 1s neither declined or incl- 
A "rat, Ed, is a Circular motion about the centre : therefore the circu- 
without right mo- Jar motion 15 never acquired naturally, without the right motion 
PEG "i precede it 3 but being once acquired, it will continue perpetually 
rerpernally mni= With uniform velocity. I could with other diſcourſes evince and 
form, demonſtrate the ſame truth, but I will not by ſo great a digreſ- 
ſion interrupt our principal argument : but rather will return to 
It upon {ome other occaſion 3 eſpecially ſince we now aſſumed the 
ſame 


Dratocuse. I. | 
" ſame, not to ſerve for a neceſſary demonſtration, but to adorn a 
Platonick, Conceit 3 to which I will add another particular obſer- 
vation of our Academick, which hath in it ſomething of admira- 
ble. Let us ſuppole amongſt the decrees of the divine Archite&, 
a purpoſe of creating in the World theſe Globes, which we be- 
hold continually moving round, and of aſſigning the centre of 
their converſions;and that in it he had placed the Sun immoveable, 
and had afterwards made all the {aid Globes in the ſame place, 
and with the intended inclinations of moving towards the Centre, 
till they had acquired thoſe degrees of velocity, which at firſt ſee- 
med good to the ſame Divine Minde ; the which being acquired, 
we laſtly ſuppoſe that they were turned round, each in his Sphere 
retaining the ſaid acquired velocity: it is now demanded, in 
what altitude and diſtance from the Sun the place was where the 
ſaid Orbs were primarily created 3 and whether it be poſſible that 
they might all be created in the ſame place ? To make this inve- 
ſtigation, we muſt take from the moſt skilfull Aſtronomers the 
magnitude of the Spheres in which the Planets revolve, and like* 
wiſe the time of their revolutions : from which two cognitions is 
gathered how much (for example) Fupiter is (wifter than Sa- 
turne; and being found (as indeed it i) that Fupiter moves more 
ſwiftly, it 1s requiſite, that departing from the ſame alritude, FLE 
piter be deſcended more than Saturne, as we really know it 13, its 
Orbe being inferiour to that of Seturne. But by proceeding for- 
wards, from the proportions of the two velocities of Jupiter and 
Saturne, and from the diſtance between their Orbs, and from the 
proportion of acceleration of natural motion, one may finde in 

what altitude and diſtance from the centre of their revolutions, "g 

was the place from whence they firſt departed. This found out, ;h., 0b;, and the 


and agreed upon, it is to be {ought, whether Mars deſcending velocity of tbe mo- 
from thence to his Orb, the magnitude of the Orb, and the ve- pa chos hr 
. - . | * L * anſwer 'propertion 
locity of the motion, agree with that which is found by calcula- by, «if deſcend; 
tion 3 and let the like be done of the Eartb, of Venus, and of - {xx ew 
Mercury , the greatneſs of which Spheres, and the velocity of EE 
their motions, agree ſo nearly to what computation gives, that it 
is very admirable. | 
SAGR. I have hearkened to this conceit with extreme delight; 
and, but that I believe the making of theſe calculations truly 
would be a long and painfull rask, and perhaps too hard for me 
to comprehend, I would make a trial of them. 
SaLy- The operation indeed is long and difficult z nor could 
I be certain to finde it ſo readily ; therefore we ſhall refer it to an- 
other time, and for the preſent we will returg to our firſt propo- 
{al, going on there where we made digreſſion 3 which, if 1 well 


remember, was about the proving the motion by a right line of no 
C 2 ufe. 


magnitude of 


20 G. Garit=us, his Syſteme. 


uſe, in the ordinate parts of the World; and we did proceed to 

ſay, that it was not ſo in circular motions, of which that which is 

| made by the moveable in it ſelf, ſtil] retains it 1n the ſame phce, 
age and fermi- and that which carrieth the moveable by the circumference of a 
tions diſorder not Circle about its fixed centre, neither puts it ſelf, nor thoſe about it 
og parts of the in diſorder; for that ſuch a motion primarily is finite and terminate 
(though not yet finiſhed and determined) but there is no point 

Inthe circular mo- jr; the circumference, that is not the firſt and laſt term in'the cir- 
+ "Ih Phone ron culation ; and continmng 1t in the circumference aſſigned '1t, it 
: the begining and leaveth all the reſt, within and withour that, free for the ute of 
hes others, without ever impediag or difordering them. This being 
a motion that makes the moveable continually leave, and con- 

Circular motion tinually arrive at the end; it alone therefore can: primarily be u- 
onely « wmform. form : for that acceleration of motion is made in the moveable, 
when it goeth towards the term, to which it hath inclination 3 

and the retardation happens by the repugnance that it hath. to 

leave and part from the tame term; and becauſe in circular mo» 

tion, the moveable continually leaves the natural term, and con- 
tinually moveth towards the ſame, therefore, m 1t, the repug- 
nance and inclination are always of equal force : from which e- 

quality reſults a velocity, neither retarded nor accelerated, . e. an 

uniformity in motion. From this conformity, and from the bein 
Circular motion Cerminate, may follow the perperual continuation by ſucceſſively 
7 pram, reiterating the circulations , which in an undeterminated line, 
4 and in a motioi continually retarded or accelerated, cannot na- 
Riehr mo:ioncax- turally be. I ſay, natmally 3 becauſe the right motion which is 
OI * rerarded, isthe violent, which cannot be perpetual] ; and the ac- 
celerate arriveth necef{arily at the term, if one there be; and if 


there be none, ic cannee be moved to it, becauſe nature moves 

not whether it 15 impoſlible to attain. 1 conclude therefore, that 

the circular motion can onely naturally conſiſt with natural bo- 

dies, parts of the univerſe, and conſtitured in an excellent diſpo« 

| ſure; and that the right, at the moſt that can be ſaid for it, is 
Fs _ aſſigned by nature to its bodies, and their parts, at ſuch time as 
b:drer , to reduce they ſhall be out of their proper places, conſtituted in a deprayed 
Frogs apo diſpoſition, and for that caule needing to be redurcd by the ſhort- 
ſrom their places, eſt way to their natural ſtate. Hence, me thinks, it may rat10- 
nally be concluded, that for maintenance of perfe& order amongſt 

the parts of the World, it is necctlary to ſay, that moveables are 

moveable onely circularly ; and if there be any that move not 

Reft ozey, ad Circularly, thele of neceſlity are immoveable : there being no- 
Oe? ”* thing bur reſt and circular morion apt to the conſervation of or- 
der, der. And I donot a little wonder with my ſelf, that Ariſtotle, 
who held that the Terreſtrial globe was placed in the centre of 

the World, and there remained immoveable, ſhould not ſay, that 


of 


Dratocus, I. 21 


of natural bodies ſome are moveable by nature, and others immo« 

veable 3 eſpecially having before defined Nature, to be the prin. 

ciple of Motion and Reſt. 

S1MPL- Ariſtotle, thongh of a very perſpicacious wit, would 

not ſtrain it further than needed : holding in all his argumen- Senfble experi- 
cations , that ſenſible experiments were to be preferred before mew are to bepre- 
any reaſons founded upon ſtrength of wit, and ſaid thoſe which {77s 29s bn: 
ſhould deny the teſtimony of ſenſe deſerved to be puniſhed with #4: | 
the loſs of that ſenſe; now who is ſo blind, that ſees not the FS. — 
parts of the Earth and Water to move, as being grave, natural- be deprivedef ir. 
ly downwards, namely, towards the centre of the Univerſe, af- CG ne, ”—m_ 
figned by nature her ſelf for the end and term of right motion che medium, and 
deorſum; and doth not likewiſe fee the Fire and Air to move crab ons 
right upwards towards the Concave of the Lunar Orb, as to the ; 
natural end of motion ſurſum ? And this being ſo manifeſtly ſeen, 
and we being certain, that eadem et ratio totins pv partium, why 


may we not aſſert it for a true and manifeſt propoſition, that the 
natural motion of the Earth i; the right motion ad medium, and 
that of the Fire, the right a medio? * | 
SALV. The moſt that you can pretend from this your Diſ- 
courſe, were it granted to be true, is that, like as the parts of the 
Earth removed from the whole, namely, from the place where 
they naturally reſt, that is in ſhort reduced to a depraved and diſ- 
ordered diſpolure, return to their place ſpontaneouſly, and there- 
fore naturally 10 a right motion, ( it being granted, that eadem 
ft ratio totius &+ partinm) lo it may be inferred, that the 
Terreſtrial Globe removed violently from the place afligned OT TC PE MK 
i queſtionable 


it by nature, it would return by a right Ine. This, as I have whether deſcending 
ſaid, 1s the moſt that can be granted yuu, and that onely for want weights move in 4 


of examination ; but he that ſhall with exa&neſs reviſe theſe "£** **- 
things, will firſt deny, that the parts of the Earth, in returning to 
its whole, move in a right line, and not by a circular or mixt ; and 
really you would have enough to do to demonſtrate the contra- 
ry, as you ſhall plainly ſee in the anſwers ro the particular reaſons 
and experiments alledged by Prolomey and Ariſtotle. Secondly, 
If another ſhould ſay that the parts of the Earth, go not 1n their 
motion towards the Centre of the World, but to unite with its 
Ihole,and that for that reaſon they naturally incline towards the 
centre of the Terreſtrial Globe, by which inclination they con- 
ſpire ro form and preſerve it, what other Al, or what other Centre pe, 
would you find for the World, to which the whole Terrene " Jaw tpexi- 
Globe, being thence removed, would ſeek to return, that ſo the '7,;,7 f Fs 47 
realon of the Whole might be like to that of its parts? It may be tis Centre, 
added, That neither Ariſtotle, nor you can ever prove; that the 
Earth de fa&o is in the centre of the Univerſe; but if any Centre 


may 


22 G. Gar1rtzus, his Syſeme. 


The Sun wore pr1* may be aſſigned to the Univerſe, we ſhall rather find the Sun 
6p 44 -rran ys placed in it, as by the ſequel you ſhall underſtand. 
than the Earth, Now, like as from the conſentaneous conſpiration of all the 
parts of the Earth to form its whole, doth follow, that they with 
Natyral ixclina- equal inclination concurr, thither . from all parts 3 and to unite 
_ 4 the parts of themſelves as much as is poſſible rogerher, they there ſpherically 
the glibes of i 
the Werl4 to go to adapt themſelves; why may we not believe that the Sun, Moon, 
their cemre, and other mundane Bodies, be alſo of a round figure , not by o- 
ther than a concordant inſtin, and natural concourſe of all the 
parts compoſing them ? Of which, if any, at any time, by any 
violence were ſeparated from the whole , 15 it not reaſonable to 
think, that they would ſpontaneouſly and by natural inſtinG re- 
eurn? and in this manner to infer, that the right motion agreeth 
with all mundane bodies alike. 
S1Mp1. Certainly, if you in this manner deny not onely the 
Principles of Sciences, but manifeſt Experience, and the Senſes 
themſelves, you can never be convinced or removed from any 0- 
pinion which you once conceit , therefore I will choole rather to 
be ſilent ( for, contra negantes principia non eſt diſputandum ) 
than contend with you. And inſiſting on the things alledged by 
you even now (fince you queſtion ſo much as whether grave move- 
ables have a right motion or no) how can you ever rationally de- 
Tre right mation ny, that the parts of the Earth 3 or, if you will, that ponderous 
Mie» /eſes. matters deſcend towards the Centre, with a right motion 3 when- 
as, if from a very high Tower, whoſe walls are very upright and 
perpendicular, you let them fall, they ſhall deſcend gliding and 
ſliding by the Tower to the Earth, exaQly in that very place 
where a plummet would fall,being hanged by a line faſtned above, 
juſt there, whence the ſaid weights were let fall? is not this a 
more than evident argument of the motions being right, and to- 
ws IO CT be wards the Centre ? In the ſecond place you call in doubt, whe- 
that grove bodies ther the parts of the Earth ATC moved, as Ariſtotle athrms, ro- 
pw oe os wards the Centre of the World; as if he had not rationally de- 
at the cetreof the Monſtrated it by contrary motions, whilſt he thus argueth 3 The 
Univerſe. motion of heavie bodies is contrary to that of the light : but the 
motion of the light is manifeſt to be direaly upwards, namely, 
towards the circumference of the World, therefore the motion of 
the heavie is dire&ly towards the Centre of the World : and it 
Heavie Rn happens per accidens, that it be towards the centre of the Earth, 
_ for that this ſtriveth to be united to that. The ſeeking in the 
per accidens, —next place, what a part of the Globe of the Sun or Moon would 
do, were it ſeparated from its whole, is vanity 3 becaufe that there- 
To ſee, wha by that is fought, which would be the conſequence of an impoſli- 
arps9- i bility 3 in regard that, as Ariſtotle allo demonſtrates, the celeſtial 
folly. bodies are impa{lible, impenetrable, and infravgible , fo that ry 
a caſe 


> 


Diartocus I: 23 

a caſe can never happen: and though it ſhould, and that the (c- Celeſtial bodict 
parated part ſhould return to its whole, it would not return as neither beavie nor 
grave Or light, for that the ſame Ariſtotle proveth, that the Ca- Fight "_ to 
Icſtial Bodies are neither heavie nor light. ; 

SALV. With what reaſon I doubt, whether grave bodies move 
by a right and perpendicular line, you ſhall hear, as I ſaid be- 
fore, when I ſhall examine this particular argument. Touching 
the ſecond point, I wonder that you ſhould need to diſcover the 
Paralogiſm of Ariſtotle, being of it ſelf ſo manifeſt ; and that 
you perceive not, that Ariſtotle ſuppoſeth that which is in queſti+ 
on : therefore take notice. 

SIMPL. Pray Salwiatus ſpeak with more reſpe& of Ariftotla : 
for who can you ever perſwade, that he who was the firſt, only, 
and admirable explainer of theSyUogiſtick forms of demonſtration, Arittotle canner e- 
of Elenchs,of the manner of diſcoveringSophiſms,Paralogiſms,and 7, ue AE 
in ſhort;of all the parts of Logick,ſhould afterwards ſo notoriouſly gick. 
equivocate in impoſing that for known, which is in queſtion? It 
would be better, my Maſters, firſt perfe&ly to underſtand him, 
and then to try, if you have a minde, to oppoſe him. 


SALv- Simplicins, we are here familiarly diſcourfing amon 
our ſclves, to inveſtigate ſome truth; I ſhall not be difpleaſed 
that you diſcover my errors 3 and if I do not follow the mind of 
Ariſtotle, freely reprehend me, and I ſhall take it in good part. 
Onely give me leave to expound my doubts, and to reply ſome- 
thing to your laſt words, telling you, that Logick, as it is well 
underſtood, is the Organe with which we philoſophate ; but as ic 
may be poſſible, that an Artiſt may be excellent in making Or- 
gans, but unlearned in playing on them, thus he might be a great 


Logician, but unexpert in making uſe of Logick: like as we have 
.many that theorically nnde-Rand he whole Art of Poetry , and 


yet are unfortunate in compoſing but mecr four Verſes ; others " A famous [;ali4n 
enjoy all che precepts of Vincz* , and yet know not how to paing Painter. 


aStoole. The playing on the Organs is not taught by them who 
know how to make Organs, but by him that knows how to play 
on them : Poetry is learnt by continual reading of Poets : Limn- 
ing is learnt by continual painting and deſigning : Demonſtration 
from the reading of Books full of demonſtrations, which are the 
Mathematical onely, and not the Logical. Now returning to our 
purpoſe, 1 ſay, that that which Ariſtotle ſeeth of the motion of 
light bodies, is the departing of the Fire from any paat of the 
Superficies of the Terreſtrial Globe, and dire&ly retreating from 
it, mounting upwards 3 and this indeed is to move towards a 

Circumference greater than that of the Earth; yea, the ſame A- 

riſtotle makes it to move to the concave of the Moon, but that 

this circumference is that of the World, or concentrick to it, Ra 

that 


24 G. Gartr=us, his Syſeme. 


that to move towards this, 1s a moving towards that of the World, 
That he cannot affirm, unleſs he ſuppoteth, That the Centre of the 
Paralgiſmef A- Earth, from which we ſee theſe light alcendent bodies to depart, 
mT P+£ be the ſame with the Centre of the World ; which 15 as much ag 
the Centre of the tO ſay, that the terreſtrial Globe is conſtituted in the midſt of the 
eres World : which is yet that of which we were in doubt, and which 
Ariftotle intended to prove. And do you fay that this 1s not a 
hs ws. +. manifeſt Paralogiſm? Feet 
pane diſcovered, "  SAGR. This Argument of Ariſtotle appeared to me deficient 
alſo, and nox-concludent for another reſpe&3 though it were 
granted, that that Circumference, to which the Fire direly mo- 
veth, be that which includeth the World : for that in a circle, 
not onely the centre, but any other point being taken,every move- 
able which departing thence, ſhall move in a right line, and to- 
wards any whatſocver part, ſhall without any doubt go towards 
the circumference, and continuing the motion, ſhall alfo arrive 
thither ; ſo that we may truly (ay, that it moveth towards the 
circumference : but yet it doth not follow, that that which mo- 
veth by the ſame line. with a contrary motion, would go towards 
the centre, unleſs when the point taken were the centre it elf, 
or that the motion were made by that onely litte, which produced 
from the point aſſigned, paſſeth thorow the . centre. So that to 
ſay, that Fire moving in a right line, goeth towards the circumfe. 
rence of the World, therefore the parts of the Earth which by 
the ſame lines move with a contrary motion, go towards the cenx 
tre of the World, concludeth not , unleſs then when It is pre- 
opts that the lines of the Fire prolonged paſs by the centre 
of the World ; and becauſe we know certainly of them, that they 
paſs by the cencre vFrhe* Toereſttjial Globe ( being perpendicu- 
lar wo its ſuperficics, and not inclined J therefore to conchude, it 
muſt be ſuppoſed, that the centre of the Parth' is the ſame with 
the centre of, the World ; or at teaſt, that the parts'6t" the Fire 
and Earth deſcend not, ſave onely by one fole line which pafſeth 
by the centre of the Wortd. Which nevertheleſs is falfey and re- 
pugnant to experienite , , which fhewerh ns , thar' the parts of 
Fire, not by one line onely, but by infinite, produced from the 
centre of the Earth towards all the parts of rhe World;-aſcend 
always by lines perpendicular to the Superticies of the Terreftri- 
al Globe. WE! (> 
SALV. Youdo very ingeniouſly lead Ar;ſtotle to the fame in- 
convenience, Sagredys , ſhewing his matyfeſt equivoke 3 but 
withal you add another inconfiſtency. We ſee the Earth to be 
ſpherical, and therefore are certain that it hath its centre, to' which 
we (ce all its parts are moved; for ſo we muſt ſay, whilſt their 
motions are all perpendicular tothe Superficics of the Earth 3 we 
mean, 


Driatocus. IL. 25 


mean, that as they move to the centre of the Earth, they move to 

their bole, and to their Univerſal Mother : and we are ſtill far- 

ther ſo free, that we will ſuffer our ſelves to be perſwaded, that 

their natural inſtin& is, not to go towards the centre of the Earth, 9% wo 

but towards that of the Univerſe 3 which we know not where to alfred nl 66 

find, or whether it be or no ; and were it granted to be, it is but = Centre of the 
: ; . a A : arth, than of the 

an imaginary point, and a nothing without any quality. As to tw ſe, 

what Simplzcins laid laſt, that the contending whether the parts 

of the Sun, Moon, or other celeſtial Body, ſeparated from their 

I/hole, ſhould naturally return to it, is a vanity, for that the caſe 

15 impoſſible; it being clear by the Demonſtrations of Ariſtotle, 

that the caleſtial Bodies are impaſſible, impenetrable, unparta«- The conditions and 

ble, &c. I anſwer, that none of the conditions, whereby AriSto- RR 

tle diſtinguiſheth the Caleſtial Bodies from Elementary, hath 0- "0 


brdies from Ele- 
_ ther foundation than what he deduceth from the diverſity of the 9e»177, depend on 


natural motion of thoſe and theſe ; inſomuch that it being deni- ary yo of 
ed, that the circular motion is peculiar to Ccaleſtial Bodies, and 

afficmed, that it is agreeable to all Bodies naturally moveable, it 

is behoofull upon neceflary conſequence to ſay, either that the 

attributes of generable, or ingenerable, alterable, or unalterable, 

partable, or unpartable, &c. equally and commonly agree with 

all worldly bodies, namely, as well to the Celeſtial as to the E- 

lemcntary 3 or that Ariſtotle hath badly and erroneouſly dedu- 

ced thoſe from the circular motion, which he hath aſſigned to Cce- 

leſtial Bodies. 


S1MPI- This manner of argumentation tends to the ſubverſi- 
on of all Natural Philoſophy, and to the diſorder and ſubverſion 
of Heaven and Farth, and «te whole Univerſe ; but I believe the 
Fundamentals of the Peripateticks are ſuch, that we need not 
fear that new Sciences can be erefted upon their ruines. 
SAaLv- Take no thought in this place for Heaven or the Earth, 
neither fear their ſubverſion, or the ruine of Philoſophy. As to 
Heaven, your fears are vain for that which you your ſelf hold 
unalrecable and impaſſible; as for the Earth, we ſtrive to enoble 
and perfe& it , whilſt we make it like to the Caleſtial Bodies, 
and as it were place it in Heaven, whence your Philoſophers have 
exiled it. Philoſophy it ſelf cannot but receive benefit from our The d/pute: and 
Diſputes, for if our conceptions prove true, new Diſcoveries will 9*7<d#ions of 


be made ; if+falſe, the firſt Do&rine will be more confirmed. wer __ " 


Rather beſtow your care upon ſome Philoſophers, and help and _ of Philoſe- 
defend them ; for as to the Science it ſelf, it cannot but improve. a 


And that we may return to our purpoſe, be pleaſed freely to pro> 
duce what preſents it (elf to you in confirmation of that great dif- 
ference which Ariſtotle puts between the Caleſtial Bodies, and 
the Elementa ry parts of the World, in making thoſe ingenerable; 


D incor- 


G. Gar1rzus, bis Syſteme. 


incorruptible, unalterable,@vc. and this corruptible, alterable,ehec, 

S1MPL- I ſee not yet any need that Ariſtotle hath of help, 

ſtanding as he doth ſtoutly and ſtrongly on his feet ; yea not be. 

ing yet aſſaulted, much leſs foiled by you. And what ward will 

Ariſtodes diſcourſe YOu choole in this combate for this firſt blow ? AriStotle writeth, 

to prove the incor- that whatever is generated, 15 made out of a contrary in ſome 
ruptibility of Hea- . . NG 1 WET fa f 

Ay {ubje&t, and likewiſc is corrupted in ſome certain fubyect rom a 

Generation & cor- Contrary into a contrary 3 ſo that (obſerve) corruption and ge- 

—_g « 7 5, neration is never but onely in contraries ; If therefore to a Cee- 

according 10 Arift, leſtial Body no contrary can be aſſigned, for that to the circular 

To the circular Motion no other motion is contrary, then Nature hath done very 

motion x0 other yell to make that exempt from contraries, which was to be in- 

motion 15 CONtY Are c a : 
generable and incorruptible, This fundamental firſt confirmed, 
it immediately followeth of conſequence, that it 15 inaugmenta- 


| ble, inalterable, impaſlible, and finally eternal, and a propor- 

Heaves an babi- nate habitation to che immortal Deities, conformable ro the 

tation for the 11m1- þ 

mort al Gods. opinion even of all men that have any conceit of the Gods. He 

OO x afterwards confirmeth the ſame by ſenſe 3 in regard, that in all 

[exſe. times paſt, according to memory or tradition, we ſee _ re- 
moved, according to the whole outward Heaven, nor any of its 

He proveth that Proper parts. Next; as to the circular motion , that no other is 
4” nes m7 contrary to it, AriStotle proveth many ways; but without reci- 
TT Tr ting them all, it is ſufficiently demonſtrated, ſince fimple motions 
are but three, to the medium, from the medinm, and about the 
medium, of which the two right, ſurſum and deorſum, are mani- 
feſtly contrary ; and becauſe one onely hath onely one for con- 
trary, therefore there .coits no other motion which may be contra- 
ry to the circular. You lee the tubule and moſt concluding dif- 
courſe of Ariſtotle, whereby he proveth the incorruptibility of - 

Heaven. 

WY SALy- This is nothing more, ſave the pure progreſs of Ariſto- 
tle, by me hinted before 3 wherein, befides that I afficm, that the 
motion which you attribute to the Cweleſtial Bodies agreeth alſo 
co the Earth, its illation proves nothing. I tell you therefore, 
that that circular motion which you aflign to Cacleſtial Bodies, 
ſuiteth alſo to the Earth, from which, ſuppofing that the reſt of 
your diſcourſe were concludent, will follow one of theſe three 
things, as I told you a little before, and ſhall repeat ; namely, 
cither that the Earth it ſelf is alſo ingenerable, and incorruptible, 
as the Celeſtial bodies ; or that the Cocleſtial bodies are, like as 
the Elementary generable, alterable &c. or that this difference of 
motion hath nothing to do with Generation and Corruption. 
The diſcourle of Ariſtotle, and yours alſo contain many Propoſi- 
tions not to be lightly admitted, and the better to examine them) 
It will be convenient to reduce them to the moſt abſtraged and 


diſtinct 


Diatocuere. I. 
diftia& that can be poſſible; and excuſe me Sagredns, if haply 


with ſome tcdiouſneſs you hear me oft repeat the ſame things, 
and fancie that you ſee me reaſſume my argument in the pub- 
lick circle of Diſputations. You ſay Generation and Corrupti- 
on are onely made where there are contraries z contraries 
are onely amongſt ſimple natural bodies, moveable with contrary 
motions; contrary motions are onely thoſe which are made by 
a right line between contrary terms; and theſe are onely two, 
that is to ſay, from the medium, and towards the medium; and 
ſuch motions belong to no other natural bodies, but to the Earth, 
the Fire, and the other two Elements : therefore Generation 
and Corruption 1s onely amongſt the Elements. And becauſe 
the third ſimple motion, namely, the circular. about the med, 
hath no contrary, (for that the other two are contraries, and one 
. onely, hath bur onely one contrary ) therefore that natural body 
with which ſuch motion agreeth, wants a contrary 3 and having 
no contrary is ingenerable and incorruptible, &c. Becauſe where 
there is no contrariety, there is no generation or corruption, &*c. 
But ſuch motion agreeth onely with the Ccaleſtial bodies; there- 
fore onely thele are ingenerable, incorruptible, ec. And to 
begin, I thiok it a more eafie thing, and ſooner done to reſolve, 
whether the Earth (a moſt vaſt Body, and for its vicinity to us, 
moſt tractable ) moveth with a ſpeedy motion, ſuch as its revo- 
lution about its own axis in twenty four hours would be, than it 
15 to underſtand and reſolve, whether Generation and Corruption 
ariſeth from contrariety, or elſe whether there be ſuch things as 
generation, corruption and contrariety in nature. And if you, 
Simplicius, can tell me what method Narnre obſerves in working, 
when ſhe ina very ſhort time begets an infinite number of flies 
from a little vapour of the Muſt of wine, and can ſhew me which 
are there the contraries you ſpeak of , what ir is that eorrupteth, 
and how 3; I ſhould think you would do more than I can; for I 
profeſs I cannot comprehend theſe things. Beſides, I would ve- 
ry gladly underſtand how, and why theſe corruptive contraries are 
fo favourable to Daws, and fo cruel to Doves; ſo indulgent to 
Stags, and ſo haſty to Horſes, that they do grant to them man 
more years of life, that is, of incorruptibility, than weeks to theſe. 
Peaches and Olives are planted in the ſame ſoil, expoſed to the 
{ame heat and cold, to the ſame wind and rains, and, in a word, 
to the {ame contrarieties ; and yet thoſe decay in a ſhort time, 
and theſe live many hundred years. Furthermore, I never was 
thorowly ſatisfied about this ſubſtanrial tranſmutation (ſtill keep- 
ing within pure natural bounds) whereby a matter becometh ſo 
transform'd, that it ſhould be neceſſarily ſaid to be deſtroy'd, ſo 
that nothing remaigerh of its firſt being, and that another body 


D 23 quite 


Its eaſier to prove 
the Earth to move, 
than that corrupt. 
on is madg by con- 


Iyarici. 


2.8 G, Gar1ltzus, bis Syleme. 


uite differing there-from ſhould be thence produced; and if 1 
AE Cr ks 0 to my (elf a body under one aſpe&, and by and by under 
diverſe ap #3, another very different, 1 cannot think it impoſſible but that it may 

happen by.a ſimple tranſpoſition of parts, without corrupting or 
ingendring any thing a-new 3 for we ſee ſuch kinds of Meramor- 
phoſes dayly : ſo that to return to my purpoſe, 1 anſwer you, 
chat inaſmuch as you go about to perſwade me that the Earth can 
not move circularly by way of corruptibility and generability, 
you have undertook a much harder task than I, that with argu- 
ments more difficult indeed, but no leſs concluding, will prove 
the contrary. 

SAGR. Pardon me, Salviatss, if I interrupt your diſcourſe, 
which, as it delights me much, for that I alſo am gravel'd with 
the ſame doubts 3 fo I fear that you can never conclude the {ame, 
without altogether digreſſing from your chief defign : therefore 
if it be permitted Ay nes in our firſt argument, I ſhould think 
that It were Convenient to remit this queſtion of generation and 
corruption to another diſtin& and fingle conference 3 as alſo, if 
it ſhall pleaſe you and Simplicizs, we may do by other particular 
queſtions which may fall in the way of our diſcourſe 3 which I 
will keep in my mind to propoſe, and exadly diſcuſs them ſome 
other time. Now as for the preſent, ſince you ſay, that if Ari- 
ſtotle deny circular motion to the Earth in. common with other 
bodies Caleſtial, it thence will follow, that the ſame which bes» 
falleth the Earth, as to its being generable, alterable, &+c. will 
hold alſo of Heaven, let us enquire no further if there be ſuch 
things in nature, as generation and corruption, or not 3 but let 
Us return to enquire what the Globe of the Earth doth. 


SIMPL. I cannot ſuffer my cars is hear it queſtion'd, whether 
generation and corruption be in reram netura, it being a thing 
a which we have continually before our eyes; and whereo Ariſtotle 
jus. ibe Scion bath written two whole Books. But if you go about to deny the 
cer , avy Paradox Principles of Sciences, and queſtion things moſt manifeſt , who 
mey be mania \ rows not, but that you may prove what yon will, and maintai 
w1 , p yon will, and maintain 
any Paradox? And if you do not dayly (ce herbs, plants, ani- 
mals to generate and corrupt, what is it that you do ſee ? Allo, 
do you not contugually behold contrarieties contend together, 
and the Earth change into Water, the Water rarn to Air, the 
Air into Fire, and agaia the Air to condenſe into Clouds, Rains, 
Hails and Storms ? 

SAGR. Yes, we fee theſe things indeed, and therefore will 
grant you the diſcourſe of Ariſtotle, as to this part of generation 
and corruption made by contraries ; but if I ſhall conclude by 
virtue of the ſame propoſitions which are granted to Ariſtotle, 
that the Celeſtial bodics themſelves are alſo generable and cor- 


ruptible 


Bare tranſpojution 


Diatocus I. 29 


cuptible, aſwell as the Elementary, what will you ſay then? 

S{MPL- I will ſay you have done that which is impoſlible to 
be done. 

SAGR. Go to; tell me, Simplicius, are not theſg affeQions 
contrary to one another ? 

SIMPL, Which? 


SAGR. Why theſe; Alterable, unalterable; paſlible, * impaſ- * 9; Impatible, 
ſible; generable, ingenerable; corruptible, incorruptible ? 
SIMPL. They are moſt contrary. 
SAGR. Well then, if this be true, and it be alſo granted, 
that Celeſtial Bodies are ingenerable and incorruptible; I prove 
that of neceſſity Caeleſtial Bodies muſt be generable and corru- 
ptible. 
SIMPL» This muſt needs be a Sophiſm. 


SAGR. Hear my Argument, and then cenſure and reſolve it. 
Celcitial Bodies, for that they are ingenerable and incorruptible, ,,; generable and 
have in Nature their contraries, which are thoſe Bodies that be _ > be= 
generable and corruptible ; but where there is contrariety, there ne: boo Lore 


{ S 8 ; g generable and in- 
1s alſo generation and corruption ; therefore Celeftial Bgdies are corropribte, 


generable and corruptible. 

SIMPL. Did 1 not fay it could be no other than a Sophiſm ? 
This is one of thoſe forked Arguments called Sorite : like that 73, forked Sylle- 
of the Cretan, who ſaid that all Cretens were lyars; but he as giſm cad zoyvter 
being a Cretan, had told alye, in ſaying that the Cretans were ly- 
ars 3 it followed therefore, that the Cretans were no lyars, and 
conſequently that he, as being a Creten, had ſpoke truth : And 
yet in ſaying the Cretans were lyars, he had aid true, and com- 


prehending himſelf as a Cretan, he muſt conſequently. be a lyar. 
And thus in theſe kinds of S-g44/*#s a man may dwell to eternity, 
and never come to any concluſion. 


SAGR. You have hitherto cenſured it, it remaineth now that 
you anſwer it, ſhewing the fallacie. 

S1MPL. As to the reſolving of it, and finding out its fallacie, 
do you not in the firſt place ſce a manifeſt contradigion in it ? 
Ccaleſtial Bodics are ingenerable and incorruptible ; Ergo, Calc- 


ſtial Bodies are generable and corruptible. And again, the con- Amony8Celr8iat 


trariety is not betwixt the Celeſtial Bodres, but betwixt the E- Fedicr there & no, 
lements, which have the contrariety of the Motions, ſurſim and 
deorſum, and of levity and gravity 3 But the Heavens which move 
circularly, to which motion no other motion is contrary, want 
contrariety, and therefore they are incorruptible. 

SAGR. Fair and ſoftly, Szmplicins; this contrariety whereby 
you {ay {ome fimple Bodies become corruptible, refides it in the 
lame Body which is corrupted, or elſe hath it relation to ſome 0- 
other? 1 ſay, if, for example, humidity by which a piece of Earth 

is 


a 
\ 
C 
- 


30 G. Garrrt=us, his Syſteme. 


is corrupted, reſides it in the ſame Earth or in ſome other bodie, 
which muſt either be the Air or Water? I believe you will grant, 
that like as the Motions upwards and downwards, and gravity 
and levity, Which you make the firſt contraries, cannot be in the 
ſame Subje&; ſo neither can moiſt and dry, hot and cold : you 
muſt therefore conſequently acknowledg that when a bodie cor- 
Comraries which ry geeth, it is occaſioned by ſome quality reſiding in another con- 
ph > trary to its own: therefore to make the Ccaleſtial Body become 
»et in the ſame bo- Corruptible, it ſufficeth that there are in Nature, bodies that have 
dy that corrupteth, contrariety to that Cceleſtial body ; and ſuch are the Elements, 
if it be true that corruptibility be contrary to incorruptibility. 
SIMPL. This ſufficeth not, Sir z The Elements alter and cor- 
rupt, becauſe they are intermixed, and are joynd to one another, 
Celeſtial Brdier and ſo may exerciſe their contrariety z but Caleſtial bodies are 
touch, but aye not | ; 
rouchedby the x- [eparated from the Elements, by which they are not ſo much as 
lemens, toueht, though indeed they have an influence upon the Elements. 
It is requiſite, if you will prove generation and corruption 1n Ca- 
leftial bodies, that you ſhew , that there reſides contrarieties be- 
tween them. 
Sa GR- Sce how Lwill find thoſe contrarieties between them. 
The firſt fountain from whence you derive the contrariety of the 
Elements, is the contratiety of their motions upwards and down- 
wards: it therefore is neceſſary that thoſe Principles be in like 
M _—_— Fs manner contraries to each other, upon which thole motions de- 
are comtrary qua- pend : - and becauſe that is moveable upwards by lightneſs, 
_— and this downwards by gravity, it is neceſſary that lightneſs and 
gravity are contrary to cach other : no leſs are we to believe thoſe 
other Principles co b<e'comearies, which are the caules that this is 
heavy, and that light : but by your own confctlion, levity and 
gravity follow as conſequents of rariry and denfiry ; therefore 
The ftarsinfinitely rarity and denſity ſhall be contraries : the which conditions or 
farye/e Fr of _ affeQions are ſo amply found in Caleſtial bodies, that you e- 
ONE ſteem the ſtars to be onely more denle parts of their Heaven : 
and if this be ſo, it followeth that the denſity of the ſtars exceeds 
that of the reſt of Heaven , by almoſt infinite degrees: 
which is manifeſt, in that Heaven is infinitely tranſparent, and 
| the ſtars extremely opacous ; and for that there are there above 
no other qualities, but more and leſs denſity and rarity , which 
may be cauſes of the greater or leſs tranſparency. There being 
then ſuch contrariety between the Caoleftial bodies, it is neceſſary 
that they alſo be generable and corruptible, in the ſame manner 
as the Elementary bodies are 3 or elſe rhat contrariety is not the 
Rarity & denſity cauſe of corruptibility, @c. 
in Celeſtralbodies, G MPI. There isno neceſſity either\of one or the other , for 


is different from Maas . Bp . 
the rarity & den- that denſity and rarity in Caleſtial bodies, are not contraries to 


ſity of the elements, each 


Driartocus I, 31 


each other, as in Elementary bodies 3 for that they depend not 
on the primary qualities, cold and heat, which are contraries; bur 
on the more or le{s matter 1a proportion to quantity : now much 
and little, ſpeak onely a relative oppoſition, that 1s, the leaſt of 
oppolitions, and which hath nothing to do with generation and 
corruption. 
SaGR- Therefore affirming, that denſity and rarity, which a- 
mongſt the Elements ſhould be the cauſe of gravity and levity, 
which may be the cauſes of contrary motions ſurſum2 and. deore 
ſam, on which, again, dependeth the conrrarietics for generation 
and corruption 3 it ſ{ufficeth not that they be thoſe dentneſſes and 
rarenciles which under the ſame quantity, or (if you will) mals 
contain, much or little matter, but it is necefſary that they be denf- 
nefices and rareneſſes. cauſed by the primary qualities, hot and 
cold, otherwiſe they would operate nothing at all : but if this be 
fo, Ariſtetle hath deceived us, for that he ſhould have told it us at Atiftorle defeBtirie 
firſt, and {o have left written that thoſe fimple bodies are gene- *” *[egying = 
cable and corruptible, that are moveable with fimple motions ans yr ns. 
upwards and downwards, dependent on levity and gravity , cau- # & corruprible, 
fed by rarity and denfity, made by much or little matter, by 
reaſon of heat and cold ; and not to have ſtaid at the ſimple mo- 
tion ſurſum and deorſum : forT aſſure you that to the making 
of bodies. heavy er light, whereby they come to be moved with 
contrary motions, any kind of denfity and rarity ſufficeth, whe- 
ther it proceed from heat and cold, or what elſe you pleaſe ; for 
heat and cold have nothing to do in this affair : and you ſhall 
upon experiment find, that a red hor iron, which yuu muſt grant 
to have heat, weigheth 2s uitlCch, and moves 1in the ſame manner 
25 when it is cold. But to overpaſs this alſo, how know you but 
that Caleſtial rarity and denſity depend on heat and cold ? 
SIMPL. 1 know it, becauſe_thoſe qualities are not amongſt 
Caleſtial bodies, which are neither hot nor cold. 
SaLv- I ſee we are again going about to engulph our ſelves in 
a bottomleſs ocean, where there is no getting to ſhore; for this 
1s a Navigation without Compals, Stars, Oars or Rudder : fo that 
it will follow either that we be forced to paſs from Shelf to Shelf, 
or run on ground, or to ſail continually in danger of being loſt. 
Therefore, if according to your advice we ſhall proceed in our 
main deſign, we muſt of neceſſity for the preſent overpaſs this 
general conſideration, whether dire& motion be neceſlary ig' Na- 
ture, and agree with {ome bodies ; and come to the particular 
demonſtrations, obſervations and experiments 3 propounding in 
the firſt place all thoſe that have been hitherto alledged by Ar: 
ſfootle, Ptolomey, and others, to prove the ſtability of the Earth, en- 
deavouring jn the next place to an{wer them : and producing in 


rhe 


= _ 
x Tp _— . wr 


- 2 _ Ja ET » 
- 2" S _ >; - —_ 
. by 
- o - - 4A 
- | wh - y _ p 
Pe = 
. 
_ k wa "4 - 
p. 4 = 7 
. Y _ _ — o 
en_ « my a—_ go = - 
a _—_— 
* 
= T - y; o a 
= 
_ _ — 


om © 


w_- 


_ We 


p - 
__ 
— 


32 G. Garit=us, his Syſtcme. 


the laſt place, thoſe, by which others may be perſwaded, that the 
Earth is no leſs than the Moon, or any other Planet to be num- 
bered amongſt natural bodies that move circularly. 

SAGR. [ ſhall the more willingly incline to this, in that I am 
better ſatisfied with your ArchiteQonical and genera] diſcourſe, 
than with that of Ariſtotle, for yours convinceth me without the 
teaſt ſcruple, and the other at every ſtep croſſeth my way with 
ſome block. And I ſee no reaſon why Simplicius ſhould not be 
preſently ſatisfied with the Argument you alledg, to prove that 
there can be no ſuch thing in nature as a motion by a right line, 
if we do but preſuppoſe that the parts of the Univerſe are diſpo- 
ſed in an excellent couſtitution and perfect order. 

SALv. Stay a little, good Sagredys, for juſt now a way comes 
into my mind, how I may give Simplicius ſatisfaGtion, provided 
that be will not be ſo ſtrialy wedded to every expreſſion of A4- 
riftotle, as to hold ie hercfic to recede in any thing from him. Nor 
is there any queſtion to be made, but that if we grant the excel- 
lent diſpoſition and perfe& order of the parts of the Univerſe, 
as to local (cituation, that then there is no other but the circular 
motion, and reſt ; for as to the motion by a right line, I ſee not 
how it can be of uſe for any thing, but to reduce to rheir natural 
conſtitution, ſome integral bodies, that by ſome accident were re- 
mov'd and ſeparated from their whole, as we ſaid above. 

Let us now conſider the whole Terreſtrial Globe, and enquire 
the beſt we can, whether it, and the other Mundaue bodies are to 
conſerve themſelves in their perfe& and natural diſpoſition. It 


Is neceffary ro fay, cher ehas jt reſts and keeps perpetually 1m- 
moveable in its place; or elſe that Continuing always In its place, 
it revolves in its ſelf ;' or that it turneth about a Centre, moving 
Ariſt.& Prolomey by the circumference of a circle. Of which accidents, both Ari- 
_ Bey Thar ftotle and Prolomey, and all their followers ſay, that it hath ever 
veable. obſerved, and ſhall continually keep the firſt, that is, a perpetual 
fe Fa; led So reſt in the ſame place, Now, why, I pray you, ought they not 
«i Globe naturally £ have ſaid, that its natural affeCtion is to reſt immoveable, ra-. 
refteth, chan that ther than to make natural unto it the motion * downwards, with 
6 OEE'Y which motion it never did or ſhall move? And as to the motion 
"The word is, « by a right line, they muſt grant us that Nature maketh uſe of it 
Thin ha eeſba to reduce the ſmal] parts of the Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and every 
dreth ſwſ#m, other integral Mundane body to their Whole, when any of them 
aw ih) 3 by chance are ſeparated, and {0 tranſported out of their proper 
chors ſenſe, place ; if alſo haply, ſome circular motion might not be found 
to be more convenient to make this reſtitution. In my judg- 
ment, this primary poſition anſwers much better, even according 
to Ariſtotles own method, to all the other conſequences , than 
to attribute the ſtraight motion to be an intrinſick and natural 


principle 


DiatocGuse. I. 32 


principle of the Elements. Which is manifeſt , for that if 1 aske 

the Peripatetick , if, being of opinion that Cacleſtial bodies are 

;ncorruptibe and eternal , he believeth that the Terreſtial Globe 

is not ſo, but corruptible and mortal , fo that there ſhall come a 

time , when the Sun and Moon and other Stars , continuing their 

beings and operations , the Earth ſhall not be found in the 

World , but ſhall with the ret of the Elements be deſtroyed 

and annihilated, 1 am certain that he would anſwer me, no : 

therefore generation and corruption 15 in the parts and not in the _ Motion 
whole 3 and in the parts very ſmall and ſuperficial , which are, ,,6,.4 __ 
as it were , incenſible in compariſon of the whole maſſe. And pris, than to the 
becauſe Ariſtotle deduceth generation and corruption from the ny 
contrariety of ſtreight motions, let us remit ſuch motions to the 

parts, which onely change and decay , and to the whole Globe 

and Sphere of the Elements, let us aſcribe either the circular mo- 

tion , or a perpetual confiſtance in its proper place : the only 

affeQions apt for perpetuation, and maintaining of perfe& order. 

This which is ſpoken of the Earth, may be ſaid with the ſame 

realon of Fire, and of the greateſt part of the Air 3 to which 

Elements , the Peripateticks are forced to aſcribe for intrinfical 7% Peripatericky 
and natural, a motion wherewith they were never yet moved, rg pen, c 
nor never ſhall-be ; andto call that motion preternatural to them, #5 Elements for 
wherewith, if they move at all, they do and ever ſhall move. ore _ 
This I ſay , becauſe they aflign to the Air aud Fire the motion were moved , and 
upwards , wherewith thoſe Elements were never moved, but _— 
only {ome parts of them, and thoſe were ſo moved onely in or- they 4/vaycr are 


der to the recovery of their perfe& conſtitution , when they were "**** 
out of their natural places 3 and on the <onmary chey call the 
circular motion preternatural co them > though they are thereby 
inceſſantly moved: forgeting, as it ſeemeth, what Ariſtotle oft in- 
culcateth , that nothing violent can be permanent. 

S1Mp1l- Toall theſe we have very pertinent anſwers , which $:,;4 experi 
| for this time omit, that we may come to the more particular **** #9 be prefer- 
reaſons, and ſenſible experiments , which ought in concluſion to $a dD, 
be oppoſed, as Ariſtotle ſaith well, to whatever humane reaſon 
can preſent us with. 

SaGR-. What hath been ſpoken hitherto , ſerves to clear up 
unto us which of the two general diſcourſes carrieth with it moſt 
of probability , I mean that of Ariſtotle , which would perſwade 
us, that the ſublunary bodies are by nature generable, and corru- 
ptible, &*c. and therefore moſt different from the eſſence of Cax- 
leftial bodies, which are impaſſible, ingenerable, incorruptible, 

Oc. drawn from the diverlity of ſimple motions ; or elſe this of 
Salviatus , who ſuppoſing the integral parts of the World to be 
Ciſpoled ina perfe& conſtitution , excludes by 'neceſſary conſe- 

E quence 


34 G. Gar11 xus, bis Syſleme. 


quence the right or ſtraight motion of ſimple natural bodies, as 

being of no ul&in nature; and eſtecms the Earth it ſelf alſo to 
be one of the Cacleſtial bodies adorn'd with all the prerogative; 
that agree with them ; which laſt diſcourſe 1s hitherto much 
more likely, in my judgment, than that other. Therefore re- 
ſolve, Simplicixs, to produce all the particular reaſons, experi- 
ments and obſervations, as well Natural as Aſtronomical, that 
may ſerve to perſwade us that the Earth differeth from the Cee- 
leſtial bodies, is immoveable, and ſituated in the Centre of the 
World, and what ever elſe excludes its moving like to the Planets, 
as Fupiter or the Moon, &»c. And Salviatns will be pleaſed to 
be tocivil as to anſwer to them one by one. 

S1MP1L- Sec here for a begining, two moſt convincing Argu- 
ments to demonſtrate the Earth to be moſt different from the 
Cca&leſtial bodics. Firſt, the bodies that are generable, corru- 
ptible, alterable, ec. are quite different from thoſe that are in- 
generable, incorrupeible, unalterable, &vc. But the Earth is ge- 
nerable, corruptible, alterable, e&*c. and the Caleſtial bodies in- 
generable, incorruptible, unalterable, &-c. Therefore the Earth 
15 quite different from the Coleſtial bodies. 

SAGR- By your firſt Argument you ſpread the Fable with the 
ſame Viands, which but juſt now with much adoe were voided. 

S1MPL. Hold a little, Sir, and take the reſt along with you, 
and then tell me if this be not different from what you had be- 
fore. In the former, the Mizor was proved 4 prior:,% now you ſee 
it proved 4 poſter:ori - Judg then if it be the ſame. I prove the 
Mingr,therefore (the Major being moſt maniteſt ) by ſenſible ex- 


perience, whioh Jhewo us that in the Earth there are made conti- 
nual generations, corruptions, alterations, e&»c. which neither our 


{enſes, nor the traditions or memories of our Anceſtors. ever ſaw 

an inſtance of in Heaven ; therefore Heaven is pattrable: &hvc. 

rag ar and the Earth alterable, ec. and therefore different from Hea- 

neverwas any mu» Ven. I rake my ſecond Argument from a principal and eſſential 

ration ſeen inie. acczdent , and it 1s this. That body which is by its nature ob- 

; Infin anpnh (cure and deprived of light , is divers from the luminous and ſhi- 

from thoſe which Ing bodies 3 but the Earth is obſcure and void of light , and the 

are by nature ob - Ccaleſtial bodies ſplendid - and full of light 5 Ergo, Oc. Anſwer 

gy to theſe Arguments firſt , that we may not heap up too many, 
and then I will alledge others. 

SALY- As to the firſt, the ſtrefle whereof you lay upon ex- 
perience, I deſire that you would a little more diſtinly produce 
me the altcration which you fee made in the Earth, and not in 
Heaven 3 upon which you call the Earth alterable, and the Hea- 
vens not {o. 


S$1MP1. Iſceinthe Earth, plants and animals continually ge- 
Ez nerating 


Driatocus. TI, 


nerating and decaying 3 winds, rains, tempeſts, ſtorms ariſing 3 and 
in a word, the aſpe& of the Earth to be perpetually metamorpho- 
ling 3 none of which mutations are to be diſcern'd in the Caleſtial 
bodies 3 the conſtitution and figuration of which 15 moſt pun&u- 
ally conformable to that they ever were time out of mind; without 
the generation of any thing that is new , or corruption of any thing 
that was old. 

SaLy- Butif you content your ſelf with theſe viſible , or to 
ſay better, ſeen experiments , you muſt conſequently account 
China and America Caleſtial bodies, for doubtlefle you never 
beheld in them theſe alterations which you ſee here in Italy , and 
that therefore according to your apprehenſion they are inal- 
terable. | 

SIMPI- Though I never did fee theſe alterations ſenſibly in 
thoſe places , the relations of them are not to be queſtioned 3 
beſides that , cum eadem ſit ratio totins » &+ partinm , thole 


Countreys being a part of the Earth, as well as ours, they 
muſt of neceſlity be alterable as theſe are. 


SALVv. And why have you not , without being put to believe 
other mens relations , examined and obſerved thoſe alterations 
with your own eyes ? 

S 1 MPL- Becauſe thole places , befides that they are not ex- 
poſed to our eyes, are ſo remote , that our fight cannot reach 
to comprehend therein ſuch like mutations. 

SALV. Sce now, how you have unawares diſcovered the falla- 
cy of your Argument 3 for, if you ſay that the alterations that 


are {cen on the Farth neer at hand, cannot, by reaſon of the too - 


great diſtance, be ſeen in America , much lefiſe can you fee them 
in the Moon , which is ſo «uany hundred times more remote : 
And it you believe the alterations in Mexico upon the report of 
thoſe that come from thence , what intelligence have you from 
the Moon , to aſſure you that there 1s no ſuch alterations in it ? 
Thereforc, from your not ſeeing any alterations in Heaven, 
whereas, if there were any ſuch , you could not fee them by rea- 
ſon of their too great diſtance , and from your not having intel- 
ligence thercof , 1n regard that it cannot be had , you ought not 
to argue , that there are no ſuch alterations; howbeit, from the 
ſeeing and obſerving of them on Earth; you well argue that 
therein ſuch there are. | 
S1Mp1. I will ſhew io great mutations that have befaln on 
the Earth ; that if any ſuch had happened in the Moon , they 
might very well have been KV. here below. We find 1n 
\cry antient records , that heretofore at the Streights of Gibraltar; 


the two great Mountains Abifa, and Calpen, were continued to- {:paration of Abi- 
gether by certain other leſſe Mountains , which there gave check |2 14 Calpen. 
E 2 to 


5 


The Mediterr ani- 
an Sea made by the 


G. Gary L=Us, bis Syfleme. 


to the Occan : but thoſe Hills, being by ſome cauſe or other ſe. 
parated, and a way being opened for the Sea to break in, it made 
(uch an inundation, that 1t gave occafion to the calling of it fince 
the Mid-Jand Sea : the greatne(s whereof conſidered, and the di- 
vers aſpe&s the ſurfaces of the Water and Earth then made, had it 
been beheld afar off, there is no doubt but ſo great a change 
might have been diſcerned by one that was then in the Moon; 
as alſo to us inhabitants of the Earth, the like altecations would 
be perceived in the Moon 3 but we find not in antiquity, that e- 
ver there was ſuch a thing ſeen; therefore we have no cauſe to 
ſay, that any of the Cceleſtial bodies are alterable, &xc. 

SAalv- That fo great alrerations have hapned in the Moon, I 
dare not ſay, but for all that, I am not yet certain but that ſuch 
changes might occur; and becauſe ſuch a mutation could onely 
repreſent unto us ſome kind of variation between the more clear, 
and more obſcure parts of the Moon, I know not whether we 
have had on Earth obſervant Selenographers, who have for any 
conſiderable number of years, inſtructed us with ſo exa& Seleno- - 
graphy, as that we ſhould confidently conclude, that there hath 
no ſuch change hapned in the face of the Moon 3; of the figura- 
tion of which | find no more particular deſcription, than the ſay- 
ing of ſome, that it repreſents an humane face ; of others, that 
it is like the muzle of a Lyon; and of others, that it is Cain with 
a bundle of thorns on his back : therefore, to fay Heaven 1s un- 
alterable, becauſe that in the Moon, or other Ccaleſtial bodies, no 
ſuch alterations are ſeen, as diſcover themſclves on Earth, is a bad 
' lation, and concludeth nothing, 

SAGR Aud cher iayether odd kind of ſcruple in this Argu- 
ment of Simplicizs, running in my mind, which F would gladly 
have anſwered ; therefore I demand of him, whether the Farth 
before the Mediterranian inundation was generable and corrupti- 
ble, or elfe began then fo to be? 

S1MPLI- It was doubtleſs generable and corruptible alſo be- 
fore that time 3 but that was ſo vaſt a mutation , that it mighr 
have been obſcrved as far as the Moon. 

SAGR. Go to; if the Earth was generable and corruptible 
before that Inundation, why may not the Moon be ſo like- 
wiſe without ſuch a change? Or why ſhould that be neceffary 
in the Moon, which importeth nothing on Earth ? 

SALV- It 15a ſhrewd queſtion : But am doubtfull that Sin- 
plicius a little altereth the Text of Ariſtotle, and the other Peri- 
pateticks, who ſay, they hold the Heavens unalterable, for that 
they lee therein no one ſtar generate or corrupt, which 1s proba- 
bly a leſs part of Heaven, than a City is of the Earth, and yet 


innumerable of theſe have been deſtroyed, ſo as that no mark of 
them hath remain'd. SAGR* 


Diatocus I. 35 
SaGR. I venily believed otherwiſe, and conccited that Sigz- 

plicins diſſembled this expoſition of the Text, that he might nor 
charge his Maſter and ConſcRators, with a notion more abſurd 
than the former. And what a folly it is to fay the Caleſtial 
part is unalterable, becauſe no ſtars do generate or corrupt there- 
in? What then? hath any one ſcen a Terreſtrial Globe corrupt,and 
another regenerate in its place? And yet 1s it not on all hands 
granted by Philoſophers, that there are very few ſtars in Heaven 
leſs than the Earth, but very many that arc much bigger? So | _ 
that for a ſtar in Heaven to corrupt, would be no leſs than if the bl, for * Frag 
whole Terreſtrial Globe ſhould be deſtroy'd. Therefore, if for cor»pt, chan for 
the true proof of generation and corruption in the Univerſe, it be - ou TOE 
neceſſary that ſo vaſt bodies as a ſtar, muſt corrupt and regene- 
rate, you may fatisfie your ſelf and ceaſe your opinion; for I 
aflure you, that you ſhall never ſee the Terreſtrial Globe or any 
other integral _ of the World, to corrupt or decay fo, that 
having been beheld by us for fo many years paſt, they ſhould fo 
diſſolve, as not to leave any footſteps of them. | 

SAaLv- But to pive Simplicins yet fuller ſfatisfa&ion, and to 
reclaim him, if poſſible, from his error; I affittn, that we have in _ 
our age new accidents and obſervations, and ſuch, that I queſtion cn porn 
not in the leaſt, but if Ariſtotle were iow alive, they would make 4id be ſee the no- 
him change his opinion 3 which may be eaſily colle&ed from the 7 97 a2e- 
very manner of his diſcourfing : For when he writerh that he c- 
ſteemeth the Heavens inalterable, &c. becauſe no new thing was 
(een to be begot therein, or any old to be diſfolved, he ſeems im- 
plicitely to hint unto us, that when ht ſhould ſee any ſuch acci- 
dent, he would hold the contrary : and, corſtuncs as indeed it is 
meet, ſenfible experimenrs to natural' reaſon : for had he not 
made any reckoning of the ſenſes,” he ' would not then from the 
not ſceing of any ſenſible mutation, have argued inimutability. 

S1MPl- Ariſtotle deduceth his principal Argitinent a priori, 
ſhewing the neceſlity of the inalterability of Heaven by natural, 
manifeſt and clear principles 3 and then ſtabliſheth the ſame 2 po- 
ſteriori, by ſenſe, and the traditions of the antients. 

Saly- This you ſpeak of is the Method he hath obſerved in 
delivering his DoErine , but I do not bethink ir yet to be that 
whetewith he invented it 3 for I do believe for certain, that he 


firſt procured by help of the ſenſes , ſuch experiments and obſer- 


vations as he could,to aflure him as much as it was poſlible, of the The certainty of | 


conclufion, and that he afterwards ſought out the micans how to '**, <1» het- 
q Fu wth | ps Bro oe rt hobe: peth by areſolutive 

emonſtrate it : For this 15 the uſual courſe in demonſtrative Scien- merbed t» find the 
ccs, and the reaſon thereof is , becauſe when the concluſion is 449917 ation. 
true , by help of refolutive Method,one may hit upon ſome pro- 


poſition before demonſtrated , or come to ſome principle known 


per 


| 
Ec 
Wy, 


-} G. Garitxus, his Syſteme. 


per ſe ; but if the concluſion be falſe , a man may proceed zn in- 

nitum , and never meet with any truth already known 3 but ve- 

. ry oft he ſhall meet with ſome impoſlibility or manifeſt abſurdi- 

page wards ty. Nor nced you queſtion but that Pythagoras along time bes 

« Geomerrical\de- fore he found the demonſtration for which he offered the Heca- 

ray ratien which tomb , had been certain, that the ſquare of the ſide ſubtending 
ound. 2 p k 

the right angle in a reangle triangle , was equal to the ſquare of 

the other two ſides : and the certainty of the concluſion condu- 

ced not a little to the inveſtigating of the demonſtration, un+ 

derſtanding me alwayes to mean jn demonſtrative Sciences. But 

what ever was the method of Ariſtotle , and whether his arguing 4 

priori preceded ſenſe a poſteriori , or the contrary 31t ſufficeth that 

the ſame Ariſtotle preferreth (as hath been oft ſaid) ſenſible ex- 

periments bcfore all diſcourſes ; beſides, as to the Arugments 4 

priori their force hath been already examined. Now returning 

to my Purpoſed matter, I ſay, that the things in our times dit* 

covered in the Heavens,are, and have been ſuch, that they may 

ive abſolute ſatisfaction to all Philoſophers ; foraſmuch as in 

the particular bodies, andin the univerſal expanſion of Heaven, 

there have been, and are continually, ſeen juſt ſuch accidents as 

we call generations and corruptions , being that excellent A- 

ſtronomers have obſerved many Comets generated and diffolved 

in parts higher than the Lunar Orb, beſides the two new Stars, 

New ſtars diſco- Anuo 1572 , and Anno 1604. , without contradition much higher 

vered in Heaven, than all the Planets 3 and in the face of the Sun it ſelf, by help 

y ogy - of the Teleſcope , certain denſe and obſcure ſubſtances , in ſem- 

of the Sun, blance very like to the foggs about the Earth, are ſeen to be 


produced and diſſolved ; and many of theſe are ſo vaſt, that 
they far excecd not only the Mciierranian Streight , bur all 
Solar Hor ub A rica and Aſia allo. Now if Ariſtotle had ſeen theſe things, 
on iAfrick, WHAAL think you he would have ſaid , and done Simplicins ? 
S1MPpL- I know not what Ariſtotle would have done or ſaid, 
that was the great Maſter of all the Sciences , but yet I know in 
part , what his SceCtators do and ſay , and ought to do and lay, 
unlefſe they would deprive themſelves of their guide, leader, and 
Prince in Philoſophy. As to the Comets, are not thoſe Modern 
Aſtronomers , who would make them Ccaleſtial, convinced by 
— dfrowmer con- the * Anti-Tycho, yea, and overcome with their own weapogs, I 
+ Si ) AutTy- mean by way of Paralaxes and Calculations , every way, tryed, 
concluding at the laſt in favour of Ariftotle , that they are all 
Elementary ? And this being overthrown, which was as it were 
their foundation, have theſe Novelliſts any thing more where- 
with to maintain their aſſertion ? 
S al.v. Holda little , good Simplicivs , this modern Author, 
what faith he to the new Stars , Amnno 1574, and 1604 , and to 


the 


Diatocues I. 39 


the Solar ſpots ? for as to the Comets , I for my own particular 
Iiccle care to make them generated under or above the Moon; 
nor did 1 ever put much ſtrefſe on the loquacity of Tycho; nor 
im | hard to belicve that their matter 15 Elementary , and that 
they may elevate (ſublimate) themlelves at their plealure, with- 
out meeting with any obſtacle from the impenetrabilicy of the * 
Perrpatetick Heaven , which I hold to be far more thin, yielding, 
and ſubtil than our Air; and as to the calculations of the Pa- 
rallaxes, firſt, the uncertainty whether Comets are ſubje& to 
ſuch accidents, and next, the inconſtancy of the obſervations, 
upon which the computations are made , make me equally {u(- 
pe& both thoſe opinions : and the rather, for char I ſee him, ; 
you call Anti-Tycho, ſometimes ſtretch to his purpoſe, or. elle ferb Afr-romical 
reze& thoſe oblervations which interfere with his deſign. "_ ciqywerrly 0 
SIMPL. As to the new Stars, Anti-Tycho extricates himſclf et 
tinely in three or four words ; ſaying, That thoſe mo- 
dern new Stars are no certain parts of the Celeſtial bodies, and 
that the adverſaries, if they will prove alteration and genera- 
tion in thoſe ſuperior bodies, muſt ſhew ſome mutations that 
have been made in the Stars deſcribed fo many ages paſt, of 
which there is no doubt but that they be Ccaleſtial bodies , 
which they can never be able to do : Next, as to thoſe mat- 
ters which ſome affirm, to generate and diffipate in the face of 
the Sun, he makes no mention thereof; wherefore I conclude, 
that he believed them f&ious , or the illuſions of the Tube, or 
at moſt, ſome petty effe&s cauſed by the Air, and in brief, any 
thing rather than matters Cazleſtial. 
SALV. But you, Simplicizs, what anſwer could you give to 
the oppoſition of theſe impo«cunate ſpots which are ftarted up 
to diſturb the Heavens, and more than that, the Peripatetick 
Philoſophy ? It cannot be but that you, who are ſo reſolute a 
Champion of it, have found ſome reply or ſolution for the 
ſame, of which you ought not to deprive us. 
S1MPL. 1 have heard ſundry opinions about this particular. 
One ſaith : « They are Stars which in their proper Orbs, like as ES LY 
« Yerus and Mercury, revolve about the Sun, and in paſling un- A an Solar 
« der it, repreſent themſelves to us obſcure 3 and for that they *"- 
« are many, they oft happen to aggregate their parts together, 
« and afterwards ſeperate again. Orkers believe them to be 
<zerial impreſſions; others, the illuſions of the chryſtals; and o- 
© thers, other things : But incline to think, yea am verily per- 
* lwaded, That they are an aggregate of many ſeveral opacous 
« bodies, as it were caſually concurrent among themſelves. And 
* therefore we often ſee, that in one of thoſe {pots one may 
* number ten or more ſuch (ſmall bodies , which are of wregu- 
«lar 


- 


40 G. Gar1r=zus, his Syſteme. 


« Jar figures, and ſeem to us like flakes of ſnow, or flocks of 
« wooll, or moaths flying : they vary ſite amongſt themſelyes, 
« and one while ſever, another while meet, and moſt of all be- 
« neath the Sun, about which, as about their Centre, they con- 
« tinually move. But yet, muſt we not therefore grant, that 
« they are generated or diſſolved , bur that at ſometimes they are 
« hid behind the body of the Sun, and at other times, though 
«remote from it, yet arc they not ſeen for the vicinity of the 
« immeaſurable light of the Sun 3 in regard that in the eccentrick 
« Orb of the Sun, there 1s conſtituted, as it were, an Onion, com- 
« poſed of many folds one within another, each of which , bein 
* The Original © * ſtudded with certain ſmall ſpots, doth move 3 and albeit their 
faith[ tewpeſtata # « jy gtion at firſt ſeemeth inconſtant and irregular , yet neverthe- 
Re rs. *lefle, it is ſaidat laſt , to be obſerved that the very ſame ſpots, 
on , ( —_— « as before, do within a determinate time return again. This 
hes a regia = h he fitteſt anſwer that hath been found to aſſigne 
in Heraldry , for cemetn to me t - : 
Tempeſtato,) ren- a reaſon of that ſame appearance , and withal to maintain the 
OT incorruptability and ingenerability of the Heavens 3 and if this 
fonifieth a violent doth not ſuffice 3 there wants not more elevated wits, which will 
rojor Hugg ** give you other more convincing. | 
a Ship. Salty. If this of which we diſpute , were ſome point of Law, 
in natwra! Sci or other part of the Studies called Humanity , wherein there is 
ences, the art © k : F : . f . 
Oratory is of no NEIther truth nor falſhood , if we will give ſufhcient credit to 
force. the acuteneſſe of the wit, readineſle of anſwers, and the gene- 
ral praftice of Writers , then he who moſt aboundeth in theſe, 
makes his reaſon more probable and plauſible ; but in Natural 
Sciences, the concluſions of which are rrue and neceflary , and 
wherewith the zndgment of men hath nothing todo, one 1s to 
be more cautious how he goeth abu. « maintain any thing that 
is falſe; for a man bur of an ordinary wit, if it be his good for- 
tune to be of the right ſide , may lay a thouſand Demoſthenes and 
a thouſand Ariſtotles at his feet. Therefore reje& thoſe hopes 
and conceits , wherewith you flatter yourſelf, that there can be 
any men ſo much more learned , read, and verſed in Authers, 
than we , that in deſpite of nature, they ſhould beable to 
make that become true , which is falſe. And ſeeing that of all 
the opinions that have been hitherto alledged rouching the eſ- 
ſence of theſe Solar ſpots, this inſtanced in by you, is in your 
judgment the trueſt , it followeth {if this be ſo) that all the reſt 
are falſe; and to deliver you from this alſo, which doubtleſle is a 
moſt falſe Chimere , over-paſling infinite other improbabilities 
that are therein, I ſhall propoſe againſt it onely two experiments; 
ap pr os onz15, that many of thoke ſpots are ſeen to ariſe in the midſt of 
proverh rhe Solar the Solar ring , and many likewiſe to diſſolve and vaniſh at a great 


lr ceverare diſtance from the circumference of the Sun 3 a neceſſary Argu- 
| ment 


DiatoGcus I. 4t 
nent that they generate and diflolve 3 for if without generating 
or corrrupting, they ſhould appear there by onely local motion, 
chey would all be een to enter; and pals out by the extreme cir- 
cumference. The other obſcrvation to ſuch as are nor ſituate in Goat axcoog ab 
the loweſt degree of 19NOrance 1N Perſpective, by the mutation the jr; are conti- 
of the appearing figures, and by the apparent mutations of the eh, OY body 
velocity of motion is neceſſarily concluding , that the ſpors are 
contiguous to the body of the Sun, and that touching its ſuperti- 
cies, they move either with it or upon it, and that they in no wiſe 
move in circles remote from the ſame. The motion proves Th motion of the 
it, which towards the circumference of the Solar Circle , #”* #-w4r4s rhe 
appeareth very flow, and towards the midſt, more {wift ; the fi- - ag" gn 
gures of the {pots 'confirmeth it, which towards the circumference _ : 
appear exceeding narrow in compariſon of that which they ſeem Pa "x wth lon 
to be in the parts nearer the middle ; and this ibecauſe in the row towards the 
midſt they are (cen in their full luſter, and as they truly be; and ;;, famſtrence of 


! : the Suns diſcus, & 
towards the circumference by reaſon of the convexity of the glo- why. 


'bous ſuperficies, they ſeem more compreſſ'd : And both thele 
diminutions of figure and motion,.to ſuch as know how to.obſerve 
and calculate them exaQtly, preciſely an{wer to that which ſhould 
appear, the ſpots being contiguous to the Sun, and differ irrecon- 
cileably from a motion in circles remote, though but for ſmal 
intervalls from the body of the Sun; as hath been diffuſely de-,, 
monſtrated by our * Friend, in his Letters abour the Solar ſpots, F eager ee 
to Marcus Velſerus. It may be gathered from the ſame muta- of Satumlek, +) 
tion of figure, that none of them are ſtars, or other bodies of prr_nd modeſtly 
{pherical figure; for that amongſt all figures the ſphere never conceals himſelf 


appeareth compreſlcd, nor can ever be repreſented but onely per- 57, ag _— 
fealy round; and thus in caſc «oy particular ſpot were a round be 
body, as all the ſtars are held to be, the ſaid roundneſs would as 

well appear in the midſt of the Solar ring, as when the (por is near 

the extreme : whereas, its ſo great compreſſion, and ſhewing its 

{elf ſo (mall towards the extreme, and contrariwiſe, ſpatious and 

large towards the middle, afſureth us , that theſe ſpots are flat 

plates of ſmall thickneſs or depth, in compariſon of their length PB foad.gys the ay) 
and breadth. Laſtly, whereas you iay that the ſpots after their 5: fla [he thin 
determinate periods are obſerved to return to their former aſpe&, ?'**" 

believe it not, Simplicins, for he that told you fo, will deceive 

you ; and that I ſpeak the truth, you may obſerve them to be hid 

in the face of the Sun far from the circumference; nor hath your 

Obſervator told you a word of that compreſſion, which neceſſa- 

nly argueth them to be contiguous to the Sun. That which he 

tells you of the return of the ſaid ſpots, is nothing elſe but what 

13 readin the forementioned Letters, namely, that ſome of them 

may ſometimes ſo happen that are of ſo long a duration, that 


they 


42 'G. Garin LEUsS, his Syſteme. 


they cannot be diſſipated by one ſole converſion about the Sun, 
which is accompliſhed in leſs than a moneth. 
S1MPL. I, for my part, have not made either ſo long, or { 
exa& obſervations, as to enable me to boaſt my ſelt Maſter of the 
Q u0d ef of this matter : but I will more accurately conſider the 
ſame, and make tryal my ſelf for my own ſatisfaction, whether ] 
can reconcile that which experience ſhews us, with that which 
Ariſtotle teacheth us 3 for it's a certain Maxim, that two Truths 
cannot be contrary to one another. 
SAaLy- If you would reconcile that which ſenſe ſheweth you, 
One caner (ſairþ With the ſolider Dofrines of Ariſtotle, you will find no great dif- 
Ariſtotle) ſpeak, ficulty in the undertaking ; and that ſo it 15, doth not Ariſtotl: 
OTIS ſay, that one cannot treat confidently of the things of Heaven, 
its NG 4ftance, by reaſon of their great remotenels ? 
S1MPL- He expreſly ſaith 0. 

Ariſtode prefers SALV-. And doth he not likewiſe affirm, that we ought to pre- 
ſenſe before;raiv- fer that which ſenſe demonſtrates, before all Arguments, though 
PENA in appearance never ſo well grounded ? and ſaith he not this 

without the leaſt doubt or bz(itation ? 

S1Mpl. He doth fo. 
SAL v. Why then, the ſecond of theſe propoſitions, which are 
Jis a 4:Nvine more Dh the dofrine of Ariſtotle, that faith, thar ſenſe 1s to take 
agreing with A- place of Logick, is a do&rine much more ſolid and undoubted, 
pooh ” Few than that other which holdeth the Heavens to be unalterable ; and 
able, than that therefore you ſhall argue more Ariſtotelically, laying, the Hea- 
wg Ron roy vens are alterable, for that ſo my ſenſe telleth me, than if you 
ſhould ſay, the Heavens are ualterable, for that Logick fo perlwa- 
be ded AriStotle. Furthermore, we may diſcourſe of Caleſtial mat: 
the Teleſcope d:ſ- EIS Much better than Ariftorte , Lecayſe, he confeſling the know: 
courſe beter of c#- ledg thereof to be difficult to him, by reaſon of their remoteneſ; 


—_ Sngy en from the ſenſes, he thereby acknowledgeth, that one to whom 

124m AITNTtOG D1W- 

ſelf. the ſenſes can better repreſent the ſame, may philoſophate upon 
them with more certainty. Now we by help of the Teleſcope, 
are brought thirty or forty times nearer to the Heavens, than ever 
Ariſtotle came ; lo that we may diſcover in them an hundred 
things, which he could not {ee, and amongſt the reſt, theſe ſpors 
in the Sun, which were to him abſolutely inviſible ; theretore 
we may diſcourſe of the Heavens and Sun, with more certainty 
than Ariſtolte. 

SAGR- Lice into the heart of Simplicizs, and know that he is 
much moved at the ſtrength of theſe ſo convincing Arguments 
but on the other ſide, when he conſidereth the great authority 
which Ariſtotle hath won with all men, and remembreth the great 
number of famous Interpreters, which have made it their bufinels 
to explain his ſenſe ; and ſeeth other Sciences, ſo neceſſary and 

profitable » 


Diatocue. I. 43 


pcoficable to the publick, to build a great part of their eſteem 
and reputation on the credit of Ariſtotle he is much puzzled and 
perplexed : and methinks I hear him ſay, To whom then ſhould The Declammwen 
we repair for the decifion of our controverlies, if Ariſtotle were 9 =P, 
removed from the chair ? What other Author ſhould we follow 
:n the Schools, Academies and Studies ? What Philoſopher hath 
writ all the parts of Natural Philoſophy, and that ſo methodically 
without omitting lo much as one ſingle concluſion ? Shall we then 
overthrow that Fabrick:under which ſo many paſſengers find 
ſhelter ? Shall we deſtroy that Aſylum, that Prytaneum, where- 
in ſo many Students meet with commodious harbour , where 
without cxpoling themlelves to the injuries of the air, with the 
onely turning over of a few leaves, one may learn all the ſe- 
crets of Nature ? Shall we diſmantle that fort in which we are 
ſafe from all hoſtile aſſaults ? But I pitie hum no more than I do 
that Gentleman who with great expence of time and treaſure, 
and the help of many hundred artiſts , eres a very {umptu- 
ous Pallace, and afterwards beholds it ready to fall, by reaſon 
of the bad foundation; but being extremely unwilting to ſee 
the Walls ſtripe which are adorned with ſo many beautifull 
Pictures 3 or to ſuffer the columns to fall, that uphold the ſtate- 
ly Galleries 3 or the gilded roofs, chimney-pieces , the freizes, 
the corniſhes of marble, with ſo much coſt ere&ed, to be rui- 


ned 3 goeth about with girders, props, ſhoars, butteraſles, to pre- FY 
vent their ſubverſion. I 

SALV. But alaſs, Simplicius as yet fears no ſuch fall, and 
I would undertake to ſecure him from that miſchief at a far 


leſs charge. There is no danger that ſo grear a multitude of T7p« tick. P hi- 
lubtle and wiſe Philoſophers, ſhould ſuffer themſelves to be 7?) eu 


He&Gjor'd by one or two, who make a little bluſtering ; nay, _ 
they will rather , without ever turning the points of their pens 
againſt them , by their ſilence onely render” them the obje& of 
univerſal (corn and contempt. Itis a fond conceit for any one 
to think to introduce new Philoſophy, by reproving this or that 
Author : kt will be firſt neceſſary to new-mold the brains of 
men, and make them apt to diſtinguiſh truth from falſhood. A 
thing which onely God can do, But from one diſcourfe to another 
whither are we ſtray'd? your memory muſt help to guide me into 
the way again. 

S1MVL. I remember very well where we left, We were 
upon the anſwer of Anti-Tycho, to the obzeQions againſt the 
mmurability of the Heavens, among which you inſerted this 
of the Solar ſpots, not ſpoke of by him ; and I believe you 


intended to examine his anſwer to the inſtance of the New 
Stars, 


F 2 SALy: 


44 G. Gar11 xus, bis Syſteme. 


SAaly-. Nowl remember the reſt, and to proceed, Methinks 
there are ſome things in the anſwer of Anti-Tycho, worthy of 
reprehenſion. And firſt, if the two New Stars, which he can dg 
no leſs than place in the uppermoſt parts of the Heavens, and 
which were of a long duration, but finally vaniſhed, give him no 
obſtruion in maintaining the inalterability of Heaven, in that 
they were not certain parts thereof, nor mutations made in the 
antient Stars, why doth he ſet himſelf ſo vigorouſly and earneſtly 
againſt the Comets, to baniſh them by all ways from the Cale. 
ſtial Regions? Was it not enough that he could lay of them 
the ſame which he ſpoke of the New ſtars? to wit, that in re- 
gard they were no certain parts of Heaven, nor mutations made 
in any of the Stars , they could no wile prejudice either Heaven, 
or the Dodtrine of Ariſtotle ? Secondly, 1 am not very well fatis- 
| | hed of his meaning z when he ſaith that the alrerations that ſhould 
be granted to be made in the Stars, would be deſtructive to the 


W \ a — __ _ 
= , 


prerogative of Heaven 3 namely , its incorruptibility, Oc. and 
F this , becauſe the Stars are Ccaleſtial ſubſtances , as 1s manifeſt 
| by the conſent of every one; and yet is nothing troubled that 
|  _ *ExrraStellas, the ſame alterations ſhould be made * without the Stars 1n the reſt 
; of the Celeſtial expanſion. Doth he think that Heaven is no 
6. Ccleſtial ſubſtance? 1, for my part, did believe that the Stars 

were called Caleſtial bodies, by reaſon that they were in Hea- 
ven, or for that they were made of the ſubſtance of Heaven ; 
| and yet I thought that Heaven was more Caleſtial than they; in 
| like fort , as nothing can be ſaid to be more Terreſtrial, or more 
; fiery than the Earth or Fire themſelves. And again, in that he ne- 


ver made any mention of the Solar ſpots z which have been evi- 
dently demonſtrated to be producea, and diſſolved , and to be 


| neer the Sun , and to turn either with, or about the ſame , I have 
| reaſon to think that this Author probably did write more for other: 
pleaſure, than for his own ſatisfaGion 3 and this I affirm , fora. 
| much as he having ſhewn himſelf to be skilful in the Mathema- 
ticks , it 1s impoſlible but that he ſhould have been convinced by 
Demonſtrations , that thoſe ſubſtances are of neceſſity contigu- 
; ous with the body of the Sun , and are ſo great generations and 
; cortuptions , that none comparable to them, ever happen in the 
} Earth : And if ſuch, fo many, and ſo frequent be made in the 
k very Globe of the Sun, which may with reaſon be held one of the 
nobleſt parts of Heaven , what ſhould make us think that others 
| may not happen in the other Orbs ? 
pncnk tut, oy SAGR, I cannot without great admiration nay more, deni- 
MG lis al of My underſtanding, hear it to be attributed to natural bodies, 
| i= the Molds bs- for a great honour and perfe&ion that they are * impaſlible, im- 


ming. 0 mutable, inalterable, ec. And on the contrary , to hear it to 
; * Impatible, be 


Diatocus I. 45 


»e eftcemed a great imperfeQtion to be alterable, generable, mu- 

<able, @»c. It 1s my opinion that the Earth is very noble and ad- T1: Eartb very 

mirable , by reaſon of fo many and (o different alterations, mu- _ oy —_ 

cations» generations z ec. which are inceſſantly made therein ; on; made cherem. 

and if without being ſubject to any alteration , it had been'all 

one vaſt heap of ſand, or a maſſe of Jaſper, or that in rhe time 

of the Deluge , the waters freezing which covered it, it had 

continued an immenſe Globe of Chriſtal ; wherein nothing had 7h £#th wwpro- 
| R fitable and full of 

ever grown, altered , or changed , I ſhould have eſteemed it a tenſe, 1s atte- 

lump of no benefit to the World, full of idlenefſe ; and in a ron taker away 

word ſuperfluous, and as if it had never been in nature ; and 

ſhould make the {ame difference in it, as between a living and 

dead creature : The like I fay of the Moor, Tupiter, and all the 


other Globes of the World, But the more [ dive into the con+ 
ſideration of rhe vanity of popular diſcourſes, the mote empty 
and ſimple I find them. And what greater folly can there be 
imagined, than to call Jems, Silver and Gold pretious; and Farth 
and dirt vile? For do not theſe perſons conſider, that if there The Earth mw 
ſhould be as great a ſcarcity of Earth , as there is of Jewels and oy EY 
prctious metals, there would be no Prince, but would gladly give ; 
a heap of Diamonds and Rubies , and many Wedpes of Gold, 
to purchale onely fo much Earth as ſhould ſuffice to plant a Geſle- 
mine in alittle pot, or to {et therein a China Orange, that he might 
lee it (prout, grow up, and bring forth ſo goodly leaves, ſo odi- 
riferous flowers, and fo delicate fruit ? Itis therefore ſcarcity and Scarciry and plen- 
plenty thar make things eſteemed and contemned by the vulgar; 7 _ and &0- 
who will ſay that ſame is a moſt beautiful Diamond , for that it = od gee 
relembleth a cleer water, and yet will vc parc with ic for ten 
Tun of watcr : Thele mcn that lo cxtol incorruptibility, inalte- Incorruptibility = 
rability, &vc- ſpeak thus 1 believe out of the great defire they Feemed bythe wal- 
have to live long , and for fear of death 3 not conſidering, that Tear TN 
if men had been immortal , they ſhould have had nothing to do 
in the World. Theſe deſerve to meet with a Meduſe's head , x, 
that would transform them into Statues of Dimond. and Faſper, cornpibiliiy de- 
that (o they might become more perfe& than they are. {rnnee-yo fared 
y g P y Into StAKHA'S 
SALVv. Andit may be ſuch a Metamorphoſes would not be al- 
together unprofitable to-them 3 for I am of opinion that it is ber+ 
ecr not to diſcourſe at aM, than to argue erroniouſly. 
$1MP1l+ There is not the leaſt queſtion to be made , but that 
the Earth is much more perfe&, being as itis alterable, mutable, 
Oc. than if it had been a mafle of ſtone; yea although it were 
one entire Diamond, moſt hard and impaſſile. But look how much ,,, _ _ 
theſe qualifications enoble the Earth , they render the Heavenly ai, defiencd - 
odics again on the other ſide ſo much the more imperfe& , in {ve the Earth, 


mg has | 4 ed bus 
w hich, luch conditions would be {uperfluous 3 in regard that the i a 
Cale- 


diſpay agers of 


46 G. Garit=us, his Syſteme. 


Celeſtial bodies , namely, the Sun, Moon, and the other Stars, 
which are ordaincd for no other uſe but to lerve the Earth, need 
no other qualities for attaining of that end, fave onely thole of 
light and motion, 

SaGR. How ? Will you afficm that nature hath produced and 
deſigned ſo many vaſt perfe& and noble Cealeſtial bodies , impaſ. 
ſible, immortal, and divine , to no other uſe but to ſerve the paſ- 
ſible, frail, and mortal Earth ? to ſerve that which you call the 
droſſe of the World, and ſink of all uncleannefſe ? To whar 
purpoſe were the Ccaeleſtial bodies made immortal, @&c. to ſerve a 
frail, &*c. Take away this ſublerviency tothe Earth , and the in- 

|  numerable multitude of Ccaleſtial bodies become wholly unuſe- 
Celeſtial boiler ful, and ſuperfluous, fince they neither have nor can have any 
changeable opera» Mutual operation betwixt themſelves 3 becauſe they are all unal- 
" #20» 14 © terable, immutable, impaſſible : For if , for Example, the Moon 
be impaſſible , what influence can the Sun or any orher Star have 
upon her ? it would doubrleflc have far lefle cfte& upon her, than 
that of one who would with his looks or imagination , lignific a 
piece of Gold. Moreover , it ſeemeth to me, that whilſt the Car- 
leſtial bodies concurre to the generation and alteration of the 
Earth, they themlelvesare alſo of neceſſity alterable ; for other- 
wiſe I cannot underſtand how the application of the Sun or Moon 
to the Earth, to cffe& produftion , ſhould be any other than to lay 
a marble Statue by a Womans fide , and from that conjundtion to 
expec& children. 
eAlterability, xc. S1wp1L- Corruptibility, alteration, mutation, &c. are not in 
aw the whole Terreſtrial Globe, which as to its whole, is no leſle cter- 
but in ſee of its Mal than the Sun or Moon, but it is generable and corruptible as ro 
parts; itsexternal parts 3 but yer it is alſo true chat likewiſe in them ge- 


neration and corruption are perpetual, and as ſuch require the 
heavenly eternal operations 3 and therefore ir is neceſlary that 
the Caleſtial bodies be eternal. 

SAGR. All this is right 3 butif the corruptibility of the ſuper- 
ficial parts of the Earth be nowiſe prejudicial to the eternity of 
its whole Globe , yea, if their being generable, corruptible, alter- 
able, &xc. gain them great ornament and perfeQion ; why can- 

{«lftial bodies not, and ought not you to admit alteration, generation, @Xc. like- 

_— OY wile in the external parts of the Celeſtial Globes, adding to 
them ornament, without taking from them perfe&ion , or berea- 
ving them of aftion 3 yea rather encreafing their effe&s , by grant- 
ing not onely that they all operate on the Earth, but that they mu- 
u_y operate upon each other , and the Earth alſo upon them 
all e 

S1MPI- Fhis cannot be , becauſe the generations, mutations, 
&c. which we ſhould ſuppoſe ». g. in the Moon ; would be vain 
and uſclefle , &+ natura nibil fruſtra facit, SAGR: 


Diarocue. I. 47 
S1GR- And why ſhould they be vain and ulcleſle 2 


$114P 1, Becaule we cleerly fee , and feel with our hands, that The generation: & 
all generations, Corruptions, ec. made in the Earth, are all ei- progeny 4 
ther mediately or immediately directed to the uſe, convenience, 0 a for the 2nd 
and benefitof man; for the uſe of man are horſes brought forth, 9 4" 
for the feeding of horſes, the Earth produceth grafle, and the 
Clouds water itz for the uſe and nouriſhment of man, herbs, corn, 
fruits, beaſts, birds, fiſhes, are brought forth; and in ſum, if 
we ſhould one by one dilligently examine and reſolve all theſe 
things , we ſhould find the end to which they are all direfted, to be 
the neceflity, uſe, convenience, and delight of man. Now of what 
ule could the generations which we ſuppoſe to be made in the 
Moon or other Planets, ever be to mankind? unleſle you ſhould 
ſay that there were alſo men in the Moon , that might enjoy the 
benefit thereof 3 a conceit eitherfabulous or impious. 

S$AGR. Thatin the Moon or other Planets, there are genera- The Moon hath 
ted either herbs, or plants, or animals, like to ours, or that there "* £#2074192s of 

, things, lihe as we 

are rains, winds, or thunders there, as about the Earth, I nei- þaz7, ror w ic in- 
ther know, nor believe , and much lefle, that it is inhabited by habired by mer. 
men : but yet 1 underſtand not , becauſe there are not genera- 
red things like to ours , that therefore it neceſlarily followeth, 
that no alteration 13 wrought therein , or that there may not be 
other things that change, generate, and difſolve , which are not o the Moon may 
onely different trom ours , but exceedingly beyond our imagina- « "x7 qd 
tion, andin a word, not to be thought of by us. And if, as 1 fromoar:. 
am certain, thatone born and brought up in a ſpatious Forreſt, 


amongſt beaſts and birds, and that hath no knowledg at all of the 


Element of Water , could never come to imagine another World 7; ;har had wt 
to be in Nature , different from the Eatth , full of living crea- #+ar4 of the Ele- 


tures, which without legs or wings ſwiftly move , and not upon 7,1, : heme 
the ſurface onely , as beaſts do upon the Earth, butin the very t© himſelf Ships 
bowels thereof ; and not onely move , but allo ſtay themſelves ans Faber. 

and ceaſe to move at their pleaſure , which birds cannot do in the 

air; and that moreover men live therein, and build Palaces and 

Cities, and have fo great convenience in travailing , that without 

the leaſt trouble , they can go with their Family, Houſe, and 

whole Cities, to places far remote , like as [ ſay, I am certain, 

luch a perſon, though of never {o piercing an imagination , could 

never fancy to himſelf Fiſhes, the Ocean, Ships, Fleets, Arma- 

do's at Sea ; thus, and much more eaſily, may it happn , that in 

the Moon, remote from us by ſo great a ſpace , and of a ſub- 

tance perchance very different from the Earth , there may be mat- 

ters, and opcrations, not only wide off, but altogether beyond 

all ow imaginations, as being ſuch as have no reſemblance to 

ours, andtheretore wholly inexcogitablein regard, that what we 


1MAa*« 


48 G. Gar1t us, bis Syſteme. 


imagine to our ſelves, muſt neceſſarily be either a thing already 
ſeen, or a compoſition of things, or parts of things ſeen at ano. 
ther time ; for ſuch are the Sphinxes, Sirenes, Chimeara's, Cen- 
taurs, RC, | 

SALy- I have very often let my fancy ruminate upon theſe ſpe. 
culations , and in the end , have thought that I had found ſome 
things that neither are nor can be 1n the Moon 3 but yet ] 
have not found therein any of thoſe which I believe arc , and may 
be there, ſave onely in a very general acceptation , namely,things 
that adorn it by operating, moving and living 3 and perhaps in a way 

Theremay be ſub- very different from ours 3 bcholding and admiring the greatnels and 

ſtances in the Hezuty of the World, and of its Maker and Ruler, and with 

Moon very diffe- + : ; . "ot 

rent f,om cure, Continual Excominms ſinging his prayles 3 and in jlumme (which is 
that which I intend) doing what facred Writers ſo frequently af- 
firm, to wit, all the creatures making it their perpetual imploy- 
ment to laud God. 

SAGR. Thelc are the things , which {peaking in general terms, 
may be there 3 but 1 would gladly hear you inſtance in ſuch as you 
believe neither are nor can be there z which perchance may be 
more particularly named. 

SALy. Take notice Segredus that this will be the third time 
that we have unawares by running from one thing to another , loſt 
our principal ſubze&; and if we continue theſe digreflions , it 
will be long ere we come to a concluſion of our diſcourſe ; there- 
fore I ſhould judg it better to remit this , as alſo ſuch other points, 
ro be decided on a particular occaſion. 

SAGR. Since we are now got into the Moon , it you pleale, let 


us diſpatch ſuch things as concern her , that {o we be not forced to 
ſuch another tedious journey. 


SALy- It ſhall be as you would haveit. And to begin with 
things more general , I believe that the Lunar Globe is far diffe- 
rent from the Terreſtrial, though in ſome things they agree. I will 
recount firſt their reſemblances, and next their differences. The 
The Firſt reſem- {gg is manifeſtly like to the Earth in fhigure , which undoubted] 
blance between the , . : 
© Moon and Earth; 1$ ſpherical > as may be neceſſarily concluded from the aſpe& of its 
which « that NT ſurtace , which is perte&aly Orbicular, and the manner of its re- 
api ag ,,. ceiving the light of the Sun , from which , if its ſurface were flat, 
ing illuminated by jt would come to be all in one and the ſame time illuminated , and 
0200 likewiſe again in another inſtant of time obſcured, and not thoſe 

parts firft , which are ſituate towards rhe Sun, and the reſt ſucceſ- 
lively , fo that in 1ts oppoſition, and not till then , its whole 
apparent circumference is enlightned ; which would happen quite 
contrary , it the viſible ſurface were concave; namely, the illu- 
The Second con- MINAtion would begin from the parts oppoſite or averſe to the Sun. 
formity « te Secondly ſhe is as the Earth, ' in her ſelf obſcure and opacous, by 


Mins heb war Joe | | 
Fg bay ne which opacity 1t 15 cnabled to receive, and refle& the light of the 


Sun 3 


Dixtocuhe: 1]. 19 
Sin; winch Were 1t not [O. ir could not do. Thirdly, I hold irg _._ EN 
narcer co be molt dente and told a> the Farth 1s, which [ Clearly (7.2. 190 
argue fom thc uncvennels of ts luperficies in moſt places, by mcans 4- ESTES 
3t the many eminencies and cavities dilcovered therein by help of ** # e519 
tC [ele}cope - of winch cminencics there arc many all over it , di- 
oy reſembling our molt ſharp and craggy mountainss of which 
\ ou thall there perceive lome extend and run in ledges of an hun- 
1:4 miles long 3 others are contracted into rounder torms ; and 
here are allo many craggy, lolitary, ſteep and clitfy rocks. But 
hat of which there arc trequenteſt appearances, are certain Banks 
(1 ute this word, becaulc 1 cannot thing of another that better cx- 
prefletn them ) pretty high raiſed, which environ and inclole tields 
of ſeveral bigneſles, and torm fundry figures, but for the moſt part 
circular 3 many of winch have 1n the midſt a mount railed pretty 
high, and {ome few are repleniſhed with a matter ſomewhat ob- 
(cure, tO wit, like to the great ſpots dilcerned by the bare eye, and 
thele are of the greateſt magnitude; the number moreover of tholc 
that are lcfler and lefler 1s very great, and yet almoſt all circular. 
Fourthly, like as the ſurface of our Globe is diſtinguiſhed into two , £ emp $? MH nt 
principal parts, namely, into the Terreſtrial and Aquatick : fo in yu4:4 imo rw 
che Lunar ſurface we dilcern a great diſtin&ion of {ome great fields wk "eee? bal 
more relplendant, and fome leſs : whole” alpe& makes me belicve, "wig the + 
thar chat of the Earth would ſeem very like it, beheld by any one ria! {be ito 
trom the Moon, or any other the like diſtance, to be illuminated — of re » 
by the Sun: and the ſurface of the ſea would appear more ob- S: word /hew ac 


(cure, and that of che Earth more bright. Fifthly, like as we from a diſt ance move 0b- 


f [ 
; Jcure than that of 
the Earch bchold the Moon, one while all illuminated, another the £.rch. 


while halt ; ſometimes more, ſometimes lefs ; ſometimes horned, * 7 > 24n1a- 
* . N * ,» h - 2 ſt (18 of figures in 
jometimes wholly invitibly; namely, when 1ts juſt under the Sun :þ: £2514, like ro 
beams ; fo that the parts which look towards tne Earth are dark : __ of the Moon, 
Thus in every reſpe&, one ſtanding in the Moon would fee the 77" 5" the 


illumination of the Earths furtace by the San , with the ſame Ac 
periods to an hair , and under the ſame changes of figures. 
SINTLY, 

SAGR. Stay a little, Salviatus; That the illumination of 
the Earth, as to the ſeveral figures, would repreſent it felt to a perſon 
placed jn the Moon, like in all things to that which we diſcover in 
the Moon, I underſtand very well, but yet I cannot conceive: how 
t ſhall appear to be done in the ſame period 3 ſeeing thar that 
which the Suns illumination doth in the Lunar luperticies in a 
mouth, it doth in the Terreſtrial in twenty four hours. 

SAILV. Its true, the effe& of the Sun about the illuminating 
thei: two bodies, and repleniſhing with its iplendor their whole 
lurtaces, is dilpatch'd in the Earthin a Natural day, and in the 
Moon im a Month ; but the variation of the figures in which the 

CG illumi- 


FO 


G. Garitnus, his Syſtcme. 


i|luminated parts of the Terreſtrial ſuperficies appear beheld from 
the Moon, depends not on this alone, but on the divers alpc&; 
which the Moon 1s ſti] changing with the Sun; lo that, it for in- 
ſtance, the Moon punGtually followed the motion of the Sun, and 
ſtood, for example, always in a dire line betwcen it and the 
Earth, in that alpe& which we call Conjunction, 1t looking alway ; 
to the ſame Hemiſphere of the Earth which the Sun looks unts, 
ſhe would behold the ſame all light : as on the contrary, it it ſhould 
always ſtay in Oppoſition to rhe Sun , it would never behold the 
Earth, of which the dark part would be continually turn'd toward; 
the Moon, and therefore invitible. But when the Moon is in 
Quadrature of the Sun, that halt of the Terreſtrial Hemiſphere ex- 
poled to the ſight of the Moon which 15 rowards the Sun, 1s lumi- 
nous ; and the other towards the contrary 1s ob{cure : and there: 
fore the illuminated part of the Earth would reprelent it ſe]f to the 
Moon in a ſemi-circular figure. 

SAGR, I clearly perccive all this, and underſtand very well, 
that the Moon departing from its Oppoſition to the Sun, where it 
ſaw no part of the illumination of the Terreſtrial ſuperficies, and 
approaching day by day nearer the Sun, ſhe begins by little and 
little to diſcover ſome part of the face of the illuminated Earth; 
and that which appeareth of it ſhall reſemble a thin fickle, in regard 
the figure of the Earth is round : and the Moon thus acquiring by 
ts motion day by day greater proximity to the Sun, {ucceflively 
diſcovers more and more of rhe Terreſtrial Hemiſphere enlightned, 
ſo that at the Quadrature there is juſt half of it viſible, intomach 
that we may ſee the other part of her : continuing next to proceed 


towards the ConjunGion, it fucceflively dricovers more and more 
of its ſurface to be illuminared, aud in fine, at the time of Conjun- 


Qion ſceth the whole Hemiſphere enlightned. And in ſhort, | 
very well conceive, that what befalls the Inhabitants of the Earth, 
in beholding the changes of the Moon, would happen to him tha 
from the Moon ſhould oblerve the Earth ; but in a contrary order, 
namely, that when the Moon is to us at her full, and in Oppolition 
to the Sun, then the Earth would be in Conjun&ion with the Sun, 
and wholly obicure and inviſible ; on the contrary, that poſition 
which is to us a ConjunGion of the Moon with the Sun, and for 
that cauſe a Moon ſilent and unſeen, would be there an Oppolition 
of the Earth to the Sun, and, to ſo ſpeak, Full Earth, to wit, all 
enlightned. And laſtly, look what part of the Lunar ſurface ap- 
pears to us from time to time illuminated, ſo much of the Earth 
in the {ame time ſhall you behold from the Moon to be obſcured: 
and look how much of the Moon is to us deprived of light, to much 
of the Earth is to the Moon illuminated. [n one thing yet thele 
murual operations in my judgment ſeem to differ , and it is, that it 

being 


£ a Lo : 
een. 23 at'7 


DiatoGcus I. oF 


being (uppoled,and not granted, that tome one being placed in the 
Moon to oblerve the Earth, he would every day tec the whole 
Terreſtrial ſuperticies, by means of the Moons going about the 
Farth in twenty four or twenty five hours ; but we never ſee but 
11f of the Moon, lince it revolves not 1n it 1{clf, as it muſt do to 
be ſeen 1n every part of it. 

S ALV. So that this, betals not contrarily, namely, that her rc- 
,olving in her felt, 1s the caule that we lee not the other half of 
her, for ſo it would be neceſlary ir ſhould be, it the had the Epicy- 
cc. But what other difference have you behind, to exchange tor 


this which you have named ? 


SaGR- Let me fee; Well for the preſent I cannot think of 


any other. 


SaLtv. And what if the Earth (as you have well noted) feerh | 41! the Earth 
no more than half, the Moon, whercas trom the Moon one may fee {{ 72 16 of 
all the Earth; and on the contrary,all the Earth feeth che Moon,and balf one!» of the 
but onely half of it ſeeth the Earth? For the inhabirants,to fo ſpeak, "A Jeeth @# 198 
of the ſuperior Hemilphere of the Moon, which is to ns invitible, 
are deprived of the fight of the Earth : and theſe haply are the 
Anifvthones, But here I remember a particular accident, new] 
obſerved by our Academian, in the Moon, from whch are gathered þ,,,, 5. £1 
two neceflary conſequences 3 one 15, that we ſee lomewhat more we ſre more tha» 
than half of the Moon ; and the other 1s, that the motion of the Clb omg 
Moon hath exa@ concentricity with the Earth : and thus he finds 
the Phanomenon and oblervation. When the Moon hath a cor- 
reſpondence and natural |ympathy with the Earth, towards which 
it hath its alpe& 1n ſuch a determinate part, it is neceſſary that the 


right line which conjoyns their centers, do palle ever by the ſame 
point of the Moons {uperficies; ſo that, who {o ſhall from the cen- 
ter of the Earth behold the ſame , ſhall alwayes ſee the ſame 
Diſcus ox Face of the Moon punctually determined by one and 
the ſame circumference 3 Butif a man be placed upon the Terre- 
ſirial ſurface, the ray which from his cye paſleth to the centre of the 
Lunar Globe, will not paſs by the ſame point of its luperticies, by 
which the line paſſeth that is drawn from the centre of the Earth 
to that of the Moon, ſave onely when it 15 vertical to him : but 
the Moon being placed in the Eaſt, or in the Welt, the point of 
incidence of the viſual ray, is higher than that of the line which 
conJoyns the centres; and therefore the obſcrver may diſcern 
lome part of the Lunar kcmiſphere towards the upper circumfe- 
rence, and alike part of the other is inviſible : they are diſcerna- 
ble and undiſcernable in reſpect of the Hemiſphere beheld from 
the truc centre of the Earth : and becauſe the part of the Moons 
ctrcumference, which is ſuperiour in its riſing, 15 nethermoſt in its 


letting ; therefore the difference of the ſaid ſuperiour and infert* 
G 2 our 


© 


52 G. Gartirtzus, his Syſicme, 


our parts muſt needs be very obſervable ; certain {pots and other 
notable things in thoſe parts, being one whule dilcernable , and 
another while not. A like variation may alſo be oblerved toward; 
the North and South extremities of the fame Diſcus (or Surface) 
according as the Moons polition is in its greateſt North or South 


North are hid, and {ome of thole parts towards the South are 
diſcovercd, and fo on the contrary. Now that thele conlequen- 
Two (ps in the ce are really true » is verified by the Teleſcope » tor there be in 
Capes Ft ge bu the Moon two remarkable ſpots , one of which, when the Moon 
{be bath refþ:8 to 15 jn the meridian » is ſituate ro the Northwelt , and the other is 
= pre of 92 moſt diametrically oppoſire untoit 3 and the firſt of thele is yi- 
Hons h ſible even without the Teleſcope 3 but the other is not. Thiat to- 
wards the Northweſt is a reaſonable great {pot of oval figure, (e- 
parated from the other great ones 3 the oppolite, one 15 lefle , and 
alſo ſevered from the biggeſt , and ſituate in a very cleer held; in 
, both thelc we may manifeſtly diſcern the toreſaid variations, and 
F ſee them one after another 3 now neer the edge or limb of the 
Lunar Diſcs , and anon remote , with ſo great difference that 
the diſtance betwixt che Northweſt and the circumference of the 
Diſcus is more than twice as great at one time, as at the other; 
and as to the ſecond ſpot (becaule it is neerer to the circumfe- 
rence) ſuch mutation importeth more , than twice {o much in the 
former. Hence its manifeſt, that the Moon , as if ic were drawn 
by a magnetick vertue , conſtantly beholds the Terreſtrial Globe 
| with one and the ſame aſpe&, never deviating from the ſame. 
SaGR. Oh! when will there be an end put to the new ob- 
ſervations aud diſcoveries of this admirable Inſtrument ? 
| S A LV» If this {ucceed according to the progrefle of other great 
! | inventions , it is to be hoped, that in procefle of time , one may 
arrive to the {ight of things , to us at preſent not to be 1magined, 
S:xtbly , The But returning to our firſt diſcourſe , I ſay for the ſixth reſemblance 
Eirch and Moon 
inerchanceably ds PEEWIXE the Moon and Earth, that as the Moon for a great part 
'lummate. of time , ſupplics the want of the Suns light , and makes the 
nights, by the refleQion of its own, reaſonable clear; ſo the 
Earth , 1n recompence , aftordeth it when it ſtands in moſt need, 
ul by reflecting the Solar rayes, a very cleer illumination, and ſo 
| > much, 1n tny opinion, greater than that which cometh from her ro 
us, by how much thefuperficies of the Earth is greater than that 
of the Moon. 
| SAaGR. Hold there, Salviatzus hold there, and permit me the 
pleaſure of relating to you, how at this firſt hint I have penetrated 
— the caule of an accident , which I have a thouland times chought 
os £146. Pon, but could never find out. You would fay, that the imper- 
ro the 17,0n. fect light which is lecn in the Moon , eſpecially when it is horned, 
comes 


Latitude; For, if it be North, ſome of 1ts parts towards the - 


«bs Sat 1h _ 4 { ty) n+ LL. ® i. 4.4 
MAN PS WR A Emory ce 0 hs 43, 


DiatogGue, I. 


comes from the reflection of the light of the Sun on the Superfi- 
ies of the Earth and Sea 3 and that light is more clear , by how 
much the horn» are letle , for then the luminous part of the Earth. 
beheld by the Mooa , is greater , according to that which wa; 
« little betore proved 3 ro wit,that the luminous part of the Earth, 
-xpoſed to the Moon , is alway az great as the obſcure part of 
he Moon » that 15 vitible to the Earth 3 whereupon, at ſuch time 
a; the Moon 1s ſharp-torked , and contequently its tenebrous part 
oreat » great alſo 15 the i[luminated part of the Farth beheld from 
the Moon, and its reflection of light to much the more poreat. 

SiLv. This1s exactly the lame with what I was about ta lay. 
In a word, It is a great pleaſure to {pcak with perſons judicious 
and apprehenſive , and the rather ro me , for that whileſt other: 
converle and dilcourle touching Axtomatical truths , I have ma- 
ny cimes Creeping, into my brain fuch arduous Paradoxes, that 
though I bave a thouſand times rehearſed this which you at the ve- 
ry firſt , have of your ſelf apprehended, yet could I never bear 
1c10to mens brains. | 

$1MP1- It you mean by your not being able to perſwade them 
toit, that you could not make them underſtand the fame , I 
much wonder thercat, and am very confident that if they did 
7 not underſtand it by your demonſtration (your way of expreflion, 
2 being, in my judgment, very plain) they would very hardly have 

apprehended it upon the explication of any other man ; but it 
} you mean you have not perſwaded them , fo as to make them be- 
2 lieveit, I wonder not, in the leaſt, at this; for I confeſle my 
2 lelt ro be one of thoſe who underſtand your diſcourſes, but 
am not fatished therewith 3 for there are in this, and ſome of 
+ the other ſix congruities, or reſemblances, many difficulties, 
which 1 ſhall inſtance in , when you have.gone through them 
all, | | 

SALV. The deſire I have to find out any truth , in the acquiſt 
whereof the objections of intelligent perſons (ſuch as your (elf) 
may much afliſt me , will cauſe me to be very briet in diſpatching 
that which remains. For a ſeventh conformity , take their reci- $4.4, 71+ 
procal reſponlion as well to injuries , as favours 3 whereby the Gerch and Avon 
Moon , which very often in the height of ics illumination , by the Pe: 
interpoſure of the Easth betwixt 1t and the Sun , is deprived of 
light, and eclipſed , doth by way of revenge; in like manner, in- 
terpole it (elf between the Earth and the Sun, and with its ſhadow 
ob(cureth the Earth ; and although the revenge be not an{wer- 
able to the injury , for that the Moon often continueth , and 
that for a reaſonable long time, wholly immerſed in the Earths 
ſhadow » but never was the Earth wholly, nor for any long time, 
<cpled by the Moon ; yer, nevertheleſie . having reſpect F5 me 

nal- 


5o 


_— \ Dy” a . —_— 
- 45, THE TEEPY IT 0M 


54 | G. Gat1t xus, bis Syſeme. 


{malneſſe of the body of this, in compariſon ro the magnitude 
of the other, it cannot be denied but that the will and as i; 
were walour of this, is very great. Thus much for their con. 
gruities or relemblances. It ſhould next follow that we ditcourſe 
rouching their diſparity 3 but becauſe Simplicins will favour ug 

© with his objections againſt the former , its necellary that we heat 
and examine them , before we proceed any farther. 

S AGR- And the rather, becauſe it is to be {uppoled that 
Simplicins will not any wayes oppole the diſparities , and incon. 
gruities betwixt the Earth and Moon , {ſince that he accounts their 
{ubſtances extremely different. | | 

S1Mp1- Amongſt the reſemblances by you recited , iA the pa- 
rallel you make berwixt the Earth and Moon , 1 hnd that 1 can 
admit none confidently ſave onely the firſt, and two others [ 
grant the firſt, namely, the ſpherical figure z howbeit, even in 
this there is ſome kind of difference, for that 1 hold that of the 
Moon to be very ſmooth and even, as a looking-glaſle , where. 
as, we find and feel this of the Earth to be extraordinary montu. 
ous and rugged; but this belonging to the inequality of ſuperti 
cies, it ſhall be anon conſidered, in another of thoſe Reſemblan. 
ces by you alledged ; 1 ſhall therefore reſerve what I lave to ſay 
thereof, till I come to the conſideration of that. Of what you 
affirm next, that the Moon ſeemeth , as you fay in your ſecond Þ 
Reſemblance , opacous and obſcure in its ſelf , like the Earth 3 1 FF 
admit not any more than the firſt attribute of opacity, of which 
the Eclipſes of the Sun aſſure me. For were the Moon tramipa- 
rent, the air in the total obſcuration of the Sun , would not be 
come ſo duskiſh, as at ſuch a time it is, but by means of the 
tranſparency of the body of the Moon, a refraed light would 
paſſe through it , as we ſee it doth through the thickeſt clouds. But 
as to the obſcurity , I believe not that the Moon is wholly depri- 
ved of light , as the Earth; nay, that clarity which is ſeen in the 
remainder of its Diſcus , over and above the ſmall creſcent en- 
lightened by the Sun , I repute to be its proper and natural light, 

The {econd clarity and not a refleftion of the Earth , which 1 eſteem unable , by 
ef the Mem «© reafon of its aſperity (craggineſle) and obſcurity , to refle& the 


Reemed te be tts 


ative light. rates of the Sun. In the third Parallel I aſſent unto you in one 
The Fen wocbh part, and diſſent in another: Iagree in judging the body of the 
'oreſiert 1322%% Moon to be moſt ſolid and hard , like the Earth, yea much more; 
7 he ſubſlarce of for if from Ariſtotle we receive that the Heavens are impenetrable; 
i ue 9296 and the Stars the moſt denſe parts of Heaven , it muſt neceſſarily 
in; ro Ariltode, follow, that they are moſt ſolid and moſt impenetrable. 
SAGR. What excellent matter would the Heavens afford us fo! 
to make Pallaces of, if we could procure a ſubſtance fo hard and o 
tranſparent ? 


SALY: 


S chi, much Tefs can 1t hurt him. 


Diatcocue. TI. 55 
<1 , Rather how improper , for betay by its tranlparence, 
Lolly invilible, a man-would not be able without ſtumbling at 
«8 t:c{holds, and breaking hi- head againſt che Walls, to pats 
{{01M 90M [0 LOOM» | 
«G1. This danger would not bctall him, it it be true, a; lome 74, /46;t4-ce of 
Poripateicks lay, that it 1; incangible : and if one cannot a nt avg i 
v1 v. This would not lerve the turn, tor though the matrec 
of the i4-avens cannot be roucht, as wanting tangible qualities : 
ver may iccatily touch the elementary bodies , and to offend us 
5. 4: jutficient that it ſtrike us, nay worle, than it we ſhould 
lirike it. But let us leave thele Pallaces, or, to lay better, theſe 
Caſtles w the alc, and not interrupt Simplicius. 
$1121. The queſtion which you have lo calually ſtarred, ts one 
of the moſt difficulty that 1s dilputcd in Plulolophy ; and I have 
on thar {ubje& moſt excellent conceits of a very learned Doctor 
of Padoua, but it 15 not now time to cater upon them. Therefore 
:crurniag to our purpole, I {ay that the Moon, in my opinion, is 
much morc ſolid than the Earth, but do not infer the ſame, as you 
do, from the cragginels and montuolity of its ſuperficies z but 75: /4pe-ficier of 
aacher from the contrary, namely, from its aptitude to reccive (as ” eg palliges 
we (ee it experimented in the hardeſt ſtones) a poliſh and luſtre Lokiny-c1as, } 
excceding that of the ſmootheſt glaſs , for ſuck neccflarily muſt : 
its uperhcies be, to render it apt to make fo lively refleftion of 
the Suns rayz3. And for thole appearances which you mention, 
of Mountains, Cliffs, Hills, Valleys, @vc. they are all illuſions : 
and I have bcen preſent at certain publick diſputes, where I have 
heard it ſtrongly maintained againſt thele introducers of novelties, 7he eminencic, 
thar (uch appearances proceed from nothing elle, but from the un- Cen Oe 
equal diſtriburion of rhe opacous and peripicuous parts, of which of i; opacow and 
the Moon is inwardly and outwardly compoled : as we lee it F*rfÞicnons parts, 
often fall out in chry tal, amber, and many orher precious ſtones 
of peric& luſtre 3 in which by rcalon of the opacity of ſome parts, 
and the tranſparency of others, there doth appear ſeveral conca- 
vities and prominencies. In the fourth reſemblance, I grant, that: 
the ſuperlicies of Terreſtrial Globe beheld from afar, would make 
wo ditterent appearances, namely, one more clear, the other more 
dark ; but 1 believe that ſuch diverſity would fucceed quite con- 
trary towhar you ſay that is, I hold that the {urkace of the wa- 
ter would appear lucid, becauſe that it is (mooth and tranſparent 3 
and that of the Farth would appear obſcure, by reaſon of its 0- 
pactty and ſcabroſity, ill accommodated for refleing the light of 
the Sun. Concerning the fifth compariſon, I grant it wholly, and 
am able, in caſe the Earth did ſhine as the Moon, to ſhow the 
12mMe to any one that ſhould from thence above behold it, repre- 


{ented 


* 

. 

: 

et 
4 
ib 


* Il Sargiatore, & 
Letteve Solari. 


two Treartiſcs of 
Galil41us. 


G, Gariitzus, bis Syfeme. 


ſented by figures anlwerable to thoſe which we lee 12 the Moon : 
I comprehend allo, how the period of 1ts 1][umination and yarja. 
tion of figure, would be month]y , albeit the Sun revolves round 
about it in twenty four hours : and Jaſtly, I do not icruple to 
admit, that the halt oncly of the Moon \ceth all the Earth, and 
that all the Earth ſecth but onely halt of the Moon. For whar 
remains, I repute 1t moſt falle, that the Moon can receive light 
from the Earth, which is moſt obicurc, opacous, and utterly yn- 
apt to refle& the Suns light, as the Moon doth reflect it to us : 'and 
as I have ſaid, I hold that that light which we {ce 1n the remain- 
der of the Moons face ( the ſplendid creſcents tubducted ) by the 
illumination, is the proper and natural light of the Moon, and no 
caſie matter would induce me to believe otherwiſe. The leventh, 
rouching the mutual Eclipſes, may be alſo admitted 3 howbeir 
that is wont to be called the eclipſe of the Sun, which you are 
pleaſed to phraſe the eclipſe of the Earth, And this 15 what [ 
have at this time to ſay in oppoſition ro your {even congruities 
or reſemblances, to which obze&ions; if you are minded to make 
any reply, I ſhall willingly hear you. 

SArLv-. If I have well apprehended what you have an(wered, it 
{cems to me, that there ſtill remains in controverſic between us,cer- 
tain conditions, which I made common betwixt the Moon & Earth, 
and they are theſe;You eſteem the Moon to be {mooth and poliſht, 
as a Looking-glaſs, and as ſuch, able to refle& the Suns light; and 
contrarily,the Earth, by reaſon of its montuoſity, unable to make 
ſuch refleftion: You yield the Moon to be folid and hard, and that 
you argue from its being ſmooth and polite, and not from its being 


montuous 3 and for its appearing montuous, you aſlign as the 
caule, that 1t conſiſts of parts more and leſs opacous and perſpi- 


cuous. Andlaſtly, you eſteem that ſecondary light, ro be proper 
to the Moon, and not refleQed from the Earth ; howbeit you 
{cem not to deny the ſea, as being of a ſmooth ſurface , ſome 
kind of reflection. As to the convincing you of that error, that 
the reflection of the Moon is made, as it were, like that of a 
Looking-glaſs, I have ſmall hope, whilſt I ſee, that what hath 
been read in the *Saggzator and in the Solar Letters of our Com- 
mon Fri:nd, hath protited nothing in your judgment, it haply 
you have attentively read what he hath there written on this ſub- 
ject. 

SIMPL: I have peruſcd the ſame fo ſuperficially, accarding to 
rhe {ma]l time of leaſure allowed me from more ſolid ſtudies 3 
therefore, it you think you can, either by repeating ſome of thole 
reaſons, or by alledging others, reſolve me theſe doubrs, I will 
hearken to them artentively. 

SALVv. 1 will tell you what comes into my mind upon the 

1oſtant; 


Diatocus I, 57 


nftauc > and its poible it may be a commixtion of my own con- 
ceipt> > and thole which 1 have {ometime read in the fore-laid 
Books , by which I well remember , that 1 was then pertectly 
arixficd , although the conclutions, at firſt fight {eem'd unto me 
{tranve Paradoxes. We enquire S implicius, wherher to the ma- 
| Ling a reflection of light , like that which we receive from thc 
F \loon , it be neceſlary that the {upertictes from whence the reflc- 
* .cion commeth , be {o {mooth and polite, as the face of a Looking- 
Glaſſe » or whether a ſuperticies not {nooth or poliſht , bur rough 
7 and uneven , bc more apt for ſuch a purpole. Now luppoling 
3 two reflections ſhould come unto us, one more bright , the other 
| lefle, from two ſuperticies oppoſite unto us, I demand of you, 
which of the two {uperficies you think would repreſear it {clt to 
our ſight , to be the cleareſt , and which the obſcurcſt. 
$1wPr. Iam very confident , that that ſame , which moſt for- 
cib!y refleced rhe light upon me , would ſhew its (elf in its aſpect 
the clearer, and the other darker. 
S A1.v. Be pleaſed to take that Glaſle which hangs on yonder 7: 5, proved «: 
Wall, and let us go out into the Court-yard. Come Sagredus. 47g that the 
, . ; . . y Mons ſurface 
Now hang the glaſſe yonder, againſt that ſame Wall, on which {;,,,. 
the Sun ſhines , and now let us with-draw our ſelves into the ſhade. ' 
Scc yonder two ſuperficies beaten by the Sun , namely, the Wal} 
and the Glaſſe. Tell me now which appears cleareſt unto you, 
that of the Wall or that of the Glaſſc ? Why do you not anſwer 
me £ 
SAGR. Ileave the reply to Simplicizs , who made the queſti- 


on; butl, formy own part, am perſwaded upon this ſmall be- 
pinning of the experiment , that che Moon mult be of a very un- 
poliſht ſurface. 

SALV, Whar ſay you Simplicizs , if you were to depaint that 
Wall, and that Glaſſe faſtened unto it , where would you ule 
your darkeſt colours, in deſigning the Wall , or elle in painting 
the Looking-G laſle. 

S1M52L- Much the darker in depainting the Glaſle. 

' SaLy. Now it from the ſuperticies, which repreſents it (elf 
more clear , there proceedeth a more powerful refle&ion of light, 
the Wall will more forcibly refle& the raies of the Sun, than the 
Glaſſe. 

SIMPI-. Very well, Sir , have you ever a better experiment 
than this? you have placed us where the Glaſſe doth nor rever- 
berate upon us3 but come along with me a little this way 3 how, 
will you not ſtir ? 


SAGR- You perhaps ſeck the place of the refle&ion, which the 
Glaſſe makth. 


y1MD>1t. I doo. 


H SAGR 


50 


G. Gariit#us, his Syſeme. 


SaGRr. Why look you, there iris upon the oppoſite Wall, juſt 
as big as the Glaſle , and little lefſe bright than if che Sun had 
dicealy ſhincd upon it. 

Styvp!. Come hither therefore, and ſee from hence the ſur. 
face of the Glaſſe, and tell me whether you think it more oh. 
(care than that of the Wall. 

SAGR- Look on it your ſelf, for I have no mind at this time, 
to dazle my eyes 3 and I know very well , without ſeeing it, 
that it there appears as ſplendid and bright as the Sun it ſelf , or 


, lictle lefle. 


SIMPL» What ſay you therefore, is the refleGion of a Glaſſe 
leſſe powerful than that of a Wall? IL lee, that ia this oppoſite 
Wall , where the reflection of the other il]Juminated Wall comes, 
together with rhat of the Glafſe , this of the Glaſſe is much 
clearer 3 and I (ee likewiſe, that, from this place where I ſtand, 
the glaile it ſelf appears with much more luſtre than the Wall. 

SA1v. You have prevented me with your ſubtlety ; for I ſtood 
in necd of this very oblervation to demonſtrate what remains, 
You ſve then the difference which happens berwixt the two refle- 
Gions made by the two ſuperficies of the Wall and Glaſle, per: 
cu (t in the (eit-fame manner, by the rayes of the Sun; and you 
ſee, how che reflection which comes from the Wall , diffuſeth ir 
ſelf towards all the parts oppolite to it, but that of the Glaſſe 
goeth towards one part onely , not. at all bigger than the Glaſle 
it ſelf : you ſee likewiſe , how the ſuperficies of the Wall, beheld 
from what part ſocyer , alwayes ſhews it ſelf of one and the ſame 
cleerneſſe , and every way , much clearer than that of the Glaſſe, 


excepting only in thac little place , on which the Glaſles reflection 
reverberates, for from thence indeed the Glaſſe appears much more 


lucid than the Wall. By theſe {o fcnſible, and palpable experi- 
ments, my thinks one may ſoon coine to know , whether the 
reflection which the Moon ſends upon us , proceed as f.om a 
Glafle, orelſe, as from a Wall , that is, from a [mooth ſuperkh- 
cies, or a rugged. 

SAGR- It Lwerein the Moon it ſelf, I think I could not with 
my hands more plainly feel the unevenneſle of its ſuperficies, than 
| do now perceive it ,by apprehending your diſcourſe. The Moon 
beheld in any poſture, in relpe& of the Sun and us, ſheweth us 
its ſuperticies , touch't by the Sunzrayes, alwayes equally clear ; 
an ctfect, winch anſwers to an hair that of the Wall , which be- 
held trom whar place ſoever , appeareth equally bright, and dit- 
ferech from the Glaſſe , which from one place onely appeareth lu- 
cid , and tiom all others obſcure. Moreover, the light which 
cometh ro me from the refleQion of the Wall , is tollerable, 
and weak, in compariſon of that of the Glaſſe , which is little 


lefle 


_ # 1 v a — z 
uh x ECON Tre Hd IA. a 9. 
= "= ay f - " v Ty Þe 


| of incidence , it muſt follow that from a plane oc flat ſuperficics, -1:: 
| they do depart unitedly towards the ſame place ; bur in regard + parent 


DriatoGcus I. No 


If forcible and offentive to the fight, than that primary and 
direct light of the Sun. And thus without trouble do we behold 
the face of the Moon 3; which were it as a Claſle, it appcaring to 
us by realon of its vicinity , as big as the Sun it ſelf, its ſplendor 
would be abſolutely intollerable , and would (cem as if we beheld 
1nother Sun- 

SxLv- Aſcribe not, I beleech you Sagredus, more to my de- 
monſtration, than it produceth. I will oppole you with an inſtance, 
which I ſee not well how you can eaſily reſolve. You inſiſt upon it 
as a grand difference between the Moon and Glaile , that it emits 
its reflection towards all parts equally , as doth the Wall ; where- 
as the Glaſle caſts1t upon one onely determinate place ; and from 
hence you conclude the Moon to be like to the Wall , and not to 


the Glafſe : ButI muſt cell you, that that ſame Glaſle caſt; its 1, Look 


2 reflection on one place onely , becaule its {urface is flat, and the g/ſes ca/t forth 


A the relicition to- 
reflex rayes being to depart at angles equal to thoſe of the DC ao - 


; but the 


that the ſuperficies of the Moon is not plain, but ſpherical , and ** 
the incident rayes upon ſuch a ſuperticies, being to reflect them- 


2 ſelves at angles equal to thoſe of the incidence towards all parts, 
7 by means of the 1nfinity of the inclinations which compole the 
7 ſpherical ſuperficies,therefore the Moon may ſend forth its reflecti- 
7 onevery way; and there is no neceflity for its repercuſſion upon one 
© place onely, as that Glaſſe which is flag. 


S1MPpL- This is one of the very ſame objections, which I in- 


; tended to have made againſt him. 


SAGR- If this be one, you had need have more of them ; yet 


* | tell You , that as to this ficſt 5 it {eems to me to make MOTre a- 
# gainſt you, than for you. 


S1MPr. You have pronounced asa thing maniteſt, that the refle- 


2 ction made by that Wall , is as cleer and lucid as that which the 
* Moon ſends forth , and I eſteem it nothing in compariſon thereto. 
# « For,in this buſineſſe of the illumination , its requilite to reſpect, SY 
* <and to diſtinguiſh the Sphere of AGvity z and who queſtions 
© ©but the Celeſtial bodies have greater Spheres of activity , than Afivicy greater 
© «theſe our elementary, frail, and mortal ones? and that Wall 


* finally, what elle is it but a litcle obſcure Earth , unapt to mentary. 
» <ſhine ? 


The ſphere of 


in the Celeſtial 
> bodies than in Ele- 


SAaGR. And here al(o | believe,that you very much deceive your 


\ felf. But I come to the firſt objecton moved by Salwviatxs z and 


I conſider, that ro make a body appear unto us luminous, it ſuf- 
liceth not that the rayes of the illuminating body fall upon it, 
but it is moreover requiſice that the reflex rayes arrive to our 


| eye; as is manifeſtly ſeen in the example of that Glaſſe , upon 


H 2 which 


fo G. Gatirt=zus, his Syſteme, 


which, without queſtion , the illuminating rayes ot the Sun dy 
come; yet nevertheletle, it appears not to us bright and ſhining, 
unleflc we ſet our eye in that particular place , where the refle. 
Gion arriveth. Now let us conſider what would {ſucceed , were 
the glaſſe of a ſpherical figure; for without doubt , we ſhould 
find, that of the reflection made by the whole turface illumina. 
ted, that to be but a very (mall part , which arniveth to the eye 
of a particular beholder 3 by reaton that that 15 but an inconſide. 
rable particle of the whole ſpherical fuperticies , the inclination 
of which caſts the ray to the particular place of the eye ; whence 
| the part of the ſpherical luperticics , which ſhews it {elf {hioiag 
| to the eye , muſt needs be very ſmall; all the reſt being repre- 
{ented ob\cure. So that were the Moon {mooth, as a Looking. 
4 A The Aeon if u 8Jafle, a very mall part would be {een by any particular eye to 
T were /mootb, bkea be 1]luſtrated by the Sun , although its whole Hemitphere were ex- 
-#a#%7% Fo poled to the Suns rayes 5 and the reſt would appear to the eye of 
' the beholder as not illumipated , and theretore inviſible; ani 
finally, the whole Moon would be likewile invilible , for ſo muc} 
as that particle , whence the reflection ſhould come , by reaſon o 
its {malnefle and remotenefle , would be loſt. And as it wouldhe 
invidible to the eye , ſo would it aot afford any light ; for it ig al 
rogether unpoſlible , that ;a brighr body ſhould take away ol 

darknefle by urs ſplendor , and we not tp lee it. 

Salv. Stay good Sagredis , for 1 lee (ome emotions j; 
the face and eyes of Srmplicius , which are to me as indices tha 
he is not either very apprehenſive of, or {atisfied with this which 
you, with admirable pioot , and abſolute truth have ſpoken 


And yet 1 now call to mind , «har ] can by another experiment 
remove all icruple. I have ſeen above in a Chamber, a gret 


{pherical Looking-glaſl:; let us ſend for it hither , and whileſt i 
15 in bringing , let Simpliciys return to conſider, how great the 
clarity is which cometh to the Wall here , under the penthouſe, 
from the reflection of the flat glafle. 

SIMPL. Lee its little lefle ſhining , than if the Sun had di 
realy beat upon it. 
| Sarv- Soindeed it is. Now tell me , if taking away that ſmal 
7 flat glaſſe , we ſhould put that great ſpherical one in the ſame 
t place , what effect (think you) would its reflection have upon the 

lame Wall ? 

! SIMPL. I believe that it would eect upon it a far greater and 
more dittuſed lighe. 

SALv- Bur if the illumination ſhould be nothing , or lo 
| {mall , thar you would ſcarle diſcern it, what would you ſay 


_ _ — — ——— ————— _ 


j 
4 
4 


then ? 


SIMPL. Whenl have ſcen the effect, I will bethink ny (elf 
of an anlwer. | SA LV. 


—_— DT EE ID 


128. *” "WANG ia hs 


DiatocGue. |. Gt 


SAaLv- Scc here 1s the glafle , which | would have to be placed 
clole ro the other. But ficlt let us go yoader roward; the reflectio; 
of that flat one, and attentively oblcerve its clarity 3 tee how 
bright it is here where it ſhines , and how diſtiatly one may dilcern 
thele ſmall unevenneſles in the Wall. 

SIMP1l- I have leen and very well oblerved the fame, now place 
the other glafle by the fide of the firſt. 

SALV. See where it is. It was placed there afſoon as you be- 
gan to look upon the Walls {mall uncvenneſles, and you percei- 
ved it not, logreat was the encreale of the light all over the reſt of 
the Wall. Now take away the flat glaſſe. Behold now all refle- 
Gon removed , though the great conyex glaſle ſtill remaineth. 
Remove this allo, and place at there again it you pleaſe, and you 
ſhall ice no alteration of light in all the Wall. See here then de- 
monſtrated to {cnſe, that the refleion of the Sun, made upon a 
ſpherical convex glaſle, doth nor ſenlibly illuminate the places necr 
unto it. Now what lay you to this experiment ? | 

SIMPL. 1am afraid that there may be fome Leigerdemazn , 
uſed in this affair ; yet in beholdang that glatle 1 ice wu dart forth 
a great {plendor , which dazleth my eyes; and that which in- 
ports moſt of all, I lee ut from what place ſoever 1 look upon it; 
and | ſee it go Changing ſituation upon the luperticies of the glafle, 
which way loever I place my lelf co look uppn it 3 a neceſſary ar- 
gument , that the light is livelily reflected towards eyery (ide , and 
coalcquently,as ſtrongly upon all that Wall, as upon my cyc. 

SALV- Now you lice how cautiouſly and reſervedly you ought 


to proceed in lending your aflgnt to that, which diſcourle alone rc- 
preſenteth ro you. There is no doubt but that this which you lay, 
carricth with it probability enough , yet you may ice , bow ſenti- 
ble experience proves the contrary. 
S$;1M1p1- How then doth this come to pals ? 
SALy- I will deliver you my thoughts t hereof, but I cannor 
tell how 'you may be pleal d therewith. And firſt, that lively 
{plendor which you {ce upon the glals, and which you think occu- 
picth a good part thereof, 15 nothing near lo great, nay is very Cx- 
ceeding (mall; bur its livelinels occaftonerh in your eye, (by means 
of the refleion made on the humidity of the extream parts of the 
eye-brows,which diſtenderh upon the pupil) an advenritious 1rcadi- 
ation, like to that blaze which we think we lce about the flame of 
a candle placed at ſome diſtance; or if you will , you may 
relemble it to the adventitious ſplendor of a tar; for if you ſhould ,,, [mall body of 
compare the {mall body v. g. of the Canicula, een in the day time the ftars fringed 
with the Teleſcope, when it is ſeen without ſuch irradiation, with "rome event web 
the ſame ſeen by night by the eye it telf, you will doubtleſs com- WMH bregerthan 
prehend that being irradiated , it appearcth above a thouſand *''" 14 nated, 


and in 11s natts 


fimes : a>: 


» 
» 
- 
5 
; 
, 
3 
= 
\ 
* 


- IE 


6 2 


The ye flex light 


of wneven brgies, ts 


more waver ſal 


then that of the 
ſmooth, & why. 


G. Gat1L xus, bis Syſleme. 


times bigger than the naked and real body : and alike or oreater 
augmentatio. doth the image of the Sun make, which you ſee in 
thac glaſs. I ſay greater for that it is more hvely than the ſtar, 
as 15 manifeſt from our being able to behold the ſtar with much 
leſs offence, than this reflection of the glaſs. The reverberation 
therefore which is to diſpere it ſclt all over this wall, cometh from 
a ſmall part of that glals, and that which even now came from 
the whole flat glaſs diſperſed and reſtrain'd it ſelf to a-very ſmall 
part of the ſaid wall. What wonder 15 it then, that the tirſt re- 
flection very lively illuminates; and that this other 1s almoſt im- 
perceptible ? 

S1MP1. I find my (elf more perplexed than ever, and there 
preſents it (elf unto me the other difficulty, how 1t can be that 
that wall, being of a matter ſo obſcure, and of a ſuperficies ſo uns 
poliſh'd, ſhould be able to dart from it greater light, than a glaſs 
very ſmooth and polite. 

S ALV. Greater light it is not, but more univerſal; for as to 
the degree of brightnels, you ſee that the refleQion of that ſmall 
flat glais, where it beamed forth yonder under the ſhadow of the 
penthouſe, i!]uminateth very much 3 and the reſt of the wall which 
receiveth the reflection of the wall on which the glaſs is placed, 
15 not in any great meaſure illuminated, as was the ſmall part on 
which the reflection of the glaſs fell. And if you would under- 
ſtand the whole of this buſineſs, you muſt conſider that the {uper- 
ficies of that wall's being rough, 1s the ſame as if it were compo- 
{ed of innumerable ſmall {uperficies, diſpoſed according to itt 
numerable diverſities of inclinations : amongſt which it neceſla- 


rily happens, that there are many diſpoſed to ſend forth their 
reflex rays from them into ſuch a place, many others into another: 


and in ſum, there 15 not any place to which there comes not very 
many rays, reflected from very many ſmall ſuperficies, diſperſed 
throughout the whole ſuperticics of the rugged body, upon which 
the rays of the Sun fall. From which it neceſſarily follow- 
eth, That upon any, whatloever, part of any ſuperficies, 
oppoled to thar which receiveth the primary incident rays, 
there 1s produced reflex rays , and conſequently illumi- 
vation. There doth alſo follow thereupon , That the ſame 
body upon which the illuminacing rays fall , - beheld from 
wharſoever place, appeareth all iliuminared and ſhining : and 
thercfore the Moon, as being of a ſuperficies rugged and 


The Moor, of it not {mooth , beameth forth the livhr of the Sun on every 


were (month and 


fleck,, would be 11:- 


viſible, 


fide, and to all beholders appearcth- equally lucid. Bur if 
the {urface of it, being ſpherical, were alſo {mooth as a glaſs, it 
would become wholly invitible 3 toraſmuch as that ſmall part, 
from which the image of the Sun ſhould be refleged unto the m7 

0 


A ego HERA, TIE LES, 


Dratocue. TI. 


of a particular perſon, by reaſon of its great diſtance would be in- 
vidible, as I have ſaid betore. 

$144p1- 1 am very apprehenſive of your diſcourſe; yct me- 
thinks I am able to relolve the ſame with very little trouble 3 and 
eaſily to maintain, that the Moon is rotund and polite, and thar ir 
reflects rhe Suns light unto us in manner of a glals; nor there- 
fore ought the image of the Sun to be leen in the middle of it, for- 
« aſmuch as the ſpecies of the Sun it ſelf admits not its ſmall figure 
« to be ſeen at {o great a diſtance, but'the light produced by the 
{ «Syn may help us to conceive that it illuminateth the whole Lu- 
I « nar Body : a like effe& we may ee 1n a plate gilded and well 
; « polliſh'd, which touch't by a luminous body, appearcth to him 
q <chat bcholds it at ſome diſ}anceto be all ſhining 3 and onely near 
3 <<ac hand one may diſcover in the middle of it the fmall image of 
4 « the luminous body, 

SiLy- Ingenuouſly confefling my dullneſs of apprehenſion, 
| muſt tell you, that I underſtand not any thing of this your di{- 
courſe, ſave onely what concerns the gilt plate : and if you permit 
me to {peak freely, I have a great conceit that you allo underſtand 

not the ſame, bur have learnt by heart thole words written by tome 
2 one out of a deſire of contradiftion, and to ſhew lumlelt mo. e intel- 
2 ligent than his adverſary 3 but it muſt be to thole, which to appear 
2 allo more wiſe, applaud that which they do not underſtand, and 
q entertain greater conceit of perſons, the lels they are by them 
; underſtood : and the writer himſelf may be one of thoſe (of which 
7 there are many.) who write what they do not underſtand, and 
4 conſequently underſtand not what they write. Therefore, 0- 
& matting the reſt, I reply, as to the gilt plate, chat if it be flat and 
| not very big, it may appear at a diſtance very bright, whilſt a grear 
light beameth upon it , but yet it mulir be when the eye 15 in a de- 
terminate line, namely in that of the reflex rays : and it will ap- 
| pear the more ſhining, if it were v. g. of ſilver, by means of its 
{ being burniſhed, and apt through the great denſity of the metal, 
| ro receive a perfect poliſh. And thoughits {uperticics, being very 
& well brightned, were not cxadly plain, but ſhould have various in- 
> clinations, yet then alſo would its ſplendor be ſeen many ways 3 
; namely, from as many places as the various reflections, made by 
| the leveral ſuperficies, do reach : for therefore are Diamonds 
! ground to many ſides, that fo their pleaſing luſtre might be beheld 
irom many places. But if the Plate were very big, though it ſhould 
| beall plain, yet would it not at a diſtance appear all over ſhining : 
| andthe berter to expreſs my elf, Let us ſuppole a very large gilr 
plate expoled to the Sun, it will ſhew to an eye far diſtant, rhe 

mage of the Sun, to occupy no more but a certain part of the ſaid 
| Plate: to wit, that from whence the refleion of the incident 


{olar 


ry 
& 
_ 


Some write what 
they wnd:rſtand 
net, and therefore 
Hnderſtand mot 
what they write, 


Diamonds ground 
to divers fides, & 
why, 


þ 64 . G. Gat1tmzus, bis Syſtene. 


ik ſolar ra\'s come : bur it is true that by the vivacity of the light, the 
[ ſaid image will appear fringed about with many rays, and lo wil 
ſeem to OCCupic a far greater part ot the plate, than rcally jt doth, 

And to (hew that this 15 true, when you have noted the particular 

placc of the plate from whence the refletion cometh, and concei. 

ved likewite how great the ſhining place appearcd to you, cover the 

Ureater part of tharſame (pacc, leaving it only vilible about the 

mid(t 3 and all this ſhall not any whit diminiſh the apparent iplen- 

dor to one that beho!ds it from afar z but you ſhall ice ir largely 

dilpcrs'd upon rhe cloth or other matter, wherewith you covered 

it. Itthercforc any one, by lecing trom a good diſtance a {mall . 

gilt plate to be all over ſhining, ſhould 1wnagine that the ſame ; 

would alſo cvcn in a plate as broad as the Moon, he 15 no leis de. 

ceived, than if he ſhould believe the Moon to be no bigger than 

the bottom of a tub If again thc plate were turn d into a {phe- 

rical {upcricics, the refletion would be fecn ſtrong in bur one lole 

particle of it; but yet by reaſon of its livelineſs, it will appear 

triaged about with many glittering rays : the reſt of the Ball would 

; appear according as it was burnithed 3 and this alſo onely then 

Sr/ver bu miſhe: 

an "%;. Ven it was not very much poliſhed, for ſhould it be perfect!y 
/-»c, k» the wt brightned,, it would appear obſcure. An example of this we 
buryhedy © 99+ have dayly before our eyes in ſilver veſſels, which whilſt they are 
only boyl'd in the Argol and Salt, they are all as white as ſnow.and 

dv not reflect any image 3 bur if they be in any part burniſh'd, they 


F become in thar place preſently obſcure:and in them one may {ee the 
reprelentation of any thing as in Looking-glafſes. And that chan: 
"hy to obſcurity, proceeds from nothing elle but the {moothing and 
Ft plaining of a tine grain, which made the ſuperficies of the {ilver 
"i | rough, and yer ſuch, as that it reflected the light into all parts, 
V3 whereby it ſeemed from all parts equally illuminated : which 
*3 {mall unevennetles, when they come to be exquilitely plained by 


te burniſh, lo that the reflection of the rays of incidence arc all 


| | directed into one dererminate place 3 then, from that ſame place, 
[i the burniſhd part ſhall ſhew much more bright and ſhining than 
"7 the reſt which 1s onely whitened by boyling ; bur from all other 
b: places it looks very ob{cure. And note, that the diverſity of 
13h P34 Steel tights of looking upon burniſh'd ſupcrticies , occaſioneth ſuch 
'K betv1f frrn 0 differcace 1n appearances, that to imitate and repreſent in picture, 
" ; © 1 £4 ©. g- a poliſh'd Cuirace, one muſt couple black plains with white, 


» ir, ve; <- One ltideways to the other, in thole parts of the arms where the 
, eo light fallerh equally. 

SAaGR- It therefore theſe great Philoſophers would acquiele 
in granting, that the Moon, Venzs and the other Planets, were not 
of lo brigh: and {moorh a ſurtace as a Looking-glaſs, but wante! 
lome {mall matrer of it,namely, were as a filver plate, onely boy? 

white: 


'Drartocus |, 6x 


white > Þut not buraiſhed 3 would this yer ſuffice to the making 
of it vitible, and apt for darting forth the light of the Sun ? 
S41.v. It would lufhce in part 3 bur would nor give a light to 
ſirong 4 a5 it doth being mountainous, and in ſum, full of 
emincncies and great cavities. But thele Philolophers will never 
vield ir ro be lctle polite than a glafle ; but far more, if more it 
can bz imagined 3 tor they efteeming that ro perte& bodies perteR 
fioures are moſt lurable 3 it1s neceſlary, that the (phericiry of thoſe 
Cocleſtial Globes be moſt exatt; belides, that it they ſhould 
grant me ſome imequality , though never to (mall, I would nor 
icruple to take any other greater 3 for that ſuch pertection conliſt- 
ing in indiviſibles , an hair doth as much detra&t trom itz perfe&ion 
4% a mountain. . 
SAGR. Here ] meet with two difficultics , one is to know the 
reaſon why the greater inequality of {uperficies maketh the ſtron- 
ger refletion of light ; the other is, why theſe Peripatetick Gen- 
rlemen are for this exact figure. oh 
SALV. I will aniwer to the firſt; and leave to Simplicixs the 7h more rough 
care of making reply to the ſecond. You muſt know therefore, /*7*r/147 make 
that the ſame ſuperticies happen to be by the ſame light more or leſs ;71,,;, . Yo 
illuminated » according as the rayes of illumination fall upon them /-/ 5-45. 
more or lefſe obliquely ; ſo that the greateſt i]|umination is where -..  LOPOSONN 
the rayes are perpendicular. And {ce , how I will prove it to your »re 15. the ob- 
ſenſe. 1 bend this paper, ſo, that one part of it makes an angle *** ©- *'7- 
upon the other : and expoſing both thele parts to the refle&ion. of Ec 
the light of that oppoſite Wall , you fee how this fide which rc- 
ceiverh the rayes obliquely , is lefle ſhining than this other , wherc 
the reflection fals at right angles 3 and obſerve, that as I by 
degrees receive the illuminacion more obliquely , it groweth 
weaker. 
SAGR, | ſec the effect , but comprehend not the cauſe. 
SAL v- If you thought upon it but a minute of an hour, you 
would find it; but that I may not waſte the time; fee a kind of 
demonſtration thereof in Fig. 7. 


SAGR- The bare fight of this Figure hath fully ſatisfied me, 


therefore proceed. 


SIMPL. Pray you let me hear you out, for I am not of fo 
quick an apprehen(jon. | 

Sa1,v. Fancie to your ſelf, that all the paralel lines, which you 
lee ro depart from the terms A. B. are the rays which fall upon the ET = 
line C. D. at right angles : then incline the (aid C. D. ill it hang x7 AG 
as D. O. now do not you ſee that a great part of thoſe rays which 7 4-4 »». 
peirce C. D. paſs by without rouching D. O ? If therefore D, O. 
be illuminated by fewer rays, it 15 very reaſonable, that the light 
received by it be more weak. Let us return now to the Moon, 

I which 


G. Garttfus, his Syſteme. 


which being of a ſpherical figure, it its ſuperficies were {mooth, as 
this paper, the parts of its hemilphere illuminatcd by the Sug, 
which arc towards its extremity, would receive much lefs light, 
than the middle parts 3 the rays talling upon them moſt obliquely, 
and upon theſe at right angles; whereupon at the time of full 
Moon, when we ſee almoſt its whole Hemiſphere 1]luminated, the 
parts towards the midſt, would ſhew themſelves to us with more 
{plendor, than thole others towards the circumference : which is 
not ſo in effett. Now the face of the Moon being repreſented 
to me full of indifferent high mountains, do not you fee how they 
rops and continuate ridges, being elevated above the convexity of 
the perfett ſpherical ſuperficies, come to be expoled to the view 
of the Sun, and accommodated to receive its rays much lels ob- 
Iiquely, and conſequently to appear as luminous as the reſt ? 

SaGR. All this L well perceive : and if there are ſuch moun- 
tains, 1ts true, the Sun will dart upon them much more direRly 
than it would do upon the inclination of a police {uperficies : but 
it isallo truc, that betwixt thoſe mountains all the valleys would 
become obſcure, by reaſon of the vaſt ſhadows, which 1n tha 
time would be caſt trom the mountains, whereas the parts toward 
the middle, though full of valleys and hills, by reaſon they have 
the Sun elevated, would appear without ſhadow, and therefore 
more lucid by far than the cxtreme parts, which are no leſs diffu: 
ſed with ſhadow than light, and yet we can perceive no ſuch diffe 
rence. 

SIMPL. I was ruminating upon the like difficulty. 

SaLv. How much readier is Simeplicixs to apprehend the ob 
zections which favour the opinions of Ariſtotle, than their ſoluts 


ons? I havea kind of ſuſpition, thac he ſtrives alſo ſometimes to 
diſſemble them 3 and in the preſent caſe, he being of himſelf able 


to hit upon the doubt, which yet is very ingenious , I cannot be 
lieve but that he alſo was advil'd of the anſwer ; wherefore I wil 
attempt to wreſt the ſame (as they ſay) out of his mouth. There- 
fore rell me, Szmplicivs, do you think there can be any ſhadow, 
where the rays of the Sun do ſhine ? | 

S1mPL. I believe, nay I am certain that there cannot; for that 
it being the grand luminary, which with its rays driveth away dark- 
nels, it 151mpoflible any tenebroſity ſhould remain where it com- 
eth 3 morcover, we have the definition, that Tenebre ſunt prive- 
tio lumings. ; 

S ALV. Therctorc the Sun, beholding the Earth, Moon or & 
ther opacous body, never ſeeth any of is ſhady parts, it not ha 
ving any other eyes to ſee with, ſave its rays, the conveyers df 
light : and conſequently, one ſtanding in the Sun would neve 
fee any thing of umbrage, foraſmuch as his viſive rays would eve! 


£0 


Iratocus, I. 


00 accompanied wich thoſe illuminating beams oi eh2 Sun. 
”" $1:4yvt. Thisistrue, Without any contradiction. 

© 11 v. Burt when the Moon is oppotite to the Sun, what dit- 
forcnce 15 there between the tratt of the rayes of your tight , and 
hat motion which the Suns rayes make ? 

S\nyt. Now I underſtand you for you would ſay , that the 
1ayes of the ſight and thoſe of the Sun, moving by the {ame lines, 
we cannot perceive any of the obſcure valleys of the Moon. Be 
pleaſed to change this your optnion , that I have either fimulation 
6: diſimulation in me 3 for I proteſt unto you , as I ama Gentle- 
man, that I did not gueſle ar this folution , nor ſhould I have 
thoght upon it , without your help , or without long ſtudy. 

S aGR- The reſolutions , which between you two have been 
alicdgcd touching this laſt doubt, hath, to ſpeak the truth, ſatisti- 
ed m: allo. Bur at the ſame tune this conſideration of the vi- 
fible raycs accompanying the rayes of the Sun , hath begotten in me 
another {cruple > about the other part , but I know not whether I 
can expretle it right, or no : for it but juſt now comming into my 
mind, I have not yet methodized ir to my mind : but let ns (ee if 
wecan , all together , make jt 1ntelligible. There is no queſtion, 
but that the parts towards the circumference of that poliſh't,bur not 
burniſh't Hemilphere, which is Yluminated by the Sun, receiving the 
rayes obliquely , receive much fewer thereof, than the middle- 
moſt parts , which receive them direAly. And its poſſible , that a 
tract or lpace of v. g. twenty degrees in breadth, and which is to- 
wards the extremity of the Hemilphere, may not receive more rays 
than another towards the middle parts, of but four degree broad : 
ſo that that doubtlels will be much more obfcure than this; and 
ſuc!) it will appcar ro whoever ſhall behold them both in the face, 
or (as may tay) in their full magnitude. Bur if the eye of the 
beholder were conſtituted in ſuch a place, that the breadth of the 
twenty degrees of the ob(cure ſpace, appeared not to it longer 
than one of four degrees, placed in the midſt of the Hemiſphere, 
I hold it not impollible for it to appear to the ſaid beholder e- 
qually clear and lucid with the other ; becauſe, finally, between 
two equal angles, to wit, of four degrees apiece, there come to 
the eye the refleQions of two equal numbers of rayes : namely, 
thole which are refle&ed from the middlemoſt ſpace , tour degrees 
1n breadth , and thoſe refle&ed from the other of twenty degrees, 
but leen by compreſſion, under the quantity of tour degrees : and 
luch a (ituation ſhall the eye obtain , when it is placed between the 
lad [emiſphere, and the body which illuminates it ; for then the 
light and rayes move in the ſame lines. It ſeemeth not impoſſible 
therefore, but that the Moon may be of a very equal ſuperficies; 
and that neyerthelcſſe , it may appear when it is at the full , no leſs 


I 2 light 


S7 


1 


G. Gar1txus, bis Syſeme, 
light in the extcemiries , than in the middle parts. 

S ALV, The doubt 1s 1ngemious and worthy of conſideration; 
and as it but juſt now came into your mind unawares , fo I will 
like wife an{wer with whar firſt comes 1nto my thoughts, and irma 
happily fall out, that by thinking more upon it, I may ſtumble 
upon a better reply. Bur b<tore, that 1 labyrinth my elf any far. 
ther , it would be necr{lty, that we afſure our lelves by ſome ex- 
pcriment, whether your objeCtion prove in effect , what it ſeemeth 
to conclude in appearance 3 and therefore taking once more the 
{ame paper , and making it to incline , by bending a little part 
thercof upon the remainder , let us try whether expoſing it to the 
Sun , 1o that the rayes of hght fall upon the lefler part direQly, 
and upon the other obliquely 3 this which receiveth the rayes dire8. 
ly appeareth more lucid ; and fee here by manifeſt experience, 
that it i5 notably more clear. Now it your objection be concluſive, 
1c will tollow , that ſtooping with our eyeſo, that in beholdi 
the oiher greater part, icfs illuminated , in compreſſion or fore. 
ſhortning, it app-ar unto us no bigger than the other, more ſhining 
a::d that conſequently , it be not beheld at a greater angle thay 
that ; it will neceſſarily enſue, 1 ſay , that its light be encreaſed, { 
that it do {cem to us as bright as the other. See how I behold, and 
look upon it io obliquely , that it appeareth to me narrower than 
the other ; bur yet, notwithſtanding its obſcurity , doth not to 
my perceiving , at all grow clearer. Try now it the ſame ſucceed 
to YOU. 

Tp! R. I have look'tupon it, and though I have ſtooped with 
my eye, yet cannot I fee the aid luperficies encreafe in light o 
clarity ; nay me thinks it rather grows more dusky. 

Sarv. We arc hicherco contident of the invalidity of the ob- 
zc&ion 3 In the next place, as to the ſolution , I believe, that, by 
reaſon the Superficies of this paper is little lefſe than ſmooth , the 
rayes are very few, which be reflected towards the point of inc+ 
dence , in comparilon of the multitude , which are refle&ed to- 
wards the oppolite partsz and that of thoſe few more and more 
are loſt ,-the nearer the viſive rayes approach to thole lucid raye 
of incidence 3 and becaule it is not the incident rayes , but thoſe 
which are refleCted to the eye, that make the obje& appear lu- 
minous 3 thercfore, in ſtooping the eye, there is more loſt than got; 
as you your ſe]t contefle to have ſeen in looking upon the oblcu- 
rer part of the paper. 

Sa Gs. Irelt ſatisfied with this experiment and reaſon : Itre- 
mains now, that Szmplicius aniwer to my ocher queſtion, and tell 


me what moves the Peripatericks to require this ſo exa& rotundity 
in the Catleſtial bodies. 


S1n v L. The Cacleſtial bodies being ingenerable,inalterable,im- 
paſlible, 


DiatoGus 1. - 69 


able, 1mmortal, vc. they muſt needs be abſolute] y periectz and papo [br city 
their bc10g ablolute perteci,neceilarily unplies that there is in them hy aſcrrbed 14 
; * norte : 6 OP > 16% Croleitial bodies , 

all kinds of perteaion ; and conſequently,that their tigure be alſo |," Patighees 


perfect , that 15 to lay , ſpherical 3 and abſolutely and pertcly tics. 
{pherical , and not rough and irregular. 

Saiv. And this incorruptibility , from whence do you prove 
4 
7 S1Me Ll. Immediately by its freedom from contraries, and me- 
diately , by its ſimple circular motion. 

S aL v. So that; by what I gather from your dilcourle , in ma- The rue & et 
king the eflence of the Caleſtial bodies to be incorruptible, inal- o” ingot rang” 
terable, @vc, there is no need of rotundity as a cauſe , or requi- fender Juvdbis. | 
ſite 3 for if this ſhould caule inalterability , we might at our plea- Z 
ſure make wood, wax, and other Elementary matters, incorrup- 
tible, by reducing them to a ſpherical figure. | 

SinPt. Andisit not maniteſt thata ball of Wood will better 
and longer be preſerved, than an oblong , or other angular fi- 
gure , made of a like quantity of the ſame wood. 

SAaLlv. Thisis moſt certain , but yet it doth not of corruptible 
become incorruptible , but {till remains corruptible, though of a 
much longer duration. Therefore you muſt note, that a thing cor- corrupribuliry ad- 
ruptible , 18 capable of being more or lefſe ſuch , and we may me of more or 

$4 X eſſe; ſo dath not 
properly ſay this is lefſe corruptible than that ; as for example, the ;,co,;,1ib4iy. 
Zaſper, than the Fretra Sirens ; but incorruptibility admits not 
of more, or lefle, fo as that it may be ſaid this is more incorrupt- 
ble than that, if both be incorruptible and eternal. The diver- 74. p/ectio» of 
fity of figure therefore cannot operate : ſave onely in matters ca- figre » operarer 


» 6 . K | C ible bo- 
pable of more or lefle duration ; but in the eternal , which can- + Bag / Hg in the 


not be other than equally eternal » the operation of figure ceaſcth. eter». 
And therefore , ſince the Carleſtial matter is not incorruptible by 
figure , but otherwayes no man needs to be fo {ſolicitous for thi 
perfe& (phericity ; for if the matter be incorruptible , let it have 

what figure it will , it ſhall be alwayes ſuch. 

SaG 8. But 1 am conlidering another thing , and ſay , that if #1 fpberica! (- 
we ſhould grant the ſpherical figure a faculty of conferring incor- £7 coxferrerh e- 
ruptibility, all bodies of whatſoever figure , would be incorrupti- aan Fa Joh 
ble; foralmuch as if the rotund body be incorruptible , corrupti- 
bility would then ſubſiſt in thoſe parts which alter the perfed& ro- 
tundity ; as for inſtance, there is in a Dre a body pertectly round, 
and, as {uch, incorruptible ; therefore it remaineth chat thoſe an- 
gles be corruptible which cover and hide the rotundiy ; fo that 
the moſt that could happen , would be, thatthole angles, and 
(to (ſo (peak) excreſcencies, would corrupt. But if we proceed to a 
more inward confideration , that in thoſe parts alfo towards the 
angles, there are compriſed other leſſer bals of the ſame matter ; 
and 


Atether of Pearl Perſpicuous parts of the ſaid Moon, conformable to which the like 


accommodated to 
imit ate the appa= 
rent urevenneſſes 
of the Moons ſur» 
face. 


G. Garirtzus, his Syſteme. 
and therefore they alſo, as being round , mult be alſo InCorrup. 
tible ; and likewiſe in the remainders, which environ thele eight 
lefler Spheres , a man may underſtand that there are others : {6 
that in the end, reſolving the whole Dze into innumerable balls, 
it muſt neccfſarily be granted incorruptible. And the lame dif. 
courſe and reſolution may be made in all other figures. 

Sar v. Your method in making the concluſion , forif ». yg. a 
round Chryſtal were, by reaſon of its figure,incorruptible; namely, 
received from thence a taculy of reſiſting all internal and external 
alterations, we ſhould not find, that the joyning to it other Chry. 
ſtal , and reducing it v. g. into a Cube , would any whit alter it 
within, or without; ſo as that it would thereupon become lefle 
apt to reſiſt the new ambient , made of the ſame matter , thanit 
was to reſiſt the other, of a matter different 3 and eſpecially, if 
it be true, that corruption is generated by contraries , as Ari- 
ſtotle ſaith 3 and with what can you encloſe that ball of Cryſtal, 
that is lefſe contrary to it, than Cryſtal it ſelf ? But we are not a+ 
ware how time flies away 3 and it will be roo late before we come 
to an end of our diſpute , if we ſhould make fo long diſcourſes, 
upon every particular 3 beſides our memories are ſo confounded 
in the multiplicity of notions , that I can very hardly recal to 
mind the Propotiiions , which I propoled in order to Simplicins, 
for our conſideration. | 

Sine. I very well remember them: And as to thus particulac 
queſtion of the montuoſity of the Moon, there yet remains uns 
anſwered that which 1 have alledged , as the cauſe , {and which 
may very well ſerve for a ſolution) of that Phenomenon , laying, 
thac it is an illuſion proceeding from the parts of the Moon, be- 
ing unequally opacous, and perſpicuous. 

Sacr Even now, when Simplicins aſcribed the apparent Pro- 
tnberancies or unevenneſles of the Moon (according to the opinion 
of a certain Peripatetick his friend) to the diverſly OPaCcous , and 


i[luſjons are ſeen in Cryſtal, and Jems of divers kinds, I bethought 
my ſelf of a matter much more commodious for the repreſenting 
{uch cffeas; which is luch, that I verily believe , that that Philoſo- 
pher would give any price for it; and it is the mother of Pearl, which 
is wrought into divers figures, and though it be brought-ro an ex- 
rreme evenneſle, yet it ſeemeth to the eye in ſeveral parts , ſo vari- 
ouſly hollow and knotty , that we can ſcarce credit our feeling of 
their evenneſle. 

SAaLv. This invention is truly ingenious ; and that which hath 
not been done already , may be done in time to come ; and it 
there have been produced other Jems, and Cryſtals , which have 


nothing to do with the illuſions of the mother of Pearl, theſe _ 
c 


DriatoGue, L JT 


be producedallo ; 1 tle mean time , that I may not preyent any 

one, I will ſuppretic che anlwer which might be given , and one] 

for this rime berake my felt to latizhe the objections brought by 

Simplicins. L lay therefore , that this reaſon of yours 1s too ge- 

neral, and as you apply it not toall the appearances one by one ; 

which are een in the Moon, and for which my {elf and others 

arc induced to hold it mountainous, I believe you will not find 

any one chat will be Jatisfied with {uch a doGtrine 3 nor canT think, 

that either You , or the Author himſelf , tind in it any greater 

quierude, than in any other thing wide from the purpolc. Of the ;;..,...,... 
very many leveral appearances which are {ven night by night in <cmmeſus of 14 
the courle of Moon, you cannot imitate ſo much ag one, by making #490 vis - 
a Ball at your choice, more or lels opacous and per{picuous, and me n+ !c(; ova: 
chat is of a polite ſuperticies ; whereas on the contrary, one may ©, © 77 pion): 
nake Balls of any (olid matter whatſoever, that is not tran{parent, it.» 17.9, 
which onely with eminencies and cavities, and by receiving the i]- /74b/e with ay 
Jumination ſeveral ways, ſhall repreſent the ſame appearances and OPT 
mutations to an hair, which from hour to hour are diſcovered in ;-,,.,., ad 
the Moon. In them you ſhall ſee the ledges of Hills expoſed to ce: from which the 
the Suns light, to be very ſhining, and afrer them the projeftions oct Bars 7 
of their ſhadows very obicure 3 you ſhall ſee them greater and leſs, MED 
according as the laid eminencies ſhall be more or leſs diſtant from 
the confines which diſtinguiſh the parts of the Moon illuminated, 
from the obſcure : you ſhall fee the ſame term and confine, not 
equally diſtended, as it would be if the Ball were poliſh'd, but 
craggie and rugged. You ſhall ſee beyond the ſame term, in the 
dark parts of the Moon many bright prominencies, and diſtia& 
from the reſt of the illuminations : you ſhall ſee the ſhadows a- 
foreſaid, according as the illumination gradually riſeth, to demi 
niſh by degrees, till they wholly diſappear 3 nor are there any of 
them to be ſeen when the whole Hemiſphere is enlightned. A- 
gain on the contrary, 1n the lights paſſage towards the other He- 
miſpherc of the Moon, you ſhall again obſerve the ſame eminen- 
cies that were marked, and you ſhall (ce the projetions of their 
ſhadows to be made a contrary way and to decreaſe by degrees : 
of which things, once more I {ay, you cannot ſhew me ſo much as 
one in yours that are opacous and per{picuous. 

SaGr- One of them certainly he may imitate, namely, that of 
the Full-Moon, when by reaſon of its being all illuminated, there 
15 not to be ſeen either ſhadow, or other thing, which receiveth 
any alteration from its eminencies and cavities. But I beſeech 
you, Salvtatis, let us ſpend no more time on this Argument, for 
a perlon that hath had but the patience to make obſervation of but 
one or tivo Lunations, and 1s not (atisfied with this moſt lenfible 
truth, may well be adjudged void of all judgment 3 and upon 


fuch 


72 G. Gat11t xus, bis Syſeme. 


ſuch why ſhould we throw away our time and breath in yain ? 

S1mp1. I muſt confeſs I have not made the obfervarions, for 
that I never had ſo much curioſity, or the Inſtruments proper for 
the buſineſs 3 but I will not fail ro do it. In the mean time, we 
may leave this queſtion in ſuſpenſe, and pals to that point which 
follows, producing the morives inducing you to think that the 
Earth may refle& the light of the Sun no leſs forceably than the 
Moon, for it ſeems to me ſo obſcure and opacous, that I judg ſuch 
an effe& altogether impoſlible. 

Sarv. The cauſe for which you repute the Earth unapt for 
illumination, may rather evince the contrary : And would it not 
be ſtrange, Simplicins, if I ſhould apprehend your diſcourſes bet- 
ter than you your (elf ? 

S1my1. Whether 1 argue well orill, it may be, that you ma 
better underſtand the ſame than 1; but be it ill or well that 1 
diſcourſe, I ſhall never belicve that you can penetrate what I mean 
better than I my felt. 

Sarv. Well, I will make you believe the ſame preſently. Tell 
me a little, when the Moon 1s near the Full, fo that it may be ſeen 
by day, and alſo at midnight, at what do you think it more ſplen- 

* did, by day or by night? | 
Thi Moon ap SIMPL By night, without all compariſon. And methinks 
pears brghier by the Moon refembleth that pillar of Clouds and pillar of Fire, 
»ght chant) 49) which guided the Iſraelites ; which at the preſence of the Sun, 
appeared like a Cloud, but in the night was very glorious. Thus 
h, The een - I have by day obſerved the Moon amidſt certain ſmall Clouds, 


time, i like to @ juſt as if one of them had been coloured white, but by night it 
Uutle cloud. ſhines with much ſplendor. 


Sarv. So that if you had never happened to ſee the Moon, 


ſave onely in the day time, you would not have thought it more 
ſhining than one of thoſe Clouds. 


Sine. 1 verily believe I ſhould nor. 

Sa1lv. Tell me now; do you believe that the Moon is really 
more ſhining in the night than day, or that. by ſome accident it 
ſeemeth ſo ? 

S1ny1. Iam of opinion, that it reſplends in it ſelf as much in 
the day as night, but that its light appears greater by night, be- 
cauſe we behold it in the dark mantle of He-ven; and in the da 
time, the whole Atmoſphere being very clear, ſo that ſhe little 
exceedeth it in luſtre, ſhe ſeems to us much leſs bright. 

SaLlv. Now tell me; have you ever at midnight ſeen the Ter- 
reſtrial Globe illuminated by the Sun ? 

\ S1nmyL-. This ſeemeth to me a queſtion not to be ask'd, unleſs 
in jeſt, or of ſome perſon known to be altogether void of ſenſe. 

Salv. No, no; I eſteem you to be a very rational man, _ 

0 


DratoGue. I. - 74 


Jo ack the queſtion ſeriouſly 3 and therefore aniwer me : and if 
afterwards you ſhall think that I ſpeak impertinently, I will be 
content to be the ſenſeleſs man: for hes much more a tvyl who 
;ntcrrogates ſimply, than he ro whom the queſtion 1s pur. 

$1»y1-. If then you do not think me altogethe: timple, take 
it for granted that I have anſwered you already, and ſaid, that it 
iz impoſſible, that one that is upon the Earth, as we are, ſhould ſee 
by night that part of the Earth where it 15 day, namely, that is 1l- 
luminated by the Sun. 

Sa1v- Therefore you have never ſcen the Earth cnlightned, 
ſave onely by day ; but you ſee the Moon to ſhine allo in the 
dead of night. And this is the Cauſe, Simplicixs, which makes 
you bclieve that the Earth doth not ſhine like the Moon; but if 
you could ſee the Earth illuminated, whilſt you were in ſome dark 
place, like our night, you would fee it ſhine brighter than the 
Moon. Now if you deſire that the compariſon may proceed 
well, you muſt compare the light of the Earth, with thar of the 
Moon ſeen in the day time, and not with the ſame by night : for 


it is not in our power to {ce the Earth illuminated, fave onely in 
the day. Is it not ſo? 


$1ny Ll. Soit ought to be. 

Sa1v. And foralſmuch as you your ſelf have already confeſſ:d 
to have {cen the Moon by day among {ome little white Clouds, | 
and very nearly, as to its aſpect, reſembling one of them ; you 6id , , i; I 
thereby grant, that thoſe Clouds, which yer are Elementary apr chan the Moon | 
matters, are as apt to receive i[|umination, as the Moon , yea ” 4 SI 
more, if you will but call to mind that you have ſometimes ſeen 7 
ſome Clouds of vaſt greatneſs, and as perfe& white as the Snow 3 
and there is no queſtion, but that if ſuch a Cloud could be con- 
tinued fo luminous in the deep of night, it would illuminate the 
places near about it, more than an hundred Moons. If therefore 
we were aſſured that the Earth is illuminated by the Sun, like one 
of thoſe Clouds, it would be undubitable, but that it would be no 
le(s ſhining rhan the Moon. Bur of this there is no queſtion to 
be made, 1n regard we ſee thoſe very Clouds in the abſence of 
the Sun, to remain by night, as obſcure as the Earth : and thar 
which is more, theie is not any one of us, but hath ſeen many 
times ſome ſuch Clouds Jow, and far off, and queſtioned whether 
they were Clouds or Mountains : an evident fign that the Moun- 
tans arc no leſs luminous than thoſe Clouds. 


A wall ilumina- 


SaGR. But what needs more diſcourſe ? See yonder the Moon t4 by the Sun, 
15 riſen, and more than half of it illuminated ; ſee there that wall, y * ang Fant wy 
on which the Sun ſhineth ; retire a little this way, ſo that you fee leſs thax ir, 
the Moon {iideways with the wall : look now; which of them 


ſhews more lacid ? No not you ſee, thatif there is any advantage, 
rhe 


4 G. Gar1txus, bis Syfeme. 


the wall hath it ? The Sun ſhincth on that wall ; from thence it 

The third refle-"y5, reverberated upon the wall of the Hall, from thence it's refle. 

A 60 17 Ged upon that chamber, fo rhar it falls on it at the third refle&ion: 

the firſt of the and 1 am very certain, that there is in that place more light, than 
pray if the Moons light bad directly faln upon it. 

Simpy. Bur this | cannot believe; for the illumination of the 
Moon, eſpecially when it is at the full, is very great. 

;, Sacs. It ſeemeth great by reaſon of the circumjacent dark 
Feng bd places; but abſolutely it is not much, and 1s leſs than that of the 
that of the rvi- t(ylight half an hour after the Sun is {et ; which is manifeſt, be. 
_ cauſe you ſee not the ſhadows of the bodies illuminated by the 

Moon till then, to begin to be diſtinguiſhed on the Earth. Whe. 
ther, again, that third refle&ion upon that chamber, illuminates 
more than the firſt of the Moon, may be known by going thether, 
and reading x Book, and afterwards ſtanding there in the night 
by the Moons light, which will ſhew by which of chem lights one 
may read more or leſs plainly, but I believe without further tryal, 
that one ſhould (ee lets diſtinGly by this later. 

S atv. Now, Simplicins, (1t haply you be ſatisfied ) you may 
conceive, as you your (elf know very well, that the Earth doth 
ſhine no leſs than the Moon; and the only remembring you of ſome 
things, which you knew of your ſelf, and Jearn'd not of me, hath 
aſſured you thercof : for 1 taught you not that the Moon ſhew 
lighter by night than by day, but you underſtood it of your elf; 
as alſo you could tell me thacr a little Cloud appeareth as lucid a; 
the Moon : you knew alſo, that the illamination of the Earth can- 
not be ſeen by night ; and in a word, you knew all this, without 
knowing that you knew it. So that you have no reaſon to be ſcru- 


pulous of granting, that the datk parr of the Earth may illuminate 
the dark part of the Moon, with no lefs a light than that where- 
with the Moon illuminates the obſcurities of the night, yea rather 
ſo much the greater, inaſmuch as the Earth is forty times bigger 
than the Moon. 


S;invLi. I muſt confels that I did believe, that that ſecondary 
light had been the natural light of the Moon. 

Sar v-. And this alſo you know of your ſelf, and perceive not 
thar you know it. Tell me, do not you know without teaching) 
that the Moon ſhews it ſelf more bright by night than by day, in 

Fawn 27 br reſpect of the obſcurity of the ſpace of the ambient? and conſe- 
in an obſer am- quently, do you not know in genere, that every bright body ſhews 
pin the clearer, by how much the ambient is obſcurer ? 

S1mpt. This I know very well. 

' Sar v. When the Moon is horned, and that ſecondary light 
ſeeme th ro you very bright, is it not ever nigh the Sun, and cony 
ſequent]y, in the light of rhe crepsſculun, (twilight? ) 


$SinegL 


DiatoGgus [; 


SineL. Itis ſo; and I have oftentimes wiſh'd that the Air 
would grow thicker, that I might be able to ſee that ſame light 
more plainly z bur it ever diſappeared before dark night. 

Satv. You know then very certainly, that in the depth of 
night, that light would be more conſpicuous. 

S;meLl. | dolo; and alſo more than that, if one could but 
take away the great light of the creſcent illuminated by the San, 
the preſence 0 which much obſcureth the other leſſer. 

Sarv. Why, doth it not ſometimes come to pals, that one may 
in a very dark night {ce the whole face of the Moon, without be- 
ing at all illuminated by the Sun ? 

S1inyLi. | know not whether this ever happeneth , fave onely 
in the total Ecclipſes of the Moon. 

Saiv. Why, at that time this its light would appear very 
clear, being in a moſt obſcure medium, and not darkned by the 
clarity of the luminous crelcents : but in that pbſition, how light 
did it appear-to you ? 

$1My1. I have ſometimes ſeen it of the colour of braſs, and a 
little whitiſh 3 but at other times it hath been fo obſcure, that I 
have wholly loſt the fight of it. 

Sai v. How then can that light be ſo natural, which you ſee ſo 
cleer in the clole of the twilight, notwithſtanding the impediment 
of the great and contiguous ſplendor of the creſcents 3 and which 
again, in the more oblcure time of night, all other light removed, 
appears not at all ? 

S1neL. Ihave heard of ſome that believed that ſame light to 
be participated to theſe creſcents from the other Stars, and in par- 
ticular from Venus, the Moons neighbour. 

Satv. And this likewiſe is a vanity ; becauſe in the time of 
its total ob(curation, it ought to appear more ſhining than ever ; 
for you cannot ſay, that the ſhadow of the Earth intercepts the 
fight of Venns, or the other Stars. But to ſay true, it 1s not at 
that inſtant wholly deprived thereof, for that the Terreſtrial He- 
miſphere, which in tha time looketh towards the Moon, is that 
where it is night, that is, an intire privation of the light of the Sun. 
| Andif you but diligently obſerve, you will very ſenſibly perceive, 

that like as the Moon, whe it is ſharp-horned, doth give very little 
light to the Earth 3. and according as in her the parts illumi- 
nated by the Suns light do encreaſe : ſo likewiſe the ſplendor ro 
our ſeeming encreaſeth, which from her is refle&ed towards us ; 
thus the Moon, whilſt it is ſharp-forked, and that by being between 
the Sun and the Earth, it diſcovereth a very great part of the Ter- 
reftrial Hemiſphere illuminated, appeareth very clear : and depart- 
ing from the Sun , and paſſing towards the *Quadrature , you 
may lee the ſaid light by degrees to grow dim 3 and after the 


K 2 Quadra- 


*By the Moons two 
Quadratures yow- 
are to underſtand 


its firſt and la#t 
quarters , as As 


ſtrologer: call chem 


G. Garirt=us, his Sylome, 


Quadrature, the ſame appears very weak, becauſe it continuall; 
loſeth more and more oi the view of the luminous part of the 
Earth : and yet it ſhould lucceed quite contrary, 1t that light were 
its own, or communicated to it from the Stars; for then we ſhould 
ſee it in the depth of night, and in {o very dark an ambient. 

S1my1. Stay alittle; for I juſt now remember, that I have 
read in a little modern trac, full of many novelties ; © T hat this 
« ſecondary light is not derived from the Stars, nor innate in the 
« Moon, and leaſt of all communicated by the Earth, bur that it i; 
The ſecondary © received from the {ame illumination of rhe Sun, which, the ſub- 
light of = Afoon &« ſtance of the Lunar Globe being ſomewhat tranſparent, pene- 
Jas ogy « trateth thorow all its body ; but more livelily illuminateth the 
; « ſuperficies of the Hemiſphere expolecd to the rays of the Sun: 
« and its profundity imbuing, and (as I may lay) iwallowing that 
« light, after the manner of a cloud or chryſtal, tranimirs ir, and 
« renders it vilibly lucid. And this (if I remember aright) he 
> « proveth by Authority, Experience and Reaſon ; citing Cleomedes, 
« Vitellion, Macrobixs, and a certain other modern Author :. and 
« adding, That it 1s {een by experience ro ſhine moſt in the day; 
« neareſt the ConjunCtion, that is, when it is horned, and'is chiefly 
« bright abour its limb. And he farther writes, That in the Sola 
« Eccliples, when it is under the a of the Sun, it may be feen 
« tranſlucid, and more elpecially towards its utmoſt Circle. And 
« 1n the next place, for Arguments; as I think, he faich, Thatir nt 
= . « being able to derive that light cither from the Earth, or from rhe 
| « Stars, or from it ſelf, it neceſſarily follows, that it cometh from 
« the Sun. Befides that, if you do bur grant this ſuppoſition, one 
« may eaſily give convenient: reaſons for all che particulars that 
*< occur. For the realon why that fecundary light ſhews more 
« lively towards the outmoſt limb, is, the ſhortne(s of the {pace 
« thar the Suns rays hath to penetrate, in regard that of the lins 
« which paſs through a circle, the greateſt is chat which paſſetl 
« through the centre, and of the reſt, thoſe: which are fartheſt fron 
«it, are always le(s than thoſe that are ngarer. From the ſame 
« principle, he ſaith, may be ſhewn why the ſaid light doth not 
«-much diminiſh. And laſtly, by this way the cauſe is aſligned 
<« whence it comes, that that ſame more ſhining circle about the 
<< utmoſt edge of the Moon, is ſeen at the time of the Solar Ec- 
« cliple, in that parr which lyeth juſt under the Diſc:4s of the Sun, 
« but not in that which is befide the Diſcs : which happeneth 
*« becaule the rays of the Sun pals direly to our eye, through the 
« parts of the Moon underneath : but as for the parts which are 

<« belides 1t, they fall betides the eye. ; 
Sarv. If this Philoſopher had been the firſt Author of this 0 
pinion, I would not wonder that he ſhou]d be fo afteGionate- ta it 
as 


t 
1s 


Dialogue, |. 


as to have received it for truth; but borrowing it from others, | 
cannot find any rcalon (ufficient to excuſe him tor aot perceiving 
jr jallacies 3 and c{pecially after he had heard the true cauſe of 
char cle, and had it in his power to ſatisfic himlclt by a thouſand 
expcruments, and maniteſt circumſtances, that the ſame proceeded 
from the refleRion of the Earth,and from nothing el{e:and the more 
this [peculation makes [ometbing to be delired, in the judgment of 
this Auchor, and of a]l thole who give no credit to it : fo much the 
more doth their not having underſtood and remembred it, excuſe 
tholc more rece(s Antients,, who, I am very certain, did they now 
underſtand 1t, would without the leaſt repugnance admut thereof. 
Andif I may treely tell you what I think , I cannot believe but 
that this Modern doth in his heart belicve it ; bur I rather. think, 
that the conceit he ſhould not be the tirſt Author thereof , did a 
liccle move him to endeavour to ſuppreſle it , or to dilparage it at 
[caſt amongſt che ſimple , whoſe number we know tq be very 
great 3 aud many there are , who much more afte& the nume- 


rous applauds of the pzople , than the approbation of a few not 
vulgar judgments. 


Sa G8. Hold, good Salwiatas , for me thinks, 1 ſee that you 
co not the way to hit the true mark in this your diſcourſe, for theſe 
that * contound all propriety', know allo how to make themſelves 
Authors of , others Inventions. , provided they be not fo ſtale; 
and publick. 1a the Schools and -Market-places, as that they are more 
then notorious to every one. 

Sarv. Hal well aimed, you blame me for roving from the 
point in hand 3 but what have you to do with Schools and Mar- 
kets? Iz1t not all oge whether opinions and inventions be new to 
men, or the.mcn new to them ? If you * contend about the e- 
ſtcem of the Foundexs af Sciences > whichin all times do ſtart up, 
you may make your {elf their inventor , even to the Alphabet it 
telt, and ſo gain admiration amongſt thar illicerate rabble ; and 
though 1n procefſe of rime your craft ſhould be perceived , that 
would bat little prejudice your deſignc ; for that others wonld 
luccecd them 1a maintaining the number of your fautors; but ler 
us return to prove to Simplicixs the invalidity of the reaſons of his 
modern Author , in which rhere axe ſeveral falfities, inconſcquen- 
cies, and incredible Paradoxes. And firſt, it is falle that this ſe- 
condary light is clearer about the utmoſt limb than in the middle 
parts, loas to form , as it were , a ring or cucle more bright than 
the reſt of its [Pace or contence. True it is, indeed , that looking 
on the Moon at the rime of ewilight , at firſt fight there is the re- 
{emblance of ſuch x circle , but by an illuſion ariſing from the di- 
verlity of confines that bound the Moons Diſcus , which are con- 
fuſed by means of thi; lecondary light 3 foraſmuch as on the part 
>. towards 


b. 


T7 


A 


* Tendono le pare- 
re al coinmu'nc. 


[t; all one whe- 

ther opinions be 
new to men, or men 
new 19 021115. 
* Conteſt are talily 
rendercd jn - the 
La:inz Tranſlation 
Conteniarec. 


7 he ſcrondary 
lizht of the Aon 
appears in form of 
a Ring, that ut:9 
ſay % bright in the 
extreme circumte- 
rence, and not On 


the midſt and why> 


c 


-Z G. Gar1L «us, bis Syſleme. 


towards the Sun it is bounded by the lucid horns of the Moon, 

and on the other part, its confining term is the obſcure traR of the 

twilight ; whoſe relation makes us think the candor of the Moons . 

'L (45 to be ſo much the clearer 3 the which happens to be ob- 

fuſcated in the oppoſite part , by the greater clarity of the creſ- 

| cents; but if this modern Author had eflaied to make an iater- 

The way 190b- poſition between the eye and the primary ſplendor , by the ridg of 

feng _— ſome houſe , or ſome other ſcreen , fo as to have left viſible only 

No. the grole of the Moon , the horns excluded , he mighr have ſeen 
it all alike luminous. | 57 #Y 

Sinp1, I think, now I remember , that he writes of his 
making uſe of ſuch another Artifice , to hide from us the falſe 
Incidum. 

Sarv. Oh! how is this (as I believed) inadvertency of his, 
changed into a lic , bordering on raſhnefle 3 for that every one 
may frequently make proof of the contrary. That in the next 

The Moms Diſ- place , at the Suns Eclipſe , the Moons Diſcus is ſeen otherwayes 
ns iu « ſo'® *- than by privation, I much doubt , and ſpecially when the F- 


clipſe can be ſeen © f ” . 
oxely by privation. Clipſe 18 not total , as thoſe muſt neceſſarily have been , which 


were obſerved by the Author ; but if alſo he ſhould have diſcoye. 
red ſomewhat of light , this contradis not , rather favoureth our 
opinion ; for that at ſucha time, the whole Terreſtrial Hemi 
ſphere illuminared by the Sun, is oppoſite to the Moon, -ſo that 
although the Moons ſhadow doth obſcure a part thereof , yet this 
is very ſmall in compariſon of that which remains i}luminated. 
That which he farther adds , that in this caſe, the part of the 
limb, lying under the Sun , doth appear very Jucid , bur that 
which lyeth beſides it , not ſo; and that to proceed from the co- 
ming of" the ſolar rayes dircaly through that part to the eye , but 
not through this, is really one of thoſe fopperies, which diſco: 
ver the other fiftions, of him which relates them : For if it be 
requiſite to the making a lecondary Jight viſible in the lunar Difſ- 
cus , that the raycs of the Sun came direQly through it to our 
eyes, doth not this pitiful Philoſopher perceive, that we ſhould ne- 
ver ſee this {ame {econdary light, ſave onely at the Eclipſe of the 
Sun? Andif apartonely of the Moon, far leſle than half a de- 
gree , by being remote from the Suns Diſcus , can defle& or de- 
viate the rayes of the Sun, ſo that they arrive not at our-eye ; 
what ſhall it do when it 1s diſtant twenty or thirty degrees , as itis 
at its firſt apparition? and what courſe ſhall the rayes of the Sun 
keep » which are to paſle thorow the body of the Moon , that 
The Author of the they may find out our eye ? This man doth go ſucceflively confi- 
_ Y £nc1%/” dering what things ought to be , that they may ſerve his purpoſe; 
the things to his but doth not gradually proceed , accommodating his conceits to 
purpoſes , 4n4 2 the things 2 as really they are, As for inſtance, to make the light 


hu purpoſes to the 
ebings, 


Driartrocus I. 79 
of the Sun capable to penetrate the ſubſtance of the Moon , he 
makes her in part diaphanous, as 15 v. g. the tran{parence of a cloud, 
or cryſtal : - but I know nor what he would think of fuch a tran- 
ſparcncy 3 in caſe the ſolar raycs were to paſlea depth of clouds 
of above two thouſand miles ; bur ler it be ſuppoſed that he 
ſhould boldly anſwer , that might well be in the Coleſtial, which 
are quite other things from theſe our Elementary, impure, and 
feculent bodies ; and let us convict his error by fuch wayes, as 
admit him no reply , or (to ſay better) ſubter-fuge. If he will 
maintain , that the ſubſtance of the Moon is diaphanons , he 
muſt ſay that 1t 15 ſo, whileſt that the rayes of rhe Sun are to pe- 
netrate its whole profundity , that is, more than two thouſand 
miles; but that if you oppole unto them onely one mile , or 
Icfſe, they ſhould no more penetrate that , than they penetrate 
one of our mountains. 
Sack. You put me in mind of a man , who would have told = 
me a ſecret how to correſpond, by means of a certain ſympathy of 667 yrs 


that would ſell 4 
magnetick needles, with one, that ſhould be two or three thou- cerram ſecrer for 


ſand miles diſtant 3 andI telling him , that I would willingly buy Fant, 
the ſame , but that Idefired firſt to ſee the experiment thereof , « thouſand mites 
and that it did (uffice me to make it , I being in one Chamber,and 

he in the next 4 he anſwered me, that in fo ſmall a diſtance one 

could not ſo well perceive the operation 3 whereupon I turn'd hm 

going , telling him, that 1had no mind, at that time, to take a 

journey unto Grand Cairo , or to Muſcovy, to make the cxperi- 

ment; bar that, if he would go himſelf, I would perform the 

other part , ſtaying in Venice. But let us hear whither the dedu- 

Gion of our Author tendeth , and what neceſſity there is, that hc 

muſt grant the matter of the Moon to be moſt perforable by the | 
rayes of the Sun, in a depth of two thouſand miles , but more | 
OPacous than one of our mountains, in a thickneſle of one mile 
onely. 

SA Lv. The very mountains of the Moon themſelves are a 
proof thereof , which percuſled on one fide of the Sun, do caſt 
on the contrary ſide very dark ſhadows , terminate, and more di- 
ſtint by much, than the ſhadows of ours; bur had theſe moun- 
tains been diaphanous, we could never have come to the know- 
ledg of any unevennetle in the ſuperficies of the Moon , nor have 
leen thoſe luminous montuoſities diſtinguiſhed by the terms which 
leparate the Jucid parts from the dark : much lefſe, ſhould we ſce 
this ſame term {o diſtin , if it were true, that the Suns light did 
Penetrate the whole thicknefſe of the Moon ; yea rather, accord- 
Ing tothe Authors own words , we ſhould of neceflity diſcern the 
paſlage, and confine, between the part of the Sun ſeen, and the 
Part not ſeen , to bs very confuſed , and mixt with light and 


dark- 


82. G. Gartrt=zus, his Syſleme. 
darkneſſc ; for that that matrer which admits the paſſage of the 
Suns rayes thorow a ſpace of two thouſand miles , mult needs he 
ſo travſparent , that it would very weakly reſiſt them in a hun- 
dredth , or leflcr part of that thickneſle 3 nevertheleſſe, the term 
which ſeparateth the part il|uminared from the obſcure , 1s inci. 
dent, and as diſtin, as white is diſtinct from black ; and e- 
ſpecially where the Scion paſſerh through the part of the Moon, 
that is naturally more clear and montanous 3 but where the o1d 
ſpots do part, Which are certain plains, that by means of their 
ſpherical inclination , receive the rayes of the Sun obliquely, 
there the term is not ſodiſtia&t, by reaſon of the more dimme 11. 
lumination. Thar, laſtly, which he faith , how that the ſecondary 
light doth not diminiſh and languiſh , according as the Moon en- 
creaſeth , bur conſerveth it ſelf continually in the ſame efficacy; 
15 moſt falſe; nay it is hardly ſeen in the quadrature, when, on 
the contrary , it ſhould appear more ſplendid, and be viſible after 
the crepuſculum in the dark of night. Ler us conclude therefore, 
that the Earths reflection is very ſtrong upon the Moon ; and that, 
which you ought more'to eſteem , we may deduce from thence an- 
| other admirable congruity berween the Moon and Earth ; name- 
The Earthmay > Ty, thar if 1t be true, the Planets operate uponthe Earth by their 
CER motion and light , the Earth may probably be no lefle porent in 
d1e1, with its gt» Operating reciprocally upon them with the ſame light , and perad- 
venture , motion alſo. And though it ſhould not move, yer may 
it retain the ſame operation 3 becauſe, as it hath been proved al- 
ready , the aQtion of the light is the ſelf ſame , I mcan of the light 
of the Sun refleged ; and morion doth nothing , fave only vary 


the aſpe&s , which fall out in the fame manner , whether we make 
the Earth move, and the Sun ſtand (il , or the contrary. 


S1iny1. None of the Philoiophers are found to have {aid, that 
theſe inferiour bodies operate ou the Curleſiial , nay, Ar:ſtotleat 
firmes the dire& contrary. 

Sarlv. AriStotle and the reſt , who knew not that the Earth and 
Moon mutually illunioated each orhcr , are to be excuſed ; but 
they would juſtly deſerve our cenfure , it whileſt they deſire that 
we ſhould grant and believe with them , thac the Moon operateth 
upon the Earth with light , they ſhould deny to us , who have 
raught them that the Earth illuminates the Moon , the operation 
the Earth hath on the Moon. | 

S1my1. In ſhort, I find in my ſelf a great unwillingnefle to 
admit this commerce , which you would perſ{wade me to be be- 
twixt the Earth and Moon , placing it, as we ſay , amongſt the 
number of the Stars 3 for it there were nothing elſe , the great 
ſeparation and diſtance between it and the Carleſtial bodies , doth 
mn my opinion neceſſarily conclude a vaſt diſparity between them. 

SALTY» 


Dratccue. I. or 
Satv. See Simplicins what an inveterare attection and radica- 
e<d opinion can do , fince it is ſo powerful , that it makes you think 
that thole very things tavour you , which you produce againſt 
our ſc!f. For it leparation and diſtance are accidents (utticicnt to 
perlwade with you a great diverſity of natures, it mnſt follow that 
proximity and contiguity import {imilitude. Now how much more Airy brewer 
neerer is the Moon to the Earth, than to any other of the Celeſtial on NN 7 ces 
Orbs? You mult acknowledy therefore,according to your own Con- vicmicy, 
ceſſion (and you ſhall have other Philolophers bear you company) 
that there 1s a very great affinity berwixt the Earth and Moon. 
Now let us proceed, and (ee whether any thing remains to be con- 
ſidered, touching thole objzeGtions which you made againſt the re- 
(emblances that are between thele rwo bodies. | | | 
Sie. Itreſts, that we ſay ſomething touching the ſolidity of 
the Moon , which I argued from irs being exquilite ſmooth and 
polite , and you ftom its montuolity, There is another ſcruple al- 
ſo comes into my mind , from an opinion which I have , that the 
Seas refleion ought by the equality of its ſurface, to be rendered 
fironger than that of the Earth , whoſe ſuperticies is ſo rough and 
OPacous. 
Sa1v. As to the firſt objzeQtion ; I ſay, that like as among the 
parts of the Earth, which all by their gravity ſtrive to approach the ,,,,. , f the 
neareſt they can poſſible to the center , ſome of them alwaycs are Lunar Glebe arge- 
more remote from it than the reſt, as the mountains more than nh. xg being 
the valleys, and that by reaſon of their ſolidity and firmneſſe : 
(for if rhey were of fluid, they would be even) fo the ſeeing ſome 
parts of the Moon to be elevated above the ſphericity of the low- 
er parts , argueth their hardnefle; for'it is probable that the mat- 
terof the Moon is reduced into a ſpherical form by the harmoni- 
ous conſpiration of all its parts to the ſame {enrenſe. Touching 
the ſecond doubt , my thinks that the particulars already obſerved 
to happen in the Looking-glaſles, may very well aſſure us;that the 
refle&ion of light comming from the-Sea , is far weaker than that 71, «,,, refl-- 
which cometh from Land ; underſtanding it alwayes of the #ion of lighe mach 
univerſal refle&ion ; for as to that particular, on which the wa- of ry Fes 
ter being calm , caſteth upon a determinate place , there is no 
doubt, but that he who ſhall ſiand in that place, ſhall ſee a very 
wh refle&ion in the water , but every . way elſe he ſhall ſee the 
urface of the Water more obſcure than that of the Land ;* and to Av experin-+4 
prove it to your ſenſes, let us. go into yonder Hall , and power Gon of ” NE 
forth a little water upon the Pavement. 'Tel] me now, doth not {fr clear han 
this wet brick ſhew more dull than the other dry ones ? Doubt- **«#f the £4nd. 
leſſe it doth , and will ſo appear , from what place ſoever you be- 
holdit, except one onely , and this is that way which the light 
cometh , that entereth in at yonder window ; go backwards 
therefore by a little and a little. L S1MeL. 


32 G, Gar1t «us, bis Syſeme. 


Sinpt. Herelfee the weſt part ſhine more than all the reſt of 
the pavement , and I ice that it ſo hapneth , becaule the refle- 
ion of the light which entcreth in at the window , cometh to. 
wards me. | 

S a L v. That moiſture hath done no more but filled thoſe little 
cavities which are ia the brick with water, and reduced irs {uper. 
ficies to an exact evenelſe ; whereupon the reflex rayes iſſue 
unitedly rowards one and the ſame place; bur the reſt of the 
pavement which 1s dry , hath its protuberances, thatis, an innu- 
merable variety of inclinations in its {malleſt particles; whereup. 
on the reflections of the light ſcatter towards all parts, but more 
weakly than if they had gone all united together ; and therefore, 
the ſame ſheweth almoſt all alike , bcheld leveral wayes, bur far 
leſſe clear than the moiſtned brick. I conclude at that the 
lurface of the Sea , beheld from the Moon, in like manner, as it 
would appear moſt cqual, (the I{lands and Rocks deduced) {o it 
would ſhew leſle clear than that of the Earth, which 1s montanons 
and uneven. And but that I would not ſeem , as the ſaying is, 
to harp too much on one ſtring, 1 could tell you that I have ob: 

z ſerved in the Moon that ſecondary light which I told you came to 
her from the refle&ion of the Ferreſtrial Globe , to be notably 
The ſecondary More clear two or three dayes before the conjunGtion , than after, 


light of the Moen that is, when we fee it before break of day in the Eaſt, than 
clearer before the 


' 
: 
þ 
' 
: 


conjunition , thay WIEN IT 18 ſeen at night after Sun-ſer in the Welt ; of which dif- 
after. ference the cauſe is, that the Terreſtrial Hemiſphere , which looks 
towards the Eaſtern Moon, hath little Sea, and muchLand , to 


wit, all Aſia , whereas, when it is in the Weſt , it beholds very 
great Seas, that is, the whole Atlantick Ocean as far as America: 
An Argument {ufficiently probable that the ſurface of the water 
appears leſſe ſplendid than that of the Earth. - 

S1MeLl- So that perhaps you believe , thoſe great ſpots diſco 
| vered in the face of the Moon , to be Seas, and the other clearer 
parts to be Land , or ſome ſuch thing ? 

$41 v. This which you ask me , is the beginning of thoſe in- 

congruities which I eſteem to be between the Moon and the 
Earth, out of which it is time to diſ-ingage our ſelves, for we 
have ſtayed too long in the Moon. Ifay therefore , that if there 
were in nature but one way onely, to make two ſuperficies illuſtra- 
ted by the Sun, to appear one more clear than the other , and 
that this were by the being of the one Earth , and the other Wa- 
ter 3 it would be neceflary to ſay that the ſurface of- the Moon 
were part earthy and part aquatick ; but becauſe we know many 
wayes to produce the ſame effect (and others there may be which 
we know not of ;) therefore I dare not affirm the Moon to con- 
Gſt of one thing more than another : It hath been ſeen alrcady 


that 


Dratocus. I. $3 

that a filveo plate boiled , being touchr with the Buruither , be- 
cometh of white obicure ; that the moiſt part of the Earth ſhews 
more obſcure than the dry 3 that in the tops of Hills , rhe woody 
parts appcar more gloomy than the naked and barren ; which 
hapnerh becaule there talleth very much ſhadow among the Trees, 
but the open places arc illuminated all over by the Sun. And this 
mixtion of ſhadow hath ſuch operation , that in tufred velvet, the 
filk which 1s cur, 1s of a far darker colour than that which is not 
cut » by means of the ſhadows diffuſed betwixt thred and thred, 
and a plain velvet ſhews much blacker than a Taftata, made of the 
ſame lilk- So that if there were in the Moon things which ſhould 
look like great \Woods, their aſpe& might repreſent unto us the 
ſpots which we dilcover ; alike difter@hce would be occaſioned, it 
there were Seas in her : and laſtly,nothing hindreth, but that thoſe 
{pots may really be of an obſcurer colour than the reſt ; for thus 
the ſnow makes the mountains ſhew brighter. That which is plain- 7h «b/curer 
ly oblerved in the Moon is, that its moſt obſcure parts are all partrof the Moon 

; b _— g X are plains, and the 
plains , with few riſes and bancks in them 3 though ſome there be; ,,... brigh; mms- 
the reſt which 1s of a brighter colour, is all full of rocks, moun- «in»: 
rains, hillocks of ſpherical and other figures; and in particular,round 
about the {pots are very great ledges of mountains. That the Long ledger of 
ſpots be plain {uperticies, we have afſuredproof , in that we ſec, P 3a Fae 
how that the term which diſtinguiſheth the part illuminated from Seen. 
the obicure , in crofling the {pots makes the interſe&ion even, but 
in the clear parts it ſhews all craggy and ſhagged. But I know not 
as yet whether this evenneſle of ſuperficies may be ſufficient of it 
ſelt alone , to make the obſcurity appear , and I rather think not. 
Belides, I account the Moon exceeding different from the Earth ; 
for although I imagine to my ſelf chat thoſe are not idle and dead 
Regions, yet I affirm not , that there are in them motion and life, There «re me 
much leſs that there are bred plants, animals or other things like "oye: Ne = 
to ours ; but, if ſach there be, they ſhould - nevertheleſs be very to our; , but if 
different, and remote from our imagination. And I am induced fo fries > 4g 
ro think, becauſe in the firſt place, I eſteem that the matter of the &.,, Lfforent. 
| Lunar Globe conſiſts not of Earth and Water ; and this alone 
lufficeth to take away the generations and alterations reſembling 
ours : but now ſuppoling that there were in the Moon, Water and The Moon »or 
Earth, yer would they not produce plants and animals like to _—_ voor 
ours ; and this for two principal reaſons : The firſt 1s, that unto' our Thoſe «ſpettr of 
produGtions there are required ſo many variable aſpe&s of the Sun, he oo _—y 
that without them they would all milcarry : now the habitudes of o»:, are net fo +» 
the Sun towards the Earth are far different from thoſe towards '** 
the Moon. We as to the diurnal 'jllumination, have, in the greater 
part of the Earth, every twenty four hours part day, and part 
night, which effe& in.the Moon is monethly : and that annual decli- 


Ph nation 


WA... 


TT 


84 G. Gar1txus, bis Syſkeme. 

Nawwal tithe nation and elevation of the Sun in the Zodiack, by which it pro- 
in the Moon are of duceth diverſity of Sealons, and inequality of dayes and nights, 
p Htennh ne” are finiſhed in the Moon 1n a moneth ; and whercas the Sun to n; 
ib: Sun aſe:ndetþ raſeth and declineth lo mach, that from the greateſt to the leaſt al- 
my mana ng nk titude, there is a difference of almoſt 4.7 degrees, for {o much is 
bares; ates +. the diſtance from one to the other Tropick ; this is in the Moon 
Eartbof forty ſe- but ten degrees only, or little more 3 namely, as much as the grez 
I, teſt Latitudes of the Dragon on each ſide the Ecliptick. Now 

conſider what effe& the Sun would have in the torrid Zone, ſhould 
it continually for fifteen dayes together beam forth its Rayes upon 
it; which without all queſtion would deſtroy plants , herbs, 
and living creatures : and if it ſhould chance that there were any 
production, it would be of litrbs, plants, and creatures very diffes 

There are no rent from thoſe which are now there. Secondly, I verily belieye 
rams in the 0%. that in the Moon there are no rains , for if Clouds ſhould gathet 

in any part thereof, as they do about the Earth, they would there- 
upon hide from our ſight ſome of thole things , which we with the 
Teleſcope behold in the Moon, and in a word, would ſome way of 
other change its Ph.enomenon,an eftc& which I could never by long 
and diligent obſervations diſcover ; but alwayes beheld it wn a 
even and pure ſerenity. 

S$aGcx. To this may be anſwered, either that there might be 
great miſts, or that it might rain in the time of their night, that is, 
when the Sun doth not illuminate it. | 

S a.L v. If other paſſages did but aſſure us, that there were ge: 
nerations in it like to ours, and that there was onely wanting the 
concourſe of rains, we might find out this, or ſome other tempe+ 
rament to ſerve inſtead thereof, as it happens in Egypt by the 1h- 
undation of Nzte : but not meeting with any accident, which cor: 
reſponds with ours,of many that have been ſought our for the pr6: 
duction of the like eftedas, we need not trouble our {elves to intrd: 
duce one alone ; and that alſo, not becauſe we have certain obſer- 
vation bf it, but for a bare non-repugnance that-we find thereit. 
Moreover, if I was demanded what my firſt apprehenfion, and putt 
natural reaſon difated to me concerning the produftion 'of thi 
like or unlike there above, I would alwayes reply , that they art 
moſt different; and to us altogether unimagmable, for ſo me thinks 
the riches of Natare ,, and the omiipotence of our Creator and 
Governour, do require. 

SaGk. lever accounted extraordinary madneflſe that of thoſe, 
who would make humane comprehenſion the meaſure of what na- 

— hath a power or knowledge to effe&t ; whereas on the con- 
perfelt knowledg EFATY There 15 nor any the leaſt effe& in Nature, which can be fully 


f nothing, wag underſtood by the moſt ſpeculative wits in the world. This thet 
ome believe they 


eterfand at 19 VAIh prefumprion'of knowing all, can take beginning from n6- 


things, thing 


Diatocus FE 85 
thing , anlefle from their never having known any thing ; for if 
one hath but once onely experienced the perte& knowledg of one 
onely thing , and but truly taſted what it is to know , he ſha!} per- 
ceive that of infinite other concluſions, he underſtands not {o much 
as One. 

Sarv. Yourdiſcourle is very concluding ; in confirmation of 
which we ave the example of thoſe who underſtand , or have 
known ſome thing , which the more knowing they ace, the more 
they know , and freely confeſfe thar they know hrtle ; nay, the 
wileſt man iti all Greece , and for ſuch protounced by the Oracle, 
openly profeſſed to know that he knew nothing. | 

SinyL. It muſt be granted therefore, either that Socrates or 
that the Ordcle it ſelf was alyar, that declaring bim to be moſt 


wiſe» and he confeſſing that he knew himſelf to be moſt ig- 
norant. 


Satv. Neither orie not the other doth follow , for that both The a»ſwer of 


the aſſertions tay be true. The Oracle adjudged Sorrates the wi- 12,0741 ire in 


{ſt of all men; whoſe knowledg is limited ; Socrates acktow- of of by 


ledoeth that he knew nothing in relation to abſolure wiſdome, ti 
which 1s infinite 3 and becaule of infinite , muchis the ſatne part, 

asis little , and as ts ttothing (for to arrive v. g. to the infinite 
number , its all one to accumulate thouſands, tens, or ciphers,) 
therefore Socrates well perceived his wiſdom to be nothing, in 
compariſon of the infiriire knowledg which he wanted; But yet, 
becauſe thete is forie knowledy found amongſt men , and this 
for equally ſhared to all , Socrates might have a greater ſhare 
thereof thin 'vthets , and therefore verified the anſwer of the 
Oracle. 

Sa k I think I very well aaderſtand this particular amo 
men , Simrplicens there is a power of operating , but not equally 
diſpenſed to all ; and it is without queſtion , that the power of an 
Empetor is fx greater than that of a private perſon ; but, both 
this and that are wothing in compariſon of the Divine Omnipo- 
tence. Arttonpft meh y there are Tome that better underſtand 
Aqricultartt than many others ; but the knowledg of planting a 
Vine in a'trench-, what hath it to do with the kncwledg -of ma- 

King it to ſþront forth , to attra@t- nouriſhment , to ſele& this-good 
part from that other, for to make thereof leaves , another to make 
[prouts, another to make grapes , another to make raiſins, ano- 
ther to m#ke the hukes of 'them , which-are -the works of moſt 
vile Natttte'? Thisis one only particular a& of the innumerable, 
Which Nature'doth, and in it alone is diſcovered an infinite wiſ- n;vize 15,{4ew 
eu. fo thit Divine Wiſdom thay be concluded to be infinitely 'fnirel inflaire. 
nite, 
SALVv. Take hereof another example. Do'we not ſay that ihe 
Ju 


86 G. Gatitzus, his Syſeme. 


| judicious diſcovering of a moſt Jovely Statua in a picce of Marble, 
apo res bath ſublimated the wit of Buonarruotti far above the vulgar wits 
a alone; | of other men? And yet this work is onely the imitation of a 
meer aptitude and diſpoſition of exteriour and ſuperficial mem- 
bers br immoveable man ; but what is it in compariſon of a 
man made by nature, compoled of as many exteriaur and inte. 
riour members, of ſo many muſcles, tendons , nerves , bones, 
which ſerve to ſo many and ſundry motions ? but what ſhall we 
ſay of the ſenſes, and of the powers of the foul, and laſtly, of 
the underſtanding ? May we not ſay , and that with reaſon, that 
the firufure of a Statue fals far ſhort of the formation of a living 

man yea more of a contemptible worm ? 4 

Sa cr And what difference think you , was there betwixt the 
Dove of Architas, and one made by Nature ? 

S;Mmel. Either I am none of theſe knowing men , orelſe 
there is a manifeſt contradiftion in this your dilcourſe. You ac- 
count underſtanding amongſt the greateſt (if you make it not the 
chief of the) Encomiums alcribed to man made by Nature , and 
a little before you ſaid with Socrates, that he had no knowledy at 
all; therefore you muſt ſay, that neither did Nature underſtand 
how to make an underſtanding that underſtapdeth. 

SaLv. You argue very cunningly, but to reply to your obye- 
Aion I muſt have recourſe to a Philoſophical diſtintion, and ſay 

2/an wnderanz}. hat the underſtanding is to be taken too ways, that is zntenſive, ot 
«th very well in- extenhve ; and that extenſuve) that 15,As to the multitude of intel- 
"of og mt 1: gibles,. which are infinite, the underſtanding of man is as no 
thing, though he ſhould underſtand a thouſand propoſitions ; for 
that a thouſand, in reſpe& of infinity is but as a cypher: but taking 
the underſtanding intenſive, (in-as much as that term imports) in 
ten(ively,that is, perfe&ly ſome propoſitions,I ſay,that humane wil 
dom underſtandeth ſome propoſitions ſo perfe&ly, and is as abs 

lutely certain thereof, as Nature her ſelf; and fuck are the 
Mathematical {ciences, to wit, Geometry and Arithmetick: in which 
Divine Wildom knows infinite more propoſitions, becauſe it know 
them all; but I believe that the knowledge of thoſe few compre 
hended by humane underſtanding, equalleth the divine, as to the 
certainty objeGiwve, tor that it arciverh to comprehend the necel 

fity thereof, than which there can be no greater certainty. 

Sine. This ſeemeth to me a very bold-and raſh expreſſion. 

S aiv. Theſe are common notions, and far from all umbrage 
of temerity, or boldneſs, and detra& not in the leaſt from the Mz 
zeſty of divine wiſdom 3 as it nothing diminiſheth the omnipotence 
thereof to ſay, that God cannot make what is once done, to be ur 
done : but I doubt, Simplicins,that your (cruple ariſeth from an © 


pinion you have, that my words arc '{omewhat equivocal 3 _ 
| ore 


DiatoGcus I. 87 


re the better tocexpreſs my elf I fay, that as to the truth, of 

which Mathematical demonſtrations give us the knowledge, it 13 

the ſame, which the divine wiſdom knoweth ; bur this I muſt grant 

cou, thar the manner whereby God knoweth the infinite propo+ 6 4 manner of 
irions, of wich we underſtand ſome few, 1s highly more excellent * range Thee je $4 
than ours} which proceedeth by ratiocination,and paſlerh icom con- Was wa dens 
cluſioa to conclution , whereas his is done at one (ingle thought or ***4%z 4c +» 
FNEULTION 5 and whereas we , for example, to attain the knowledg EE i ry 

of ſome paſlion of the Circle , which hath infinite , deginning 

from one of the moſt (imple, and raking that for its definition, 

do procced with argumentation to another , and from that to a 

thicd, and then to a fourth, &c. the Divine Wiſdom, by the 

apprehenſion of its efſence comprehends, without temporary raci- 

ocination , all thele infiaite patſions 3 which notwithſtanding)are 

in cffe@ virtually comprited in the definitions of all things; and, tro Definitions con- 
conclude ,as being infinite, perhaps are but one alone in their nature, '# val al 
and in the Nivine Mind 3 the which neither is wholly unknown to Vide nvk ” 
humane underſtanding , bur onely be-clouded with thick and 1»foire Paſſions 
oroſſe miſts ; which come in parr to be diſlipared and clarified, ot arm; m= 
when we are made Maſters of any concluſions, firmly demon- 
ſtrated » and io perteHtly made ours, as that we can ſpeedily run 

through them 3 for in liam, what other, is that propofnion, that 

the ſquare of -the {ide fubrending the right angle in any triangle, 

is equal to rhe {quares of the other rwo , which include it, bur 

onely the Paralellograms being upon common baſes , and between 

parallels qual amongſt themſelves ? and this, laſtly, is it not the 

lame, as to ſay that 'thofe two ſuperficies are equal, of which 

equal parts applyed to equal parts, poſſeſſe equal place * Now Th. aſconr{er 
theſe inferences, which our incelle& apprehendeth with time and a »5ih humane 
gradual motion , the Divine Wiſdom, like light , penetrateth in pA pony MP he 
an inſtant, which is the ſame as toſay , hath them alwaycs pre- Divine wiſdom re- 
ſent : I conclude therefore , that our underſtanding , both as to aug oy ow 
the manner and the multitude of the things comprehended by us, hem alway: Bs 
is infinitely ſurpaſt by the Divine Wiſdom ; but yet 1 do not (0 four. 

vilifie it, as to repute 1t abſolutely nothing ; yea rather, when [ 

conſider how many and how great miſteries men have underſtood, 

diſcovered, and contrived, 1 very plainly know and underſtand 

the mind of man to be one of the works, yea one of the moſt cx- 

cellent works of God. 

SaGr. I have oft times conſidered with my (elf , in purſuance The wi: of mas 
of that which you ſpeak of , how great the wit of mans; 'and 45 acme. 
whil'ſt I run thorow ſuch and ſo many admirable inventions found 
out by him , as well in the Arts, as Sciences 3 and again refle&ing 
upon my own wit, ſo far from promiſing me the diſcovery of any 
thing new, that | deſpair of comprehending what is already dil- 


covered, 


88 G. Gatit=us, his Syfteme. 
covered , confounded with wonder , and ſurpriſed with deſperz. 
tion, I account my ſelf little lefſe than miſerable. if I behold; 
Statue of ſome excellent Maſter , I ſay with my ſelf ; Whenwilt 
thou know how to chizzle away the refuſe of a piece of Marble, 
and diſcover ſo lovely a figure , as lyerth hid therein ? When wilt 
thou mix and ſpread ſo many different colours upon a Cloth, 6 
Wall, and repreſent therewith all viſible objetts, like a Michael 
Angelo, a Raphaello, or a Tizvano? It I behold what inventions 
men have in comparting Muſical intervals. , in eſtabliſhing Pre. 
cepts and Rules for the management thereof with admirable de. 
light to the ear : When ſhall I ceaſe my aſtoniſhment ? What 
ſhall I ſay of ſuch and ſo various Inſtruments of that Art? The 
reading of excellent Poets, with what admiration doth it (well 
any one that attentively conſidereth the invention of conceits, 
and their explanation ? What ſhall we ſay of ArchiteQure? 

The invention of W hat of Navigation ?. But, above all other ſtupendious inventi- 
writingfupencims gn;, what ſublimity of mind was that in him, that imagined to 
«bevel 21: pimſelf to find out a way to communicate his moſt ſecret thought 

to any other perſon , though very far diſtant from him either in 
time, or place , ſpeaking with thoſe that are in the India's; i 
ing to thoſe that are not yet born , nor ſhall be this thouſand, of 
ten thouſand years ? and with how much facility ? but by the 
* For of ſo many rious collocation of * twenty little letters upon a paper ? Let thy 
res Wang In be the Seal of all the admirable 1aventions of man , and the cloſe 
of our Diſcourſe for this day : For the warmer hours being paſt, 
I ſuppoſe that Salviatzs hath a delire to go and take the air in hi 
Gondelo ; but too morrow we will both wait upon you , to con- 
tinue the Diſcourles we have begun, &c. 


GAL 


; Trg:2. 


5 In 7 Eh Rl ULANIEE i < 


—— —— > 


: WL WP" 


NE Las, 
GCE EE HY ne 
| A 
og DS, 2904s NT — 
Er EAI 4 men to 
* « CRE NAEINY 
[= 


Be - 


| 
| 
| 


bs 2 ts bb OT 7 I 4 Rr I + i Rs, 


Plate 


Place this 


at the end of 
the furst- 


n1alog ue Wa 


aw — ; ——  _ _ 
—_—_— Rd — 


GALILAUS 
 Galileus Lynceus, 


SYSI EME 


OF THE 


WORLD. 


6» >, 
as 


'ine Second Dialogue. 


—— 


INTERLOCUTORS. 
SALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and SIMPLIC1US. 


SAKYV; : | 
Fr FELT He yeſter-dayes diverſions which led us 
J\| out of the path of our principal diſcourſe, 
were {uch and ſo many , that I know not 
how I can without your aſſiſtance reco- 
ll ' ver the track in which I am to proceed. 
Sack. I wonder not, that you, who 
have your fancy charged and laden with 
R's 7 both what hath been, and 1s to be ſpo- 
S——R) ken, do find your ſelf in ſome confuſi- 


on; but], who as being onely an Auditor , have nothing to bur- 


then my memory withal , but ſuch things as I have heard, may 
haply by a fuccin& rehearſal of them , recover the firſt thred 
of our Diſcourle. As far therefore as my memory ſerves me, the 
ſum of yeſter-dayes conferences were an examination of the Prin- 


M | ciples 


8g 


mm—_—_ _ _ - ” 
TIC l 


JO 


# 
4 
þ, 
_ 


a , 4 _—_— be , O-n.>4 _ 
- , —- 
+ 


G. Gar1irt Aus, his Syſeme, 


Ciples of Ptolomy and Copernicug , and which of their opinions is 
the more probable and rational; that, which afhrmeth the ſub. 
ſtance of the Celeſtial bodies to be ingenerable, incorruprtible, yn- 


, alterable, impaſlible,and in a word,cxempt from all kind of change, 


ſave that of {ocal, and therefore to be a fifth eſſence, quite different 
from this of our Elementarybodies , which are generable , corrup- 
tible, alterable, &»c. orclſc the other , which taking away ſuch 
deformity from the parts of the World , holdeth the Earth to en- 
Joy the ſame pertections as the other integral bodies of the uni. 
verſe 3, and eſteemeth it a moveable and erratick Globe, no lefle 
than the Moon, Jupiter, Venus, or any other Planet : And lafly, 
maketh many particulas parallels betwixt the Earth and Moon; 
and more with the Moon, than with any other Planet ; hap- 
ly by reaſon we have greater and more certain notice of it, as 
being lefle diſtant from us. And having , laſtly , concluded this 
ſecond opinion to have more of probability with it than the firſt, 
I ſhould think it beſt in the ſubſequent diicourſes to begin to exa- 
mine whether the Earth be eſteemed immoveable , as it hath 
been till now believed by moſt men, or elſe moveable , as ſome 
ancient Philoſophers held, and others of not very receſle times, 
were of opinion ; and if it be moveable, to enquire of what 
kind its motion may be? 

Sarlv. I ſee already what way I am to take; but before we 
offer to proceed any farther , I am to ſay ſomething to you touch- 
ing thoſe laſt words which you ſpake, how that the opinion which 
holds the Earth to be endued with the {ame conditions that the 
Caleſtial bodies enyzoy , ſeems to be more true than the contra- 
ry ; for that I affirmed no ſuch thing , nor would I have any of the 
Propoſitions in controverſie , be made to ſpeak to any definitive 
ſenſe : but 1 onely intended to produce on either part , thoſe rex- 
ſons and anſwers, arguments and ſolutions, which have been hi- 
therto thought upon by others , together with certain others, 
which I baye ſtumbled upon in my long ſearching thereinto , ab 
wayes remitting the deciſion thereof to the yudgment of others. 

SaGr. I was unawazes tranſported by my own ſenſe of the 
thing ; and believing that others ought to judg as I did , I made 
that concluſion unzverlal, which ſhould have been particular ; agd 
therefore confeſſe 1 have erred, and the rather, in that I know 
not what Simplicizs his judgment is in this particular. 

S1»eL. I muſt confeſſe, that I have been ruminating all ths 
night of what paſt yeſterday , and to ſay the truth , I meet there- 
in with many acute, new, aud plauſible notions; yet nevertheleſs, 
I tind my ſelf over-perſwaded by the authority of ſo many great 
Writers, and in particular @&vc. I fee you ſhake your 
head Sagredus, and ſmile to your ſelf, asif I had uttered ſome 
great abſurdity. SaGR 


Driatcocuse. I. G1 
SaGr. 1 not onely (mile, bur to toi] you truc , am ready to 
burſt with holding in my le! trom laughing outright , tor you 
have put Mme 11 mind of a very pretty patlage , that I was a wit- 
actle oft, not many years lince , rogether with {ome others of 
my wocthy friends, which I could yer name unto you. . 
'$,rv. Ic would be well that you told us what it was , that ſo 
Simplicins may not ſtil] think that he gave you the occation of 
laughter. 
SaGcr- Lam content. I found one day, at home in his houle, at 
Venice , a famous Philician, to whom {ome flockt tor their ſtudies, 
and others our of curioſity ,{ometimes came thither to fee certain A- 
natomics difſe&ted by the hand of a no lefle learned, than careful 
and expcrienced Anatomilt. It chanced upon that day, when I was Tj orivina! of 
there, that he was in ſearch of the original and rife of the Nerves, '* > Nerv's ac- 
: F cording to Anſtoe 
about which there 1s a famous controverlie between the Galeniſts je 154 according 
and Peripateticks; and the Anatomilt ſhewing, how that the great *? 'h1/5c-4>.. 
number of Nerves departing from the Brain, as their root , and 
paſſing by the nape of the Neck , diſtend rhemſelyes afterwards 
along by the Back-bone, and branch themſelves thorow all the 
Body ; and that a very {mall filament, as fine as a thred went to 
the Heart ; he turned to a Gentleman whom he knew to be a Pe- 
ripatetick, Philoſopher , and for whoſe ſake he had with extraor- 
dinary exaCtneſle, dilcovered and proved every thing, and demand- 
ed of him, if he was ar length (arisfied and per{waded that the origi- 
nal of the Nerves proceeded from the Brain , and not from the 
Heart ? To which the Philoſopher, after he had ſtood muſing a *The :1dicnlo:u 
while, anlwered; you have made me to ſee this buſineſſe ſo "56h wy _ 
plainly and {enfibly. , that did not the Text of Ari ſtotle aſſert the _—_ original of 
contrary , which poſitively affirmeth the Nerves to proceed from the Nerver- 
the Heart , I ſhould be couſtrained to conteſle your opinion to be 
true. WE | 
S1imei. | would have you know my Maſters , that this contro- 
verfie about the original of the Nerves 1s not yet fo proved and 
decided , as ſome may perhaps periwade themlelves. 
- $a 6,;Nor queſtionlefſe ever ſhall it be, if it find (uch like 
contraditors 3 but that which you lay , doth not at all leſſen the 
extravagance of the anſwer of that Peripaterick , who againſt 
luch ſenfible expcrience produced not other experiments , or rea- 
lonsof Ariſtotle , but his bare authority and pure ipſe dixit. 
SiMe. Ariſtotle had not gained fo great authority, but for 
the force of his Demonſtrations , and the profoundneſle of his 
arguments ; bur it 15 requiſite that we underſtand him , and not 
onely underſtand him , but have fo great familiarity with his : 
Books , that we form a perfe& Idea thereof in our minds, fo as 
that every ſaying of his may be alwayes as it were, preſent in our 


- me- 


bk 
| ; 
F 
; 
| 

q 


.. * 
> > - G 
_ Arrows - tc ct + 


—_— 


G. Gat1ltmzus, bis Syleme. 


memory for l;c did not write to the vulgar , nor is he obliged to 
{pin out his Sillogilmes with the trivial method of dilputes ; nay 
rather , uſing a freedome , he hath lometimes placed the proof 
of one Propoſition amongſt Texts , which icem to treat of quite 


Requifrecto fit - another point 3 and therefore it is requiſite to be maſter of all 


aAwan tz philo Vans 
foate well after y £ . - 
the manzer of A- and to combine this Text with another far remote from it ; for it 


riltorle, 


that vaſt [dea, and to learn how to connect this paſſage with that, 


1s not to be queſtioned but that he who hath thus ſtudied him, 
knows how to gather from his Books the demonſtrations of every 
knowable deduction , for that they contein all things. 

Sa G8. But good Simplicins , like as the things icattered here 
and there in Ariſtotle, give you no trouble in colleQing them, 
but that you perſwade your {elf to be able by comparing and 


Acuming way Cconnefing ſeveral ſmall ſentences to extract thence the juice of 
to gather Philoſo- 
phy out of any book. 


whatſoever, 


* A word fignify- 
ing works compo- 
ſed of many frag- 
ments of yerlcs 
colleXed out of the 


Poets. 


ſome deſired concluſion, fo this , which you and other egregj- 
ous Philoſophers do with the Text of Ariſtotle ,” I could do by the 
verſes of Virgil , or of Ovid, compoſing thereof * Centones, and 
therewith explaining all the affairs of men, and ſecrets of Na- 
rure. But what talk I of Virgzl, or any other Poet ? I have a lit- 
tle Book much ſhorter than Ariſtotle and Ovid, in which are con- 
teined all the Sciences, and with. very little ſtudy, one.may gather 
out of it a moſt perfe& Idea, and this is the Alphabet ; and there 
1s no doubt but that he who knows how to couple and diſpoſe 
aright this and that vowel , with thole, or thoſe other conſonant, 
may gather thence the infallible anſwers to all doubts, and de- 
duce from them the principles of all Sciences and Arts , juſt in the 
ſame manner as the Painter from divers ſimple colours , laid ſeve- 
rally upon his Pa/late , proccedeth by mixing a little of this and 
a little of that , with alittle of a third, to repreſent to the life 
men, plants, buildings, birds, fiſhes, and in a word, counterfeit- 
ing what ever object is viſible , though there be not on the Pallet 
all the while, either eyes, or feathers, or fins, or leaves, or ſtones. 
Nay, farther, it is neceſſary , that none of the things to be imitt- 
ted, or any part of them, be a&ually among colours , if you 
would be able therewith to repreſent all things ; for ſhould there 
be amongſt them ». gr. feathers , theſe would ſerve to repreſent 
nothing fave birds , and plumed creatures. os TOR 
Sa1v. And there are certain Gentlemen yet living,and in heakh, 
who were preſent, when a Doftor , that was Profeflor in a fa- 


Invcntionof the ous Academy 5 hearing the deſcription of the Telef, cope , by him 


Teleicope tak, 


from Ariſtotle, 


en 


not {een as then, ſaid, that the invention was taken from Ari- 
ftotle, and caufing his works to be ferch't, he turned to a place 
where the Philoſopher gives the reaſon , whence it commierh , rhit 
fromthe bottom of a very deep Well, one may fee the ſtarsin 


Heaven. , at noon day ; and, addreſſing himſelf ro the Oe] 
cc 


Diatocus IT. 


ec here, laith he, the Well , which repreſenteth the Tube, ſee 
here the giols vapours , from whence is taken the invention of 
che Cryſtals, and ſee here laſtly rhe ſight fortified by the paſlage 
of the rays through a diaphanous , bur more denſe and obſcure 
medium. | 

$SAaGs. This 13 a way to comprehend all things knowable, much 
like to that wherewith a piece of marble conteineth in it one, yea, 
2 thouſand very beautiful Statua's , but the difficulty lieth in be- 
ing able to diſcover them; or we may fay , that it 1s like to the 
propheſies of Abbot Joachim, or the anſwers of the Heathen 
Oracles , Which are not to be underſtood , till after the things 
fore-told are come to paſle. 

Sarv. And why do you not adde the predictions of the Ge- 
nethliacks , Which are with like cleerneſle ſeen after the event, in 
cheir Horoſcopes, or, if you will, Configurations of the Heavens. 

SaGr. In this manner the Chymiſts find , being led by their 
melancholly humour , that all the ſublimeſt wits of the World 
have writ of nothing elſe in reality , than of the way to make. 
Gold ; but, that they might tran{mit the ſecret to poſterity with- 
out diſcovering it to the vulgar , they contrived ſome one way, and 
ſome another how to conceal the ſame under {eyeral maskes ; and 

it would make one merry to hear their comments upon the ancient 
Poets, finding out the important miſteries , which lie hid under 
their Fables 3 and the ſignification of the Loves of the Moon, 
and her deſcending to the Earth for Erdimion ; her diſpleaſure 
againſt Afeon , and what was meant by Jupiters turning himſelf 
intp a ſhowreof Gold; and into flames of fire ; and what great 
ſecrets of ' Art are conteined in thac Mercury the Interpreter; in 
thoſe thefts of Pluto; and in thoſe Branches of Gold. 

'S1mpr. I believe, and in pact know,that there want not in the 
World very extravagant heads, the vanities of whom ought not to 
redound ro the prejudice of Ariſtotle, of whom my thinks you 
{peak ſometimes with too little xefpe&t , and rhe onely antiquity 
and bare name that he hath acquired in the opinions of ſo many 
famous men , ſhould ſuffice to render hnn honourable with all 
that profeſſe themſelves learned. 

Sa1y. You ſtate not the matter nghtly , Simplicins ; There 
are ſome of his followers that bear before they are in danger , 
who give us occaſion , or, to ſay better , would give us caule to 
eſteem him lefle , ſhould we conſent to applaud their Capricio's. 
And you, pray you tell me, are you for your part ſo Gmple , as 
not to know that had ArzStotle been preſent , to have heard the 
Dottor that would have made him Author of the Teleſcope , he 
would have been much more di{pleaſed with him, than with thoſe, 
Who laught at the Door and his Comments ? Do you queſtion 

; whe- 


97 


Chyms/ts inter- 
pree the Fables of 
the Poets to be le- 
crets for making of 
OY 


Some of Ari't9- 
tles Seftators i- 
pare the repur ation 
of ther Maſter ,m 
going about to en» 


hanſe it, 


94 G. Garir®us, his Syſteme. 
whether Ariſloile, had he but lecn the novelrics Giſcoveredgn Hea- 
ven, would not have changed his opinior, amended his Books, 
and embraccd the more ſenſible Doctrine ; rezeGing thoſe lilly 
Gulls, which too {crupulouſly go about to detend what ever he 
hath ſaid 3 not conſidering, that if Ariſtotle were tuch a one as 
they fancy him to themſelves , he would be a man of an untra&a- 
ble wit , an obſtinate mind, a barbarous foul, a ſtubborn will, 
that accounting all men elſe but as filly ſheep , would haye his 
Oracles preferred before the Senſes , Experience, and Nature her 
{elf ? They are the Sectators of Ari$totle that have given him this 
Authority , and not he that hath uſurped or taken it upon him ; 
and becauſe it is more eaſie for a man to {calk under anothers 
ſhield than to ſhew himſelf openly , they tremble , and are affraid 
to ſtir one ſtep from him; and rather than they will admit ſome 
alterations in the Heaven of Ariſtotle , they will impertinently de- 
ny thoſe they behold in the Heaven of Nature. 
Sac Rr. Thele kind of Drollerics put me in mind of that Statu- 
; Fa ridicule 1ry which having reduced a great piece of Marble to the Image of 
cnt carte an Hercales , or a thundring Fupiter , I know not whether , and 
given ut with admirable Art fucha vivacity and threatning fury, 
that it moved terror in as many as beheld it ; he himſelf began 
alſo to be affraid thereof , though all its ſprightfulneſſe, and life 
was his own workmanſhip 3 and his affrightment was ſuch , that 
he had no longer the courage to affront it with his Chizzels and 
Mallet. TT 
Sar v. I have many times. wondered how thele nice maintain- 
ers of what ever fell from Ariſtotle, are not aware how great a pre- 
judice they are to his reputation and credit; and how that the 
more they go about to encreaſe- his Authority , the more they 
diminiſh it 3 for whileſt I ſee them obſtinate in their attempts 
to maintain thoſe Propoſitions which 1 palpably diſcover to 
be manifeſtly falſe ; and in their deſires to perſwade me that 
{o to do, 1s the part of a Philolopher; and -that Ariſtotle himſelf 
would do the ſame, it much abates in me of the opinion that he 
hath rightly philolophated about: other concluſions, to me more 
abſtruſe : for if I could ſee them concede and change, opinion in 
a manifeſt truth, I would believe, that in thoſe in which they 
ſhould perfiſt, they may have ſome f{olid demonſtrations to me un- 
known, and unheard of. EC 
SaGKk Or when they ſhould be made to ſee that they have ha- 
zarded.too much of their own and Ariſtotle's repuatation in con- 
felling, that they had not underſtood this or that concluſion found 
out by {ome other man ; would it not be a leſs evil for them to 
{eek tor it amongſt his Texts, by laying many of them together, 
according to the art intimated to us by Simplicins ? for if rs 
works 


Diatocue. II. 


works contain all things knowable , it muſt follow alſo that they 
may be therein diſcovered. ; . 

Salty. Good Sagredus, make no jeſt of this advice, which me 
thinks you rehearſe in too Ironical a way ; for it is not long ſince 
that a very eminent Philoſopher having compoled a Book de anzms, 
wherein, citing the opinion of Ariſtotle, about its being or not be- 
ing immortal, he alledged many Texts, (not any of thoſe hercto- 
fore quoted by Alexander ab Alexandro : for in thoſe he ſaid, thar 
Ariſtotle had not fo much as treated of that matter, much lels de- 
termincd any thing pertaining to the ſame, but others) by himſelf 
found out in other more abſtruſe places, which tended to an ec- 
roncous ſenſe : and being adviſed, that he would find it an hard 
matter to get a Licence A the Inquilitors, he writ back unto 
his friend , that he would notwithſtanding , with all expedition 
procure the ſame , for that if no other obſtacle ſhould interpole, 
be would not much ſcruple to change the DoGrine of Ariſtotle , 
and with other expoſitions, and other Texts to maintain the con- 


trary opinion , which yet ſhould be alſo agreeable to the ſenſe of 


Ariſtotle. 

Sa 6 xs» Oh moſt profound DoGor , this | that can command 
me that I ſtir not a ſtep from Arzſtotle , but will himſelf lead 
bim by the noſe , and make him ſpeak as he pleaſeth. Sec how 
much it importeth to learn to take Time by the Fore-top. Nor 
is it ſeaſonable to have to do with Hercules, whilſt he is en- 
raged, and amongſt the Furies, but when he is telling merry tales 
amongſt the Meonion Damoſels. Ah, unheard of ſordidneſſe of 
lervile ſouls! ro make themſelves willing flaves to other mens opi- 
nions 3 to receive them for inviolable Decrees , to engage them- 
ſelves to ſeem ſatisfied and convinced by arguments , of ſuch effi- 
cacy, andſo manifeſtly concludent , that they themſclves cag- 
not certainly reſolve whether they were really writ to that pur- 
poſe, or ſerve to prove that allumption in hand, or the contrary. 
But, which is a greater madneſle , they are at variance amongſt 
themſelves , whether the Author himſelf bath held the afficmative 
part, or the negative. What is this, but to make an Oracle of a 
Log, andto run to that for anſwers, to fear that , to reverence 
and adore that ? 

S1nyt. But in caſewe ſhould recede from AriSiotle , who have 
we to be our Guid in Philoſophy ? Name you ſome Author. 

SaLv. We needa Guid in ynknown and uncouth wayes, but 
in champion places, and open plains, the blind only Rand in need 
| Of aLeader; and for ſuch, it is better rhat they ſtay at home. 
But he that hath eyes in his head , and in his mind , bim ſhould 


a man chooſe for his Guid, Yet miſtake me not , thinking that 1 
ſpeak this, for that I am againſt hearing of Ariftotle ; for on the 
cos 


A brave yeſolu- 
tion of 4 certain 
Periparetick Phi- 
loſopher. 


The ſervile ſpi- 
rit of ſome of Ari- 


ſotles foſlowers. 


T 00 cloſe adhe- 
ring to Ariſtotle &# 
blameable. 


It t not juſt that 
thiſe who ores 
philofc phate, hauld 
r-ſeurp the wile of 
Philoſephers. 


The Senſible 
World. 


G. Gar1lzus, bis Syſeme. 


contrary, I commend the reading , and diligently ſtudying of him; 
and onely blame the fervile giving ones 1clf up a ſlave unto him, 
lo, as blindly to ſubicribe ro what ever he delivers , and withour 
{caich oi auy farther realon thereot, to receive the ſame for an in- 
violable decree. Which 1s an abule , that carrieth with it ano: 
ther great inconvenience , to Wit, that others will no longer take 
pains to underſtand the validity of his Demonſtrations. And 
whar is more ſhameful , than in the middeſt of publique diſputes, 
whileſt one perſon 1s treating of demonſtrable concluſions, to 
hear another interpole with a paſſage of Ariſtotle , and not ſel- 
dome writ to quite another purpole, and with that to ſtop the 
mouth of his opponent ? Bur if you will continue to ſtudy in this 
manner, I would have you lay afide the name of Philoſophers ; 
and call your ſelves cither Hiſtorians or Doors of Memory , for 
itis not fit, that thoſe who never philoſophate , ſhould uſury 
the honourable title of Philoſophers. Bur it is beſt for us to re- 
turn to ſhore , and not lanch farrher into a boundlefle Gulph, out 
cf which we ſhall not be able to get before night. Therefore 
Simplicius, come either with arguments and demonſtrations of 
your own , 'orof Ariſtotle, and bring us no more Texts and na- 
ked authorities, for our di{putcs are about the Senſible World, 
and not one of Paper. And foraſmuch as in our diſcourſes yeſter- 
day , we retriev'd the Earth fiom darkneffe, and expoſed it ro the 
open skie , ſhewing ; that the artempt to enumerate ir amongſt 
thoſe which we call Celeſtial bodies , was not a poſition ſo foil'd, 
and vanquiſh't ,- as that it had no lite left init 3 it followeth next, 
that we proceed to examine what probability there is for holding 
of it fixe';- and wholly immoveable., ſcilicet as to its entire Globe, 
what likelihood there is for making it moveable with ſome motion, 
and of what kind that may be. - And forafmuch as in this ſame 
queſtion I am ambiguous , and Srmplicixs is reſolute , as likewiſe 
Ariſtotle fox the opinion of its. immobility , he ſhall one by one 
produce the arguments in favour of their opinion , and I will al 
ledge the anſwers and reaſons on the contrary part z and next S4- 
gredzs ſhall tell us his thoughts ; and to which fide he finds him- 
ielf inclined. 25 Iz LES 

5aGKR- Content ; provided alwayes that I may reſerve the I- 
berty to my lelf of alledging what'pure natural reaſon ſhall ſome- 
times dictate to me. '* Ef | 

Sa1lv. Nay more ; it is that which I particularly beg of you; 
for, amoigſt the more eafie, and, to ſo ſpeak , material confiders* 
tions, | believe there are but few of them that have been omrt- 
ted by Writers , to that onely ſome of the more ſubtle , and re- 
mote can be deſired, or wanting ; and to inveſtigate theſe , what 


other ingenuity can be more fit than that of the moſt acute and 
piercing wit of Sagredys ? SAGR- 


Diatocus IT. 

S168. 1am what ever pleaſeth Salviatus , but I pray you, 
1-15 not ſally out into another kind of digreſſion complemental; 
for ar thi time 1 am a Philoſopher, and in the Schools, not in the 
(Court. 

Sarv. Let our contemplation begin therefore with this con(1- 
deration, that whatſoever motion may be alcribed to the Earth, 
it is neceflary that it be to us, (as inhabitants upon it, and conle- 
quently partakers of the ſame) alrogether imperceptible , and as if 
ir were not atall , fo long as we have regard onely to terreſtrial 
things 3 but yet it 1s on the contrary , as neceſſary that the ſame 
motion do ſeem common to all other bodies , and vitible ob- 
jze&s , that bemg leparated from the Earth, participate not of the 
lame. So that the true method to tind whether any kind of motion 
may be aſcribed ro the Earth , and that found , ro know what it 
is, is to conlider and oblerve if in bodies ſeparated from the 
Earth, one may dilcover any appearance of motion , whiche- 
qually {uiteth to all the reſt ; for a motion that ts onely ſeen, v.gr. 
in the Moon , and that hath nothing to do with Venxs or Jupiter, 
or any other Stars, cannot any way belong to the Earth, or to 
any other ſave the Moon alone. Now there is a moſt general and 
grand motion above all others, and it is that by which the Sun, 
the Moon, the other Planets , and the Fixed Stars, and in a word, 
the whole Univerſe , the Earth onely excepted , appeareth in our 
thinking to move from the Eaſt towards the Weſt, in the ſpace of 
twenty four hours; and this, as to this firſt appearance, hath no 
obſtacle to hinder it, that it may not belong to the Earth alone, 
as well as to all the World beſides, the Earth excepted; for the 
ſame aſpects will appear in the one poſition, as in the other. 

Hence it is that Ariſtotle and Ptolomy , as having hit upon this con- 
ideration, in going about to prove the Earth to be immoveable, 
argue not againſt any other than this Diurnal Motion ; fave onely 
that Ariſtotle hinteth ſomething in oblcure terms againſt another 
Motion aſcribed to it by an Ancient , of which we ſhall ſpeak in 
its place. 

SaG8. I very well perceive the neceſſity of your illation : but 
| meet with a doubt which 1 know not bow to free my (elf from, 
and this it is, That Copernicus afligning to the Earth another mo- 
tion beſide the Diurnal, which, according to the rule even now laid 
down, ought to be to us, as to appearance, imperceptible in the 
Earth, bur viſible in all the reſt of the World ; me thinks I may 
neceſſarily infer, either that he hath manifeſtly erred in aſſigning 

the Earth a motion, to which there appears not a general corre- 
lpondence in Heaven or elſe that if there be ſuch a. congruity 
therein, Prolomy on the other hand hath been deficient in not con- 
turing this, as he hath done the other. 


N SAL V, 


67 


The motions of 
the E avyth are ins- 


pryceptible to its * 


Inhabitants. 


The Earth can 
Pav: nm other wme= 
(1095 , than theſe 
which 10 1s appray 
commune to all the 
reiF of the Uni- 
virſe , the Earth 
excepted. 

The Diurnal Ma 
tn, ſcemeth cong- 
mune to all the V- 
xiverſe, ſave onely 
the Earth excepred. 


Ariſtotle and 
Pcolomy argue a- 
£4inſt the Diur- 
nal Motion attyi- 
ibuted to the Exnth, 


retnenenars at. 


IWhy the diurnal 
motion more pro- 
bably ſhould belong 
» tothe Earth. than 
to the reſt of the 
Uxiverſc, 


Aotion, as to the 
trimngs that equally 
move thereby, is as 
ef In nevVy were, Cu 
{o far operates as it 
hath rel acton te 
enings arprived if 
70710 ”1. 


G. Gart11=us, his £ yſicme, 

Sat v. You have good caule for your doubt : and when, we 
come to treat of the other Motion, you ſhall fee how far Copey. 
nicus excelled Ptolomey in clearne(s and lublimity of. wit, in that 
he ſaw what the other did not, I mean the admirable harmon 
wherein that Motion agreed with all the other Cacleſtial»Bodies, 
Bur for the preſent we will luſpend this, particular, and return to 
our firſt contideration 3 touching which | will proceed to propoſe 
(begining with things more general) thole reafons which feem to 
favour the mobility of the Earth, and then wait the an{wers which 
Simplicins ſhall make thereto. And tirſt, if we conſider onely 
the immenſe magnitude of the Starry Sphere, compared to the 
{malneſ(s of the Terrcſirial Globe, contained therein fo many mil- 
lions of times 3 and moreover weigh the velocity of the. motion 
which mult in a day and night make an entire revolution thereof, 
I cannot per{wade my lelt, that. there is any man who believes it 
more realonable and credible, that the Caleſtial Sphere turneth 
round, and the Terreſtrial Globe ſtands ſtill. 

SaGs- It from the umverlality of cffe&s, which may in nature 
have dependence upon ſuch like motions, there ſhould indifferent- 
ly follow all the ſame conſ{equences to an hair, a{well in one Hypu- 
theſis as in the other ; yet I for my part, as to my firſt and general 
apprehenſion, would c{teem, that he which ſhould hold it more ra- 
tional to make the whole Univerſe move, and thereby to ſalve the 
Earths mobility, 15 more unreaſonable than he thar being got to 
the top of your Turret, ſhould deſire, to the end onely that he 
might behold the City, and the Fields about it, that the whole 
Country might turn round, that ſo he might not be put to the 
trouble to ſtir his head. And yet doubtleſs the advantages would 
be many and great which the Copernicaz Hypotheſis is attended 
with, above thole of the Ptolomaique, which in my opinion re- 
{embleth, nay ſurpaſleth that other folly ; ſo that all this makes 
me think that far more probable than this. But haply Ariſtotle, 
Ptolomey, and Simplicius may find the advantages of their Sy- 
ſteme, which they would do well to communicate to us allo, if 
any ſuch there be ; orelle declare to me, that there neither are or 
can be any ſuch things. 

Sarv. For my part, as I have not been able, as much as I have 
thought upon it, to find any diverſity thereia 3 ſo I think I have 
found, that no ſuch diverſity can be in them: in ſo mach that 1 
elteem it to no purpoſe tq ſeek farther after it. Therefore ob- 
terve : Motion 1s fo far Motion, and as Motion operateth, by how 
far it hath relation to things which want Motion : but in thole 
things which all equally partake rhercot it hath nothing to do, and 
's aSif 1t never were. And thus the Merchandiles with which a 
ſhip is laden, fo far move, by how far leaving London, they pals 


by 


Diatocus IT. 
ty France, Spain, Italy, and fail to Aleppo, which London, France, 
$pa1a Ae. ſtand ſtill, not moving with the ſhip : but as to the 
Ch-{ts, Bales and other Parcels, wherewith the ſhip is ſtow'd and 
and laden, and 1n reſpect of the ſhip it ſelf, the Motion from Lop- 
don co Fyria is as much as nothing ; and nothing-altereth the re- 
1ation which is between them : and rhis, becauſe it 1s common to 
all, and 1s participated by all alike : and of the Cargo which is in 
che ſhip, if a Bale were romag'd from a Cheſt but one inch onely, 


this alone would be in that Cargo, a greater Motion in relpet of 


che Cheſt, than the whole Voyage of above three thouſand miles, 
made by them as they were ſtived together. 

Si\net. This Doftrine 1s good, found, and altogether Per;- 
patetick. 

Sarv. I hold it to be much more antient : and ſuſpe& that A- 
riſtotle in receiving it from ſome good School, did not fully under- 
ſtand it, and that therefore, having delivered it with ſome altera- 
tion, it hath been an occaſion of confuſion amongſt thoſe, who 
would defend whatever he faith. And when he writ, that what- 
ſoever moverh, doth move upon {omerhing unmoveable, I ſuppoſe ' 
that he equivocated, and meant, that whatever moveth, moveth 
in reſpe& to ſomething immoveable ; which propoſition admitteth 
no doubt, and the other many. 

\ Sack. Pray you make no digreſſion, but proceed in the diſ- 
{ertation you began. 

Sar v. It being therefore manifeſt, that the motion which is 
common tro many moveables, is idle, and as it were, null as to the 
relation of thole moveables between themſelves, becauſe that a- 
mong themiclves they have made no change : and that it 1s ope- 
rative onely in the relation that thoſe moveables have to other 
things, which want that motion, among which the habitude is 
changed : and we having divided the Univerſe into two parts, one 
of which is neceſſarily moveable, and the other immoveable ; for 
the obtaining of whatſoever may depend upon, or be required 
from ſuch a motion, it may as well be done by making the Earth 
alone, as by -makang all the reſt of the World ro move : for that 
the operation of ſuch a motion conſiſts in nothing elſe, ſave in 
the relation or habitude which 1s between the Caleſtial Bodies, 

and the Earth, the which relation is all that is changed. Now if 
tor the obtaining of the ſame effe& ad nnguem, it be all one whe- 
ther the Earth alone moveth, the reſt of the Univerſe Randins 
ſt]l; or that, the Earth onely ſtanding till, the whole Univerſe 
moverh with one and the ſame motion 3; who would believe, that 
Nature (which by common conſent, doth not that by many things, 
which may be done by tew) hath choſen to make an innumerable 
number of moſt vaſt bodies move, and that with an unconceivable 
N 2 velocity, 


A propoſition ta- 
ken by Ariltotle 
from the Amtico, 
but ſomewhat al- 
tered by biyw. 


ho 
> 
a 


The firſt diſcourſe 
to prove that the 
diurnal motion be- 


longs to the Earth. 


Nature never 
doth that by many 
things, which may 
be done by a few: 


The dinrx il n+ 
tron carſth LA 
mutation amone ſt 
the Celeſtial Bo- 
dies, but all chen- 
ges have relation 
tothe Earth. 


A [ccend cor- 


formation that the 
dturnal mnt inn be- 


longs tothe Earih. 


(rreular mt 
Ons are not contra” 
ry » According 70 

riltorle. 


G. Garir aus, his Syſeme. 


velocity, to periorm that , which might be done by the moderats 
motion of onc ajone about its own Ceatre ? 

Simvti. 1 do not well underſtand, how this grand motion ſip. 
nigeth nothiag as ro the Sun, as to the Moon, as to the other Pla. 
nets, and as to the innumerable multitude of fixed ſtars ;%or why 
you ſhould fay that it 15 to no purpole tor the Sun to pals from oge 
Mcridian to another; to 11)c above this Horizon, to tet beneath 
that other; to make it one while day, another while night : the 
like variations are made by the Moon, the other Planets, and the 
hxed ſtars themlelves. 

Sarv. All thelc alterations inſtanced by you, are nothing, ſaye 
onely in relation to the Earth : and that this 15 true, do but + 
magine the Earth ro move, and there will be no fuck thing in the 
World as the riſing or ſetting of the Sun or Moon, nor Horizons, 
nor Meridians, nor days, nor mghts; nor, 18 2 word, Will ſuch a 
motion caule any mutation between the Moon and Sun, or any 
other ſtar whatloever, whether fixed or erratick; but all thele 
changes have relation to the Earth : which all do yet in ſum 
import. no other than as if the Sun ſhould ſhew it (elf now to 
China, anon to Ferſza, then to Egypt, Greece, France, Spain, A- 
merica,Cc. and the like holdeth in the Moon, and the reſt of the 
Coleſtial Bodies : which {elt ſame effect falls out exatly in the 
ſame manner, if, without troubling lo great a part of the Univerſe, 
the Terreſtrial Globe be made to revolve in it ſelf. But we wil 
augment the difficulty by the addition of this other, which is a 
very great onc, namely,that it you will aicribe this Great Motion to 
Heaven, you muſt of neceſlity make it contrary to the particular 
motion of all the Orbs of the Planets, each of which without 
controyerlie hath its peculiar motion from the Weſt towards the 
Eaſt, and this but very eafie and moderate : and then you make 
them to be hurried to the contrary part, z#. e. from Eaſt to Welk, 
by this moſt furious diurnal motion : whereas, on the contrary, 
making the Earth to move 1n it {elf, the contrariety of motions, is 
taken away, and the onely motion from Weſt to Eaſt 'is accom 
modated to all appearances, and exaQly fſatisfieth every Pha 
mMeuon. vi? 

SinyeL. As to the contrariety of Motions it would unport lit 
tle, tor Ariſtotle demonſtrateth,that circular motions, are not con- 
trary tO one another ; and that theirs cannot be truly called con 
trariety, | 7 

SaLlv. Doth Ariſtotle demonſtrate this, or doth he not rather 
barcly athrm it, as {erving to ſome certain deſign of his ? If con- 
traries be thole things, that deſtroy one another, as he himſelf 
atticmeth , I do not ſee how two moveables that encounter each 


other-1n a Circular line, ſhould lefle prejudice one another, than it 
they interfered in a right line, SA GR 


PriatoGue, II. 


S,cx. Holdalntle, I pray you. Tell me Simplicins, when 
wo Kaights encounter each other, rilting in open field , or when 
two whole Squadrons , or two Fleets at Sea, make up to grapple, 
and are broken and funk, do you call thele encounters contrary to 
one andrher ? 

S1mypLt. Yes, we lay they are contrary. 

Sack. How then, 1s there no contrariety in circular motion;. 
Thele motions , being made upon the {luperticies of the Earth or 
Watcr , which are , as you know , {pherical , come to be circular. 
Can you tell , Srmplicius, which thole circular morions be , that 
are not contrary to each other ? They are (if I miſtake not) thoſe 
of two circles , which touching one another withour, one thereof 
being rurn'd round, naturally maketh the other move the contra- 
ry * way 3 burtif one of them ſhall be withia the other , it is im- 
pollible that rheir motion being made towards different points , 
they ſhould nor juſtle one another. 

Sau v. But be they contrary , or not contrary , thele are bur 
alterations of words 3 and I know, that upon the matter, it would 
be far more properand agreeable with Nature , if we could falve 
all with one motion onely , than to introduce two that are (if you 
will not call them contrary) oppolite 3 yet do I not cenlure this 
mr oduction (of contrary motions) as impoſlible ; nor pretend I 
from the denial thereof , to inferre a neceſſary Demonſtration , 
but onely a greater probability, of the other. A third realon 
which maketh the Pto/omaique Hypotheſis lefſe probable is, thar it 
moſt unrealonably confoundeth the order , which we affuredly 
lee to be amongſt thole Celeſtial Bodies , the circumgyration of 
which 1s not queſtionable , but moſt certain. And that Order 1s, 
that according as an Orb is greater , it finiſheth its revolution in a 
longer time , and the leſſer, in ſhorter. And thus Saturn deſcri- 
bing a greater Circle than all the other Planets, compleateth the 
ſame in thirty yeares: Jupiter finiſheth his ; that 1s lefſe, in 
twelve years: Mars in two: The Moon runneth thorow hers , {o 
much lefle than the reſt 5 in a Moneth onely. Nor do we leſſc 
(enſibly ſee that of the Medicean Stars, which is neareſt to Fu- 
piter , to make its revolution in a very ſhort time, that 1s, in four 
and forty hours, or thereabouts, the next to that 1n three dayes and 
an halt, the third in {even dayes , and the moſt remote in. ſixteen. 
And this rate holdeth well enough , nor will it at all alter , whileſt 
we aſllign the motion of 24 hours co the Terreſtrial Globe , for it 
to move round its own center in that time ; bur if you would have 

the Earth immoveable ,; it is neceſſary, that when you have paſt 
tromthe ſhort period of the Moon , to the others ſucceflively 
bigger, until you come to that of Mars in two years, and from 
thence to thar of the bigger Sphere of Jupiterin twelve years, and 


from 


101 


* AS you ſee ing 
Mill , wher-in che 
wmplicared cogs ler 
the whecls on mv- 


Vis 


A third con fir - 


mation of the ſame 
Dottrine. 


The preater Orbs 
make their conver- 
ſfrons in greater 
times, 


The timetof the 
Mcdxcan Planc:s 
converſions. 


— oy. 4 oy 


| 
bl 
.* 
, 


- & yr a ” 


CL 


T he Motion of 
24 hours aſcribed 
ro. the higheſt 
Sphere drſo- ders 
the period of tre 


infertour, 


F "FP 4 5 = 
T; e fourth (2: 


Srmaticn. 


Great adrſparny 
Amons Þ the mots- 
ons of the Particu- 


lar fixed avs, if 


their Sphet e be 
moveable. 


The f fib Con- 


| r mation, 


The motions of 
the fixed ſtars 
would accelerate 
and grow ſlow 8 
divers times, if the 
ſtarry Sphere were 
moueable, 


1 he ta th ( n+ 


frmations 


CG, Gatitxzns, bis Syſeme. 


from this to the other yet bigger of Saturn , whoſe period is of 


thirty years , it 15 neccflary , I lay , that you paſle to another 


Sphere incomparably greater ſtill than that , and make this to ac- 


complith an catire revolution in twenty four hours. And this yet js 


the leaſt diſorder that can follow. For if any one ſhouJd paſſe 
from the Sphere of Satxrn to the Starry Orb , and make it (6 
mach bigger than that of Saturn , as proportion would require, in 
reſpect of its very (low motion, of many thoulands of years, then 
it muſt needs be a Salt much more ablurd , to skip from this to 
another bigger , and to make it convertible in twenty four hours. 
But the motion of the Earth being granted , the order of the pe. 
riods will be cxaGily obſerved , and from the very flow Sphere of 
Saturn, we come to the fixed Stars, which are wholly immovea- 
ble, and ſo avoid a fourth difficulty, which we muſt of neceſſity ad- 
mit, if the Starry Sphere be ſuppoſed moveable, and that is the 
immenſe diſparity berwcen the motions of thole ſtars themſelves; 
of which ſome would come to move moſt {wittly in moſt vaſt cir- 
cles, others moſt (lowly in circles very {mall , according as thoſe 
or theſe ſhould be found nearer , or more remote from the Poles; 
which ſtill is accompanied with an inconvenience , as well becauſe 
we ſee thoſe , of whoſe motion there 15 no queſtion ro be made, 
tro move all in very immenſe circles; as alſo, becauſe it ſeems to 
be an a& done with no good confideration , to conſtitute bodies, 
that are deſigned to move circularly , at immenſe diſtances from 
the centre, and afterwards to make them move 1n very {mall cir- 
cles. And not onely the magnitudes of the circles , and conſe- 
quently the velocity of the morions of theſe Stars , ſhall be moſt 
different from the circles and motions of thoſe others , but 
( which ſhall be rhe fifth inconvenience ) - the ſelf-ſame Stars 
ſhall {ucceſlively vary its circles and velocities : - For that 
thole , which two thouland years ſince were in the EquinoGial, 
and conſequently did with their motion deſcribe very vaſt cir- 
cles, being in our dayes many degrees diſtant from-thence, muſt 
of neceflity become more ſlow of motion , and be reduced to 
move in leſſer circles , and it is not altogether impoſlible but that 
a time may come, in which ſome of them which in aforetime had 
continually moved , ſhall be reduced by uniting with the Pole, to 
a ſtate of reſt, and then after ſome time of ceſſation, ſhall return 
ro their motion again 3 whereas the ocher Stars , touching whole 
motion none ſtand in doubt , do all deſcribe , as hath been ſaid; 
the great circle of their Orb , and in that maintain themſelves 
without any variation. The abſurdiry is farther enlarged (which 
let be the fixth inconvenience) to him that more ſeriouſly exami- 
neth the thing, inthat no thought can comprehend what ought to 
be the {olidiry of that immenſe Sphere , whole depth ſo Iy 
hol[det 


Diatogue, II. 


olderh faſt ſuch a multitude of Stars z which without ever chang- 
in ite among themlelves , are with fo much concord carried 4 
bout , with lo great diſparity of motions. Orelſe, ſuppoſing the 
Heavens to be fluid, as we are with more reaſon to believe , {v 
3s that every Star wandereth to and troinit, by wayes of its 
own , what cules ſhall regulate their motions, and to whar pur- 
poſe, [0, 'ay that being beheld from the Earth, they appear as if 
they were made by one onely Sphere ? It is my opinion, that they 
might io much more eaſily do that, and in a more commodious 
manner , by being conſtituted immoveable , than by being made 
errant,by how much more facile it is to number the quarries in the 
Pavement of a P:a%za , than the rout of boyes which run up and 
down upon them. And: laſtly , which is the ſeventh inſtance, if 
we atribute the Diurnal Motion to the higheſt Heaven , it muſt be 
conſticuted of luch a force and efficacy , as to carry along with 
it the 1nnumerable multitude of fixed Stars, Bodies all of vaſt 
magnitude , and far bigger than the Earth; and moreover all the 
Spheres of the Planets ; notwithſtanding that both theſe and thole 
of their own nature move the contrary way. And beſides all this, 
it muſt be granted, that allo the Element of Fire, and the grear- 
er part of the Air, are likewiſe forcibly hurried along with the 
reſt, and that the ſole little Globe of the Earth pertinaciouſly 
ſtands ſtill, and unmoved againſt luch an impulle ; a thing , which 
in my thinking, is very dithcult 3 nor can I ſee how the Earth, a 
pendent body , and equilibrated upon its centre , expoſed indit- 
terently to either motion or reſt , and environed with a liquid am- 
bient , ſhould not yield alſo as the reſt, and be carried abour. 
But we tind none of theſe obſtacles in making the Earth tro move; 
a {mall body, and inſenfible , compared to the Univerſe , and 
therctore unable to offer it any violence. 

S a Gr. I find my fancy diſturbed with certain conzeQures ſo con- 
fuledly ſprung from your later diſcourſes ; that, if I would be ena- 
bled to apply my ſelf withatention to what followeth,l muſt of ne- 
cellity attempt whether I can better methodize them , and gather 
thence their true conſtrugion , if haply any can be made of them; 
and peradventure, the proceeding by interrogations may help me 
the more eaſily to exprefle my (elf. Therefore I demand firſt of Sim- 
plicius , whether he believeth , that divers motions may natural- 
ly agree to one and the ſame moveable body, or elſe that it be 
requiſite its natural and proper motion be anely one. 

SiMyL. To one ſingle moveable , there can naturally agree 
but one ſole motion, and no more; the reſt all happen acciden- 
tally and by participation 3 like as to him. that walketh upon the 
Deck of a Ship , his proper motion is that of his walk , his motion 
by participation that which carrieth him to his Port , whither he 


would 


The Seven C n- 
firmatio", 


T he Earth 2 
pendent Boily, ard 
equilzbrated in 4 
finid Medium 
ſeems mnnable to 
reſiſt the rapture 


of the Dinrnal 
Aotion, 


A rele mor 2+ 
able hath but onely 
one natural mutt» 
on , and all the 
reſt are by partici- 
pation. 


ce 


Afotton Cannot 
b- made without 
its moveable ſub- 


felt, 


G. Gati1Lxzus, bis Syſeme. 


would neyer with his walking have arrived , it the Ship with ir; 
motion had not watced him thither. 

SaGk. Tell ine {econdly. That motion , which is commugz. 
cated to any moveable by participation , whileſt it moverh by i 
ſelf, with another motion differcnt from the participated , isir 
neceſſary , that it do reſide in ſome certain lubje@ by itſelf, or 
elſe can it ſubfiſt in nature alone, without other ſupport. 

S1nyL. Ariſtotle giveth you an anſwer to all thele queſtions, 
and tels you , that as of one {ole moyeable the motion is but one; 
ſo of one ſole motion the moveable is but one; and conſequent- 
ly, that without the inherence in its ſubze&t , no motion can ei- 
ther ſubſiſt , or be imagined. 

Sack. I would have you tell me in the third place, whether 
you beblicve that the Moon and the other Planets and Caleſtial 
bodics , have their proper motions , and what they are. 

S1myt. They have ſo, and they be thole according to which 
they run through the Zodiack , the Moon in a Moneth , the Sun 
ina Year, Mars in two, the Starry Sphere in thoſe ſo many thou- 


. ſand. And theſe are their proper, or natural motions. 


SaGr. But that motion wherewith I ſee the fixed Stars , and 
with them all the Planets go unitedly from Eaſt to Weſt, and re- 
turn round to the Eaſt again 1n twenty four hours, how doth it 
agree with them ? 

S1me1. It ſuiteth with them by participation. 

SaGx. This then reſides not in them , and not reſiding in 
them , nor being able to ſubſiſt without ſome ſubject in which ic 


15 reſident , it muſt of force be the proper and natural motion of 
ſome other Sphere. 


Sinei. For this purpoſe Aſtronomers , and Philoſophers have 
found another high Sphere , above all the reſt , without Stars , to 
which Natural agreeth the Diurnal Motion ; and this they call 
the Primum mobile ;, the which carrieth along with it all the in- 
feriour Spheres , contributing and imparting its motion to 
them. 

Sas Rk. But when, without introducing other Spheres unknown 
and hugely vaſt, without other motions or communicated raptures, 
with leaving to each Sphere its ſole and ſimple motion, without 
intermixing contrary motions, but making all turn, one way, as 
t 15 neceſſary that they do, depending all upon one ſole principle; 
all things proceed orderly, and correipond with moſt perfe& hat- 
mony, why do we rejze& this Phenomenon, and give our aſſent to 
thole prodigious and laborious conditions ? 

S1MP1. The difficulty lyeth in finding out this ſo natural and 
expeditious Way. 


© a GK 


Diatocus IT. 


S\Gs. In my judgment this is found. Make the Earth the 
Pr imum mobile, that 13, make it turn round 1ts Own 4x35 11 twenty 
four hours, and towards the ſame point with all the other Spheres ; 
and without participating this ſame motion to any other Planet or 
Star, all ſhall have their riſings, ſettings, and in a word, all the 
other appearances. 

S1pt. The buline(s is, to be able to make the Eaith move 
without athouſand inconveniences. Ts 

SaLtv. All the inconveniences ſhall be removed as faſt as you 
propound them : and the things ſpoken hitherto are onely che 
primary and more general inducements which give us to beheve 
that the diurnal converſion may not altogether without probabi- 
lity be applyed to the Earth, rather than to all the reſt of che U- 
niverle : the which inducements I impole not upon you as invio- 
lable Axioms, but as hints, which carry with them ſomewhat of 
likelihood. And in regard'I know very well, that one (ole ex- 
periment, or concludear demonſtration, produced on the contrary 
part, ſufficeth to batter to the ground thele and a thouland other 
probable Arguments; therefore it is not tit to ſtay here, but proceed 
torwards and hear what Simplicius an{wereth , and what greatei 
probabilities, or ſtronger arguments he alledgeth on the contrary. 

Sinyr. I will firſt ſay ſomething in general upon all thele con- 

fiderations together, and then I will delcend to tome particulars. 
It ſcems that you univerſally bottom all you lay upon the greater 
ſimplicity and facility of producing the {ame effects, whilſt yeu 
hold, that as to the cauſing of them, the motion of the Earth a- 
lone, terveth 4s well as thar of all the reſt of the World, the Earth 
deducted : but as to the operations, you eſteem that much ealier 
than this. To which 1 reply , that I am allo of the ſame opinion, 
ſo long as | regard my own not onely finite, but feeble power ; 
but having a reſpe& to the ſtrength of the Mower , which is in- 
finite , its no lefle eatie to move the Univerſe, than the Earth, 
yea than a ſtraw. And if his power be infinite , why ſhould he not 
rather exerciſe a greater part thereof than a lefſe ? Therefore, 
| hold that your diſcourſe in general is not convincing, 

Salty. If I had at any time faid , that the Univerle moved nor 
tor want of power in the Mower , I ſhould have erred , and your 
reproof would have been ſ{eaſonable; and I grant you, that to 
an tofinite power, it 15ascafie ro move an hundred thouſand, as 
one. But that which I did lay , concerns not the Mover , but one- 
ly hath reſpe&t to the Moveables ; and in them , not onely to 
their reſiſtance , which doubtleſlſe is lefſer in the Earth, than in 
the Univerſe; but to the many other particulars, but even now 
conlidered. As to what you ſay in the next place , that of anin- 
finite power it is better to exerciſe a great part than a ſmal] : , an- 

we. 


105 


One ſingle exe 
perimenty or ſound 
demonſtration bg: = 
fereth down all ar- 


Lguments meerly 
probable, 


Of an influite 
Power one would 
think, 4 preater 
part ſhould rather 


be imploy'd than « 
eſſe. 


106 


" Of infinity, one 
pare is no bigger 
than another , al- 
though they ave 
comparatively tmn= 


equal, 


In the Axiome 
Fruſtra ft per plu- 
ra, &c. the addi- 
tron of xque bene, 
'5 ſuper finons, 


G. Gartrt=us, his Syſtcme. 


(wer, that of infivitc one part is not greater than another , {ns 
both are infinite 3 nor can it be ſaid , that of the infinite number, 
an hundred thouſand is a greater part than two, though that be 
fifry thouſand times greater than this ; and it to the moving of 
the Univerſe there be required a finite power, though very great 
in compariſon of that which lufficeth to move the Earth onely , 
yet 1s there not implied therein a greater part of the infinite power, 
nor is that part leſſc infinite which remaineth unimploy'd. $9 that 
to apply unto a particular effe&t, a little more, or a little leſſs 
power, importeth nothing ; beſides that the operation of ſuch 
vertue , hath nor for its bound or end the Diurnal Motion onely; 
but there are ſeveral other motions in the World , which we 
know of , and many others there may be, that are to us unknowy. 
Therefore if we reſpe& the Moveables , and granting it as out of 
queſtion , that it is a ſhorter and eaſier way to move the Earth, 
than the Univerſe 3 and moreover, having an eye to the {a many 
other abreviations, and facilities that onely this way are to be ob- 
tained , an infallible Maxime of Ariſtotle , which he teacheth us, 
that , fruſtra fit per plura, quod poteſt fieri per pauciora, ren- 
dereth it more probable that the Diurnal Motion belonvs to the 
Earth alone , than to the Univerſe , - the Earth ſubduceed. 

Simyi. In reciting that Axiom , you have omitted a {mall 
clauſc , which unporteth as much as all the reſt , eſpecially in our 
caſe , that is to ſay, the words que bene. It is requiſite therefore 
to examine whether this Hypotbeſts doth equally well farisfle in all 
particulars , as the other. 

Saitv. The knowledg whether both thele poſitions do £quz 
bene , ſatisfie , may be comprehended from the particular exami- 
nation of the appearances which they are to ſatisfie ; for hitherto 
we have diſcourſed , and will continue to argue ex hypetbefi, 
namely, ſuppoſing, that as to the {atisfaGtion of the appearances, 
both the aflumptions are equally accomodated. As to the clauſe 
which you ſay was omitted by me , I have more reaſon to ſuf] 
that it' was ſuperfluouſly inſerted by you. For the expreſſion equt 
bene , 1s a relative that neceſſarily requireth two terms at leaſt, 
for a thing cannot have relation to its ſelf , nor do we ſay, v. gr. 
reſt to be equally good, as reſt. And becauſe , when we ſay, that 
3s done in vain by many means , which may be dowie with fewer, 
we mean » that that which is to be done , ought to be the ſame 
thing , nor two different ones; and becauſe the ſame thing can» - 
not be ſaid to be done as well as its ſelf ; therefore, the addition 
of the Phraſe que bene is ſuperfluous, and a relation , that hath 
bur one term onely. | 

Sa G8. Unleſle you will have the {ame befal us, as did yeſter- 
day , let usreturn to our matter in hand ; and let Simplicius bee 


gin 


Diatocus IT. 


gin to produce thoſe difficulties that ſeem in his opinion, to thwart 
this new diſpoſitlon of the World. 
S1npt. That diſpoſition is not new, bur very old ; and that 
you may ſee itis ſo, Ariſtotle confuteth it; and his confutations 
ire thele: © Firſt if the Earth moverh either in it felf abour irs 
« own Centre , or in an Excentrick Cucle, it is neceſlary that that 
« ſame motion be violent ; for it is not its natural motion , for 
« if it were, each of its parts would partake thereof; but each 
« of them moveth in a right line towards its Centre. lt being 
« therefore violent and pteternatural , it could never be perpetu- 
« a] : But the order of the World is perpetual. Therefore, ec. 
« Secondly , all the other moveables that move circularly , feem 
« to * ſtay behind, and to move with more than one motion , the 
« Primum Mobile excepted : Whence it would be neceſſary that 
« the Earth alſo do move with two motions; and if that ſhould 
« beſo, it would inevitably follow , that mutations ſhould be 
« made in the Fixed Stars, the which none do perceive; nay 
« without any variation , the ſame Stars alwayes riſe from cowards 
« the ſame places , andiw/ the {ame places do ſet. Fhirdly , the 
<« motion of the parts is the ſame with that of the whole, and natu- 
« rally tendeth towards the Centre of the Univerſe; and for the 
« ſame cauſe reſt,being arrived thither. He the r e uponmoves the 
&« queſtion whether the motion of the parts hath a tendency to 
« centre of the Univerſe, or to the centre of the Earth; and conclu- 
« deth that it goeth by proper inſtin& to the centre of the Univerſe, 
&« and per accidence to that of the Earth 3 of which point we largely 
« diſcourſed yeſterday. He laſtly confirmeth the ſame with a fourth 
« argument taken from the experiment of grave bodies, which fal- 
« ing from on high,deſcend perpendicularly unto the Earthsſurface; 
« and in the ſame manner Proje:ons ſhot perpendicularlyupwards, 
«do by the ſame lines return perpendicularly down again, though 
« they were ſhot to a very great height. All which arguments nece(- 
« farily prove their motion to be towards the Centre of the Earth, 
« which without moving at all waits for , and receiveth them. He 
« ;ntimateth in the laſt place that the Aſtronomers alledg other 
« reaſons in confirmation of the ſame conclufions, I mean of the 
« Earths being in the Centre of the Univerſe , and immoveable; 
« and inſtanceth onely in one of them , to wit, that all the Phe- 
« nomena or appearances that are ſeen in the motions of the Stars, 
« perfe&ly agree with the poſition of the Earth in the Centre ; 
« which would not be ſo , were the Earth ſeated otherwiſe. 
© The reſt produced by Ptolomy and the other Aſtronomers, I can 
« give you now if you pleaſe , or after you have ſpoken what you 
*« have to ſay in anſwer to theſe of Ariſtotle. 


SaLv, The arguments which are brought upon this occaſion 
2 are 


Ariltotlcs aAr- 
guments for the 


Earths quieſſence. 


y Reflin) indietzs, 
which is meanc 
h:re of that mott- 
on which a bowl 
makes when is 
born by its Dy as fo 
one (ide or oth: x? 
and (o hindered in 
aces direRt motions | 


Fo 
——— _ - 
_— - - - 


— —_— — _— — 


FER mY _- 


103 


T wo hinde; R 
eArguments tous 
ching the Earths 
moron or ret. 


eArguments of 
Prolomy axd Ty- 
cho,end other p:r- 
ſont , over and a- 
bove thoſe of Ari- 
ltotle, 


The firſt argu- 
ment taken from 
grave boaies fal- 
ling from on his | 
to the ground. 


Which ss Confire 
med by the experi- 
ment of 4 body let 
fall from the round 
top of a Ship. 

* That 1s, at the 
foot of the Malt, 
upon the upper 


deck, 


The ſecond ar- 
gament taken from 
# Projettion ſhot 
Tery high. 


T he third argue 
ment taken from 
the ſhots of a Can- 
nu 1 towards the 
E at, and towards 
#be1Wo't 


G. Gatit=us, his Syſteme. 


are of two kinds : ſome have reſpect to the accidents Terreſtrial 

without any relation to the Stars, and others arte taken from the 
Phenomena and obſervations of things Caleſtial. The arguments 
of Ariſtotle are for the moſt part taken from things neer at hand, 
and he leaveth the others ro Aſtronomers ; and therefore it is the 
beſt way, if you like of it, ro examine theſe taken from experi. 
ments touching the Earth, and then procced to thole of the other 
kind. And becauſc Ptelomy, Tycho, and the other Aſtronomer, 
and Philoſophers, beſides the arguments of Ariſtotle by them afſy. 
med, confirmed, and made good, do produce certain others ; we 
will put chem all together, that ſo we may not an{wer twice to 
the ſame, or the like objze&ions. Therefore Simplicins, chooſe 
whether you will recite them your ſelf, or cauſe me to eaſe you of 
this task, for I am ready to ſerve you. 

SimyL. It15 better that you quote them , becaule, as baving 
taken more pains in the ſtudy of them, you can produce them with 
more readineſſe, and in greater number. | 

S a Lv. All, for the ſtrongeſt reaſon, alledge that of grave bo- 
dies, which falling downwards from on high, move by a right line, 
that is perpendicular to the ſurface of the Earth , an argument 


which is held undeniably to prove that the Earth is unmoveable: 
for in caſe it ſhould have the diurnal motion, a Tower , from the 
top of which a ſtone is let fall, being carried along by the conver. 
fion of the Earth, in the time that the ſtone ſpends in falling,woul 


be tranſported many hundred yards Eaſtward , and fo far diſtan 
from the Towers foot would the ſtone come to ground. The 
which effe& they back with another experiment 3 to wit , by let- 
ting a bullet of lead fall from the round top of a Ship, that lieth a 
anchor, and obſerving the mark it makes where it lights, which t 

find to be _neer the * partners of the Maſt; bur if the ſame bullet 
be let fall from the ſame place when the ſhip is under ſail , it ſhall 
light as far from the former place, as the ſhip harh run in the cime 
of the leads deſcent; and this for no other reafon, than becauſe 
the natural motion of the ball being ar liberty is by a right line ro- 
wards the centre of the Earth. They fortifie this argument with 
the experiment of a projection ſhot on high at a very great d- 
ſtance 3 as for example, a ball ſent out of a Cannon, erected per 
pendicular to the horizon, the which {pendeth ſo much time 1n al- 
cending and falling, that in our parallel the Cannon and we both 
ſhould be carried by the Earth many miles rowards the Eaſt, fo 
that the ball in its return could never come neer the Peece , but 
would fall as far Weſt, as the Earth had run Eaſt. They againe 
adde a third, and very evident experiment, ſcilicet, that ſhooting? 
bullet point blank {or as Gunners ſay,neither above nor under me- 
tal) out of a Culycrin cowards the Eaſt, and afterwards my 

wit 


DrartoGus, II. 


with the ſame charge,and at the ſame elevation or diſport towards 
the Welt, the range towards the Welt ſhould be very much grea- 
ter then the other rowards the Eaſt : for that whii ſt the ball goerh 
Weſtward, ard the Peece 1s carried along by the Earth Eaſtward, 
che ball will fall from the Peece as far diſtant as is the aggregate of 
the two motions, one made by it {elf towards the Weſt , and the 
other by the Pcece carried about by the Earth towards the Eaſt ; 
and on the contrary, from the range of the ball ſhot Eaſtward you 
are to ſubſtract the tpace the Peece moved, being carried after it. 
Now ſuppole, for example, that the range of the ball ſhox Weſt 
were tive miles, and that the Earth in the {ame parallel and in the 
time of the Bals ranging ſhould remove three miles,the Ball in this 
caſe would fall eight miles diſtant from the Culverin, namely, its 
own five Weſtward, and the Culverins three miles Eaſtward : bur 
the range of the ſhot towards the Eaſt would be but two miles 
long, for ſv much 1s the remainder, after you have ſubſtrated 
from the five miles of the range , the three miles which the Peece 
had moved towards the {ame part. But experience ſheweth rhe 
Ranges to be equal, therefore the Culverin, and conſequently the 
Earth are immoveable. And the ſtability of the Earthis no leſſe 
confirmed by two other ſhots made North and South 3 for they 
would never hit the mark, but the Ranges would be alwayes wide, 
or towards the Weſt, by meanes of the remove the mark would 
make, being c2rried along with the Earth towards the Eaſt, whil'ſt 
the ball is lying- And not onely ſhots made by the Meridians, 
bur allo thoſe auned Eaſt or Weit-would prove uncertain; for 
thoſe aim'd Eaſt would be too high, and thole dire&ted Weſt too 
low, although they were ſhot poinr blank, as I ſaid. For the 
Range of the Ball in both the ſhots being made by the Tangent, 
that 1s, by a line parallel to the Horizon, and being that in the di- 
urnal motion, if it be of the Earth, the Horizon goerh continually 
deſcending rowards the Eaſt, and riſing from the Weſt (therefore 
the Oriental Stars ſeem to rife, and the Occidental to decline) lo 
that the Oriental mark would deſcend below the aime , and there- 
upon the ſhot would fly too high, and the alcending of the Weſt- 
ern mark would make the ſhot aimed that way range too low ; ſo 
that the Peece would never carry true towards any point ; and for 
that experience telleth us the contrary, it 15 requiſite to ſay, that 
the Earth is inmovcable. | 

S1Myrt. Theſe are ſolid reaſons, and {uch as I believe no man 
can an\{wer. | 

Sal v. Perhaps they are new to you ? 

Sine. Really they are; and now I ſee with how many ad- 
mirable experiments Nature is pleaſed to favour us, wherewith to 
aſliſt us in the knowledge of the Truth. Oh! how exa&ly one 

truth 


109 


Thu armument 
i confirmed byrwo 
ſhots towards the 
South and towar ds 
the North. 


And it u like- 
wiſe confirmed by 
two (hots towards 
the Eaſt , and to» 
wayds the Weſt. 


Copernicus bu 
followeys are not 
woved through ig - 
nor ance of the ar= 
guments on the 0» 
they part, 


Chriltianus Vur- 
Nirius read certain 
Left ures touching 
the opinion of Co- 
pernicus, & what 
enſued thereupos, 


The followers of 
Copernicus were 
all firft againſt 
that opinion , but 
the Scilators © 
Ariftotle & Pto- 
lomy, were never 


»f the other ſide, 


G. Gat1l us, bis Syſeme. 


truth agreeth with another, and all conſpire to render each other 
1nexpugnable ! 

Sacr What pity it 15 that Guns were not uſed in Ariſtotle; 
age, he would with help of them have eaſily battered down ip- 
norance, and ſpoke without hzſitation of thele mundane points. 

Sartv. lam very glad that theſe reaſons are new unto you, that 
{o you may not reſt in the opinion of the major part of Peripate 
ticks, who believe, that if any one forſakes the Dofrine of Ari- 
ſtotle, it is becauſe they did not underſtand or rightly apprehend 
his demonſtrations. But you may expect to hear of other Novel- 
ties, and you ſhall ſee the tollowers of this new Syſteme produce a- 
gainſt themſelves obſervations, experiences, and reaſons of farre 
greater force than thoſe alledged by AriStotle, Ptolomy, and other 
oppoſers of the ſame concluſions, and by this means you ſhall come 
ro aſcertain your ſelf that they were not induced through want of 
knowledge or expetience to follow that opinion. 

SaGx. It is requiſite that upon this occafion I relate unto you 
ſome accidents that befe]] me, fo ſoon as I firſt began to hear ſpeak 
of this new do&rine. Being very young, and having ſcarcely fi- 


niſhed my courſe of Philoſophy, which I lefc off, as being ſet upon 
other employments, there chanced to come into theſe parts a Cer- 
tain Foreigner of Koſtock, whoſe name, as I remember, was Chri- 
ſtianus Vurſtitins, a follower of Copernicus, who in an Academy 
made two or three LeCtures upon this point, to whom many flock' - 


as Auditors ; but I thinking they went more for the novelty of the 
ſubje& than otherwiſe, did not go to hear him : for I had conclu- 
ded with my {elf that that opinion could be no other than a ſolemn 
madnefle. And queſtioning ſome of thoſe who had been there, | 
perceived they all made a jeſt thereof, execpt one , who told me 
that the buſinefſe was not altogether to be laugh't at, and becauſc 
this man was reputed by me to be very intelligent and wary, I re- 
pented that I was not there, and began from that time forward as 
oft as I met with any one of the Copernican perſwafion, to demand 
of them,if they had been alwayes of the ſame judgment; and of as 
many as I examined, I found not ſo much as one, who told me not 
that he had been a long time of the contrary opinion, but co have 
changed it for this, as convinced by the ſtrength of the reaſons pro- 
ving the ſame : and afterwards queſtioning them, one by one, to 
{ce whether they were well poſleſt of the reaſons of the other ſide, 
I found them all to be very ready and perfe& in them ; ſo that 1 
could not truly ſay, that they had took up this opinion out of ig- 
norance , vanity , or to ſhew the acuteneſle of their wits. On the 
contrary , of as many of the Peripateticks and Prolomeans as | 
have asked (and out of curioſity I have talked with many) what 
pains they had taken in the Book of Copernicus, I found my 

: ew 


Diatocue. II. 

{.-w tat had fo much as luperticially peruled it ; but of thoſe 
whom, | thought, had underſtood the ſame , not one 3 and more- 
over, 1 have enquired amongſt the followers of the Peripaterich 
Docrine , it ever any of them had held the contrary opinion, and 
likewiſe found none that had. W hereupon conſidering that thete 
was no man who followed the opinion of Copernic#s , that had 
not been firſt on the contrary (ide, and that was not very well ac- 
quainted with the reaſons of Ariſtotle and Ptolomy ; and, on the 
contrary , that there is not one of the followers of Prolomy that 
had ever been of the judgment of Copernicws , and had left thar, 
tro imbrace this of Arzſtotle , conſidering, I ſay, theſe things, 1 
began to think , that one , who leaveth an opinion imbued with 
his milk, and followed by very many , to take up another owned 
by very few , and denied by all the Schools , and that really 
leems a very great Paradox , muſt needs have been moved, not 
tolay forced , by more powerful reaſons. For this cauſe, I am 
become very curious to dive , as they ſay, into the bottom of this 
bulineſſe , and accountiit my great good fortune that I have met 
you two , from whom I may without any trouble , hear all that 
hath been , and, haply, can be ſaid on this argument , -aſfurin 
my (elf that the ſtrength of your reaſons will reſolve all (cruples, 
and bring me to a certainty in this ſubje&. 

SinyLt. Burits poſſible your opinion and hopes may be diſap- 
pointed , and that you may find your ſelves more at a lofle in the 
end than you wasat firſt. | 

Sacr. I am very confident that this can in no wile befal 
me. . 

Siny Ll. And why not? Lhavea manifeſt example in my (elf, 
that the farther I go , the more I am confounded. 

SaGx. This isa fign that thoſe reaſons that hitherto ſeemed 
concluding unto you , and allured you T6] the truth of your opt- 
nion , begia to change countenance in your mind , and to let you 
by degrees, if not imbrace, at leaſt look towards the contrary te- 
nent 3 but I, that have been hitherto indifferent , do greatly hope 
to acquire reſt and ſatisfaion by our future diſcourſes, and you 
will not deny but I may, if you pleaſe but to hear what perſwa- 
deth me to this expeQation. 

Sie. I will gladly hearken to the ſame , and ſhould be no 

leſſe glad thar the like effe& might be wrought in me. 
. Sacs. Favour me therefore with an{wering to what I ſhall ask 
you. And firſt, tell me, Stmplicizs, is not the concluſion, which 
we leck the truth of, Whether we ought ro hold with Ariſtotle 
and Ptolomy , that the Earth onely abiding without motion in the 
Centre of the Univerſe, the Celeſtial bodies all move , or elſe, 
Whether the Starry Sphere and the Sun ſtanding ſtill in the Centre, 
' the 


IN 


Motion and reſt 
principal accidents 
11 wALMrE. 


Untruth. cannt 
be demonitrated , 
a Truths are, 

For proof of true 
concluſions, many 
ſolid arguments 
may be produced, 
but to prove a fal- 


foty, none. 


G. Gar1tzus, bis Syſteme. 


the Earth is without the ſame,and owner of all thoſe motions thar 
in our ſceming belong to the Sun and fixed Stars ? | 

S1myp1. Thele are the concluſions which are in diſpute. 

Sacr. And theſe two concluſions, are they not of ſuch a na. 
ture, that one of them muſt neceſſarily be true , and the other 
falle ? © 

S1MP1. They areſo. Weare in a Dilemma, one part of which 
muſt of neceſſity be true, and the other untrue; for between Mo- 
tion and Reſt, which are contradiQories, there cannot be inſtanced 
a third, ſo as that one cannot ſay the Earth moves not; 'nor ſtand; 
ſtill; the Sun and Stars do not move, and yet ſtand nor ſtill. 

S a 6K. The Earth, the Sun, and Stars, what things are they in 
nature ? are they petite things not worth our notice, or grand and 
worthy of confideration ? 

S1np 1. They are principal, noble, integral bodies of the Uni- 
verſe, moſt vaſt and conſiderable. 

Sacr. And Motion, and Reſt, what accidents are they in 
Nature ? 


S1inyL. Sogreat and principal, that Nature her ſelf is defined 
by them. | 

S a 6 . So that moving eternally, and the being wholly immo- 
veable are two conditions very conſiderable in Nature, and indi- 
cate vcry great diverſity ; and eſpecially when aſcribed to the 
principal bodies of the Univerſe, from which can enſue none but 
very different events. 

S:1mpLl. Yea doubtleſle. 

S a 6 x. Now anſwer me to another point. Do you believe that 
in Logick, Rhethorick , the Phyficks,Metaphyſicks, Mathematicks, 
and finally, in the univerſaity of Diſputations there are argument 
ſufficient to perſwade and demonſtrate to a perſon the fallacious, 
no leſſe then the true concluſjons ? 

S1myL. NoSir; rather 1am very confident and certain, that 
for the proving of a true and neceflary conclaſion, there are in 
nature not onely one, but many very powerfull demonſtrations : 
and that one may dilcuſle and handle the ſame divers and ſundr 
wayes, without ever falling into any abſurdity ; and that the more 
any Sophiſt would diſturb and muddy it, the more clear would it: 
cerrainty appear : And that on the contrary to make a falſe pott- 
tion paſle for true, and to per{wade the belief thereof, there can: 
not be any thing produced bur fallacies, Sophiſms, Paralogilmes, 
Equivocations, and Diſcourſes vain, inconfiſtant, and full of rc+ 
pugnances and contradictions. 

S a G &. Now if eternal motion, and eternal reſt be ſo princi- 
pal accidents of Nature, and fo different, that there can depend 
on them only moſt different conſequences, and eſpecially when 


applied 


Diatocns IT 


applycdto the Sun , and to the Earth, lo vaſt and famous bodies 
ot che Univeric 3 and it being, moreover, impollible , that one of 
wo contradictory Propolittons, ſhould not be true, and the other 
falſe ; and that for proof of the falle one, any thing can be pro- 
duced but fallacies 3 but the true one being perſwadeable by all 
kind of concluding and demonſtrative arguments, why ſhould 
you chiuk that he , of you two , who ſhall be fo fortunate as to 
maintain the truc Propoſition ought not to perlwade me ? You 
muſt (uppole me to be of a ſtupid wit, perverle judgment , dull 
mind and intelle&, and of a blind rcalon , that I ſhould not be 
able ro diſtinguiſh light from darknefle , jewels from coals, or 
ruth from talihood. ; 

S1»P L-: I rell you now , and have told you upon other 
occaſions, thar the beſt Maſter to teach us how to dilcern So- 
phiſmes , Paralogiſmes ,- and other fallacies, was Ariſtotle, who 
1n this particular can never be deceived. 

SaGr. Youinfiſt upon ArzStotle , who cannot ſpeak. Yet I 
tell you , thar if Ariſtotle were here , he would either yield him- 
ſelf to be perſwaded by us, or refuring our arguments , convince 
us by better of his own. And you your {elf , when you heard the 
experiments of the Suns related, did you not acknowledg and 
admire them , and confeſſe them more concludent than thoſe of 
Ariſtotle? Yet nevertheleſle 1 cannot perceive that Salvintys, 
who hath produced them , examined them, and with exquiſite 
care (can'd them, doth confeſſe himſelf perſwaded by them; no 
nor by others of greater force, which he intimated that he was 
about to give us an account of. And know not on whar grounds 
you ſhould cenſure Nature , as one that for many Ages hath 
been lazie , and forgetful to.produce ſpeculative wits.z and 
that knoweth not how to make more luch , unlefſe they be luck 
kind of men as {laviſhly giving up their judgments to Ariſtotle, do 
underſtand with his brain , and reſent with his ſenſes. Bur let us 
hear the refidue of thoſe reaſons which favour his opinion, that 
we may thereupon proceed -to ſpeak to them ; comparing and 
weighing them 1n the ballance of impartiality. 

Sat v. Before I proceed any farther, I muſt tell Sagredxs, that 
in theſe our Diſputations, I perionate the Copernican , and imi- 
tate him, as if I were his Zany ;, but what hath been effe&ed in 
my private thoughts by theſe arguments which 1 ſcem to: alledg in 
bis favour, I would not have you to judg by what I ſay , whil'ſt 
lam in the heat of a&ing my part in the Fable ; but x þi L bave 
lad by my diſguiſe , for you may chance to find me different 
trom what you ſee me upon the Stage. Now let us go on. 

Ptolomy and his followers produce another experiment like to 
that of the Projetions » andit is of things that being ſeparated 

P trom 


113 


Ariſtotle would 
efthey re fute his 
adverſaries argue 
ments , or would 
alter his opunton. 


An aroxment 
taken from the 
C loudr, and from 
Brrds. 


«A ou aroiment 
tahen from the airy 
which we feirl to 
beat Hpo3: 44 hoy 
wernmna Horſe at 


full ſperd. 


eAxrx ar um'/nt 
taken from the 
whirlins of C17 C;.- 
lar mation , which 
hath a faculty to 
extrude ard diſſie 


partes 


G. Garirt=us, his £yſteme. 


from the Earth , continue a govd {pace of rime in the Air » ſuch 
as are the Clouds, Birds of flight; and as of them it cannot be 
ſaid that they are rapt or tranſparted by the Earth , having no ad. 
heſion thereto , it leems not poſſible that they ſhould be able tg 
keep pace with the velocity thereof 3 nay it ſhould rather ſeem 
tous, that they all ſwiftly move towards the Weſt : And if 
being carried abour by the Earth , paſfe our parallel in twenty 
four hours, which yet is at lcaſt ſixteen thouſand miles, how can 
Birds follow ſuch a courſe or revolution ? Whereas on the con. 
trary , we ſee them fly as well towards the Eaſt, as towards the 
Weſt, or any other part , without any ſenſible difference. More. 
over, if when we run a Horſe at his ipeed , we feel the air beat 
vehemently againſt our face, what an imperuous blaſt ought we 
perpetually to feel from the Eaſt -, being carried with fo rapida 
courlec againſt the wind ? and yet no (uch effect is perceived. Take 
another very ingenious argument inferred from the following ex- 
periment. The circular motion hath a faculty to extrude and dil. 
ſipate from its Centre the parts of the moving body , whenſoeyer 
either the motion is not very flow , or thole parts are n6t very 
well faſtened rogether ; and therefore , if v. g. we ſhould turn 
one of thoſe great wheels very faſt about , wherein one or more 
men walking , crane up very great weights, as the huge maſſie 
ſtone , uſed by the Callander for prefling of Cloaths ; or the 
fraighted Barks which being haled on ſhore, are hoiſted out of 
one river into another; incaſe the parts of that ſame Wheel { 
ſwiftly turn'd round, be not very well joyn'd and pin'd rogether, 
they would all be ſhattered to pieces 3 and though many ſtones or 
other ponderous ſubſtances,ſhould be very faſt bound to its outward 
Rinme , yet could they not retiſt the impetuoſity ,. which with 
great violence would hurl them every way far from the Wheel, 
and conſcquently from its Centre, So that if .the Earth did move 
with ſuch and ſo much greater velocity , what gravity, what tena- 
city of lime or plaiſter would keep together. Stones, Buildings, and 
whole Cities , that they ſhould not be toſt into the Air by to pre- 
cipitous a motion ? And both men and beaſts , which are not fa- 
ſtened to the Earth , how could they reſiſt fo great an impetws? 
Whereas, on the other fide, we ſee both theſe , ' and far leflfe re- 
ſiſtances of pebles , ſands, leaves reſt quietly on the Earth, and 
to return to it 1n falling , though with a very flow morion- See 
here , Simplicizs , the moſt potent arguments, taken; to {o ſpeak, 
from things Terreſtrial ; there remain thoſe of the other kind , 
namely , ſuch as have relation to the appearances. of Heaven, 
which reaſons, to confefle the truth , tend more to prove the 
Earth to be in the centre of the Univerſe , and conſequently, to 
depriveitof the annual motion about the ſame , a{cribed unto it 


by 


Diatocues LJ]; 


by Coperric #5. \\lach arguments , as being of formcwiut a diffe- 
\Cne narure 4 May be provuced, atrer we have examined the 
ſirength of thele alrcady propounded. 
S+GRr. W hat lay you 51mplicizs ? do you think that Salvia! us 
\ Maſtcr of, ai.d knoweth how to unfold the Prolomean and Ari- 
fotelian arguments ? Or do you think that any Peripatetich is c- 
qually refit in the Cypernican demonſtrations ? 
S1met. Were It not for the high eſteem, that the paſt diſcour- 
{es have begot 19 me of the learning of Salviatizs, and of the a- 
cutcncfle of Sagreamns , 1 would by thor good leave have CONC My 
way without ſtaying tor their avlwers; it {ceming to me a thing 
impoſlibic , that {o pa]pebic experiments ſhould be contradicted; 
and would, without hearing them farther , confirm my leclt in my 
old periwation ; for though I ſhould be made to ice that it was cr- 
roneous, its being upheld by lo many probable reaſons, would ren- 
der it exculeable. And 1i thele are ftallacics, what crue demonſtra- 
tions were ever fo fair ? 
SaGk- Yct its goud that we hear the reſpontions of Salviatus; 
which if they be true, mult of necetlity be more fair, and that by 
infinite degrees 3 and thole mult be detormed, yea moſt detormed, 
if the Meraphy ical Axiome hold, That true and fair are one and True and {++ 
the ſame tliag 3 as allo falſe and deformed. Thereforc Salviatus _ Eo rea Rey: 
let's no loager Joſe time. ard deformed. © 
Salyv. The firſt Argument alledged by Srmplicizs, if 1 well rc- 
member it, was this. The Earth cannot move circularly, becaulc 
luch motion would be violent to the ſame , and therctore nor per- 
perua] : -that it 15 violent, the reaſon was : Becaule,that had it been 
natural, its parts would likewiſe naturally move 1o0und , which 15s 
impoſlible, tor that it is natural for the parts thereot to move with a 
nght motion downwards. To this my reply is, that I could glad- 
ly wiſh, that Ariſtotle had more cleerly expreſt himlelf , where he The aswuer ws 
laid 3 Thar its parts would likewile move circularly 3 for this ma- Arittoiles þrf# ar 
ving circularly is to:be underſtopd; two wayes , one is, that every **" 
particle or; atome leparated from its J hole would move circularly 
about its particular centre, deſcribing its {mall Circulets; the other 
15, that the whole Globe moving abour its centre in twenty tour 
hours, the parts allo would turn about the {ame centre in four and 
twenty hours. The firſt would be no lefle an impertinency , than 
if one ſhould ſay, that every part of the circumference of a Circle 
ought .ro be a Curcle ; or becauſe. that the Earth 1s Spherical , that 
therefore every part thereof be a Globe , for (o doth the Axiome 
require :- Eadem eſt ratio totizs5, EX partzum. Bur it he took it in 
the other ſetile ,* ro wit, that the parts 1n imitation of - the I bole 
ſhould move naturally round the Centre of the whole Globe in 
twenty four hours , I ſay, that they do io 3 and it concerns you, 


2 inſtead 


Q 


116 


That which « 
violent, canner be 
eternal, and that 
which cannot be e= 
ternal, cannot be 
natural, 


G. Gartitzus, his Syſteme. 


inſtcad of Ariſtotle, to prove that they do not 

Sine. Thisisproved by Ariſtotle in the ſame place, when he 
ſaith, that the natural motion of the parts is the right motion 
downwards to the centre of the Univerſe ; fo that the circylz; 
motion cannot naturally agree therewith. 

Sar v. Burdo not you ſee, that thoſe very words carry in them 
a corfutation of this {olution ? | 

Simpl. How? and where ? 

Sar v. Doth not he ſay that the circular motion of the Ear 
would be violent? and therefore not eternal ? and that this js ab. 
ſurd, for that the order of the World is erernal ? 

S;meyt. He ſaith lo. . 

S atv. Butif that whichis violent cannot be eternal, then by 
converſion, that which cannot be eternal, cannot be natural : but 
the motion of the Earth downwards cannot be otherwile eternal; 
therefore much leſſe can it be natural : nor can any other motion 
be natural to it, ſave onely that which is eternal. But if we make 
the Earth move with a circular motion, this may be eternal to it, 
and to its parts, and theretore natural. 

S1mer. The right motion is moſt natural to the parts of the 
Earth, and is to them eternal ; nor ſhall it ever happen that they 
move not with a right motion ; alwayes provided that the impe- 
diments be removed. 

S atv. Youequivocate Simplicius ; and I will try to free you 
from the equivoke. Tell me , therefore, do you think that 1 
Ship which ſhould fail from the Strait of Gibralter towards Pale. 


ftina can eternally move towards that Coaſt ? keeping alwayes an 
equal courle ? 


S 1» y 1- No doubtleſle. 

Sartv. And why not? 

Simpx. Becauie that Voyage is bounded and terminated be- 
tween the Herculean Pillars, and the ſhore of the Holy-land; and 
the diſtance being limited, it is paſt in a finite time, unleſle one by 
returning back ſhould with a contrary motion begin the ſame Voy- 
age anew; but this would be an interrupted and no continutd 
motion. 

SaLv. Very true. But the Navigation from the Strait of Me: 
galanes by the Pacifick Ocean, the Moluccha's, the Cape 4i buows 
Speranza, and from thence by the ſame Strait, and then again by 
the Pacifick Ocean, &c. do you believe that it may be perpe- 
tuared ? 

Simpy. It may; for this being a circumgyration, which re 
turneth about its ſelf, with infinite replications, it may be perpetu- 
ated without any interruption. 

Saiv. AdShipthen may in this Voyage continue ſailng eter 
nally. | S1meL 


Diatocue. Il. 


619? Lt. It may, in caſe the Ship were imcorruptible, but th: 
Ship decaying, the Navigation muſt of neceflity come to an end, 

S+Lv. Burin the Mediterrane, though the Veſſel were incor- 
ruprible, yet could ſhe not lail perpetually rowards Paleftina, thar 
\ oyage being determined. Two things then are required, to the 
end a moveable may without intermitlion move perpetually ; the 
one is, that the motion may of its own nature be indeterminate and 
infinite 3 the other, that the moveable be likewile Incorruptible 
and eternal. 

Size t- All this1s neceflary. 

Sat v- Therefore you may (ce how of your own accord you 
have cont-(led it impoſlible that any moveable ſhould move crer- 
nally in a r1ght line, in regard that right motion, whether it be up- 
wards, or downwards, is by you your felt bounded by the circum- 
ference and centre 3 lo that if a Moveable , as ſuppole the Earth 
be ererna], yet foralſmuch as the right morion is not of its own na- 

cure eterna]l, but moſt * terminate, 1t cannot naturally ſuit with 
the Earth. Nay, as was ſaid * yeſterday, Ariſtotle himſelf is 
conſtrained to make the Terreſtrial Globe erernally immoveable. 
When again you ſay, that the parts of the Earth evermore move 
downwards, all impediments being removed, you egregiouſly equi- 
vocate ; for then, on the other ſide they mult be impeded, contra- 
ried, and forced, if you would have them move 3 for , when they 
are once fallen to the ground, they muſt be violently thrown up- 
wards, that they may a ſecond time fall; and as to the DS. 
ments, theſe only hinder its arrival at the centre; bur if there were 
a Yell, that did paſſe thorow and beyond the centre, yet would not 
a clod of Earth paſſe beyond it, aolefle inaſmuch as being tranſ- 
ported by its impetus, it ſhould paſle the ſame to return thither a- 
gain, and in the end there to reſt. As therefore to the defending, 
that the motion by a right line doth or can agree naturally neither 
to the Earth, nor to any other moveable , whilſt the Univerſe re- 
taineth irs perfe& order, | would have you take no further paines a- 
bour ir, bur (unlefſe you will grant them the circular morion) 
your belt way will be to defend and maintain their immobiliry. 

S1inet. Asto their immoveableneſſe , the arguments of Ari- 
ftotle, and moreover thole alledged by your (elf ſeem in my opini- 
on neceflarily to conchude the ſame, as yet; and I conceive it will 
be a hard matter to refute them. 

Sar v. Come we therefore to the ſecond Argument, which was, 
Thar thoſe bodies,-which we are affured do move circularly, have 

more than one motion, unlefle it be the Primem Mobile ;, and 
therefore, if the Earth did move circularly, it ought to have two 
monons; from which alrerations wonld follow in the riſing and 
fetting of the Fixed Stars : Which effe& is not percerved to enſue. 


There- 


uy 


T w2 tl gs ye 
qur/:teiorhe end a 
Mon MAy Pere 
preaxte it ſelf; an 
urlimited ſpace , 
and as Mcorrupts- 
ble moveable, 


Reehe motion 
Cannot be eternal, 
and Conſequently 
Cannot be natrtral 
tothe Earth, 


* Termainatiſhmo. 


* By this expreſſi« 
on he every where 
mans the prece- 
ding Dalogue, Ol 
(j107 nate, 


The anſwer to 
the ſecond Arga- 


wert, 


TI 


* Cuidckcere, 


" O: Cecanrre, 


Anliones arga- 
mnt ar kinſ the 
E arth:e motion, uu 
aefeiirie im two 
things 

* The Come word 
which s hitlea. oy? 
{ ::ndrcd ay | e- 
Inrd , as a bowle 
when 1, meets with 
WW.S, 


CG. Galli zus, hs Syfieme. 


Therefore, &c. The molt proper and genuine anſwer to this Alle. 
gation is Contained 1n the Argument it {elt; ard even AriStotl, 
puts it in our mouths, which 1t 1s impoſlible, Simplicizes , that You 
ſhould nor have cen. 

S1my 1. I neither have ſecn it, vor do 1 yet apprehend it. 

Sarv. This cannot be, ſure, the thing 1s fo very plain. 

SiMe i. 1 will with your leave, caſt an cye upon the Text. 

S aGcr. We will command the Text to be brought forthwith, 

Sine. Ialwaycs carry it about with me : Sec hereitis, and 
I know the place pertc&ly well > which 1s in [:b. 2. De Clo, cap. 
16. Here itis, Text 97. Preterea omnia, que feruntur latione 
circulari ſubdeficere videntur , ac moveri pluribus una latione, 
preter prumam Spheram; quare &* Terram neceſſariam eſt , ſive 
circa medium , ſive in medio poſita feratur , duabus mover 
lationibus. Si autcm hoc acciderit , neceſſariam eſt frert muta- 
tiones, ac converſiones fixorum aſtrarum. Hoc autem non vide- 
tur ficri , ſed ſemper cadem , apud eadem loca ipſius , + oriun- 
tur, & occidunt. | In Engliſh thus : | Furthermore all that are 
carried with circular motion , {eem to * foreſlow , and to move 
with morc than one motion , except the firſt Sphere 3 wherefore 
it is neceſſary that the Earth move with two motions , whether 
it be carried about the * middle, or placed in the middle. But 
if it be ſo, there would ot neceſſity be alterations and converſt- 
ons made amongſt the fixed Stars. But no {uch thing 1s ſeen to 
be done , but the {ame Star doth alwayes rite and ſet in the {ame 
place. In all this I tind not any falacy , and my thinks the argy- 
ment 1s very forcible. | 

Salv. And this new reading of the place hath confirmed me 
in the fallacy of the Sillogiſme,, . aid mpreover , diſcovered ano- 
ther falſity. Therefore oblerve. The Poſitions, or if you wil, 
Concluſions , which Ariſtotie endeavours to oppoſe, are two ; one 
1s that of thole , who placing the. Earth in the midſt of the World, 
do make ut move 1n it {elf about its own centre. The other isof 
thoſe , who conſticuting it far from the middle , do makeit re- 
volve with a cucular motion about the middle of the Univerle. 
And both thete Poſitions he conjointly impugneth with one and 
the ſame argument. Now I aftirm that he is out in both the one 
and the other impugvation ; and that his error againſt the firlt 
Polition 1s an Equivoke or Paralogilme 3; and his miſtake touch 
ing the lecond is a falſe conſequence. Let us begin with the firſt 
Ailertion , which conſtituteth the Earth in the midſt of the 
World, and maketh it move in it ſelf about its own-centre 3 and 
let us confropt it with rhe objeion of Ariſtotle; ſaying , All 
moveables , that move circularly , ſeem to * foreſlow , and move 
with more than one Byas , except the firſt Sphere (that is the pri: 

mu 


DiatoGue, IT, 


mm mic) theictore the Earth moving about its own centre, 
| being placed 1a the middle , muſt of necefliry have two byalle.. 


and forcilow. Burt if this were lo , it would follow , that there 
hould be a variation in the riting and letting of rhe fixed Stars , 
which we do not perceive to be done : Theretore the Earth doth 
not move, &*c. Here is the Paralogilme, and to diſcover it, I will 
argue with Ariſtotle in this manner. Thou faiſt , oh Ariſtotle, 
that the Earth placcd in the middle of the World , cannot move 
in it ſelt (7. e. upon its own ax#s) for then it would be requiſite 
to allow it two byatiles 3 fo thar, it ic ſhould not be necef{ary to 
allow it more than one Byas onely , thou wouldeſt nor then hold 
it impolitblc tor it ro move onely with that one; for thou would'ſt 
unneccilarily have confined the impoſltbility to the plurality of 
byaſſes, it 1a cale it had no more but one , yet it could not move 
with that. And b:caule that of all the moveables in the World, 
thou makeſt but one alone to move with one {ole byas; and all 
the reſt with more than one ; and this ſame moveable thon af- 
ficmeſt to be the fii{t Sphere , namely , that by which all che fix- 


Weſt , if in calc the Earth may be that firſt Sphere , that by mo- 
ving with one byas onely , may make the Stars appear to move 
from Eaſt ro Weſt , thou wilt not deny them ir : Bur he that af- 
firmeth , chat the Earth being placed in the midſt of the World, 
moveth about its own Axis , aſcribes unto it no other motion, 
ſave that by which all the Scars appear to move from Eaſt to Weſt; 
and {o ir cometh ro be that firſt Sphere , which thou thy ſelf ac- 
knowledgeſt ro move with but one byas onely. It is therefore ne- 
ceflary , oh Ariſtotle, if thou wilt conclude any thing, that thou 
demonſtrate z that the: Earth being placed in the midſt of the 
World , cannot move with ſo much as one byas onely ; or elſe, 
that much leſſe can the firſt Sphere have one {ole motion ; for 9- 
therwite chou doeſt in thy very Stlloviſme both commit the falacy, 
and dereCt ir, denying, andat that very time proving the ſame 
thing. 1 come now to the ſecond Poſition , namely, of thoſe 
who placing the Earth far from the midſt of the Univerſe , make 
it moveable about the ſame 3: that is, make it a Planet and erra- 
ack Star ; againſt which the argument 1s direfted , and as to 
torm is concludent , bur faileth in matter. For ir being granted, 
that the Earth doth in that manner move , and that with two by- 
alles, yer doth it not neceſſarily follow that though it were fo, 
It ſhould make altetations in the rifings and ſettings of the fixed 
Nars, as 1 ſhall in its proper place declare. And here I could 
gladly excuſe Ariſtotle; rather I could highly applaud him for ha- 
ving light upon the moſt ſubtil argument rhat could be produced 
igainſt the Copernican Hypotheſis; and if the objeQion be inge- 


nious, 


ed and erratick Stars tcem harmomouſly to move from Eaſt to - 


19 


G. Gariitzus, bs Syſteme. 


r10us, and to outward appearance moſt powerful , you may ſce 

bow much more acute and ingenious the folution muſt be, and 

not to be found by a wit lefle piercing than thar of Copernicus; 

and again from the difficulty in underſtanding it , you may argue 

the {o much greater difficulty 1n finding ir. But ler us for the Pie- 

{ent ſuſpend our anſwer , which you ſhall underſtand in due time 

and place , after we have repeated the obzeCtion of Ariſtotle, and 

that in his favour, much ſtrengthened. Now paſſe we to Arj- 

The anſwer to ſtotles third Argument , touching which we need give no farther 
nn han ©24- reply , it having been ſufficiently anſwered betwixt the diſcourſe, 
: of yeſterday and to day : Inas much as he urgeth , that the mo. 
tion of grave bodies is naturally by a right line to the centre; and 

then enquireth , whether to the centre of the Earth , or to that 

of the Univerſe, and concludeth that they tend naturally to the 

centre of the Univerſe , but accidentally to that of the Earth. 

,7b* axſmer 19 Therefore we may proceed to the fourth , upon which its requiſite 
pac ova, ©£*%" that we ftay ſome time, by reaſon it 15 founded upon that ExPe- 
riment , from whence the greater part of the remaining argu- 

ments derive all thcir ſtrength. Ariſtotle ſaith therefore, that itis 

a moſt convincing argument of the Earths immobility ,' to ſee 

that projzeGtions thrown or ſhot upright , return perpendicularly 

by the ſame line unto the ſame place from whence they were ſhot 

or thrown. And this holdeth true, although the motion be of a 

very great height , which could never come to paſſe , did the 

Earth move : tor in the time that the projected body 1s moving 

upwards and downwards in a ſtate of ſeparation from the Earth, 

the place from whence the motion of the prozeQion began, would 


be paſt, by means of the Earths revolution, a great way tv- 
wards the Eaſt, and look how great that ſpace was , ſo far fron 


that place would the projeged body inits deſcent come to the 
ground. So that hither may be referred the argument taken fiom 
a bullet ſhot from a Canon direaly upwards 3 as alſo that other 
uſed by Ariſtotle and Ptolomy , of the grave bodies that falling 
from on high , are obſerved to deſcend by a dire& and perpendicu- 
lar line to the ſurface of the Earch. Now that I may begin to untie 
theſe knots, I demand of Simplicins that in caſe one ſhould deny 
to Ptolomy and Ariftotle that weights in falling freely from on 
high , deicend by a right and perpendicular line , that is, diretly 
to the centre , what means he would uſe to prove it ? 

Simyt. The meansof the lenſes ; the which aſſureth us, that 
that Tower or other altitude, is upright and perpendicular , and 
ſheweth us that that ſtone , or other grave body , doth lide along 
the Wall , without inclining a hairs breadth to one ſide or ano- 


ther, and light at the foot thereof juſt under the place from whence 
it was let fall. 


SALV 


Diatocus IT. 


0,1 v. But if it ſhould happen that the Terrcſtrial Globe did 
move round, and conſequently carry the Tower allo alons wi 
it, and that the ſtone did then allo grate and ſlide along the (ide | 
-he Tower, what muſt its motion be then ? 

S1»pL. In this caſe we may.rather ſay its motions : for ic 
ould have one wherewith to de(cend from the top of the Tower 
to the bottom, and ſhould neccflarily have another to follow the 
courle of the laid Tower. 

$1. v. So that its motion ſhould be compounded of two, to 
wir, of that wherewithit meaſureth the Tower, and of that o- 
ther wherewith it followerh the ſame : From which compoſition 
would follow, that the ſtone would no longer deſcribe that {imple 
right and perpendicular line, but one tranl{verſe, and perhaps nor 
ſtreight. 

$1MyL- I can fay nothing of irs non-refitude, but this I know 
very well, that it would of neceflity be tranſverſe, and different 
from the other directly perpendicular, which it doth deſcribe, the 
Earth ſtanding ſtill. 

Sa Lv. You lee then, that upon the meer oblcrving the falling 
ſoac to glide along the Fower, you cannot certainly aftirm that 
it deſcribeth a line which is ſtreight and perpendicular, unleſs you 
firſt ſuppoſe that the Earth ſtandeth ſtil], 

Simpl. True, for if the Earth ſhould move, the ſtones mo- 
tion would be tranlverſe, and not perpendicular. | 
S a 1 v. Behold then the Paralogilm of Ariſtotle and Ptolomey 
to be evident and manifeſt, and diſcovered by you your ſelf, 


wherein that is {uppoſed for known, which is intended to be de- 
monlſtrated. 


$1M yt. How can that be? To me it appeareth that the 
Fyllogilm is rightly demonſtrated wirhour petitionem principii. 
SaLtyv. You ſhall ſee how it 153 anſwer me a little. Doth he 
not lay down the concluſion as unknown ? 
$1e Lt. Unknown ; why otherwiſe the demonſtrating it would 
de ſuperfluous. 
Sa v. But the middle term, ought not that to be known ? 
Sint. Its neceſſary that it ſhould ; for otherwiſe it would be 
a proving ignotum per &que ignotum. 
S atv. Our concluſion which is to be proved, and which is un- 
known, is it not the ſtability of the Earth ? 
SIMPL. It is the ſame. 
SAL v. The middle term, which ought to be known,is it not the 
ſtreight and perpendicular deſcent of the ſtone ? 
dinyL. It is fo. 
dilv. But was it not juſt now concluded, that we can have 
no Certain knowledg whether that ſame ſhall be dzre& and perpen- 
Q_ dicular; 


Tb: Par alog v9 
of Ariltotle and 
Pcolomey #& ſap- 
po ling that for 
h nown, which 1 in 
qneftion, 


$Þ 4 


Aritotle admit- 
teth that the Fire 
mover! atrettly 
u2wards by na- 
ture, ard round a= 
bout by participas 


$10 Ms 


G. Garlitzus, his Syſleme. 


dicular, unlcis we tuſt know that the Earth ſtands ſtill > Therefore 
in your Syllogiim the certainty of the middle term is allumeq 
From the uncertainty of the conclution. You may ſee then, wha: 
and how great the Pa ralogilm 15. 

S a 6 r. | would, in favour of Simplicius, detend Ariſtotle if 
were poſlible , or at leaſt better larisfhie my felf CONCerning the 
ſtrength of your illation. You ſay, that the leeing the ſtone rake 
along the Tower, 1 not {ufficient to aſſure us, that its motion j; 
perpendicular (which 1s the middle term of the Syllogilm) unleſ; 
it be preſuppoſed, that the Earth ſtandeth ſtill, which is the con- 
cluſion to be proved : For that if the Tower did move together 
with the Earth, and the ſtone did ſlide along the fame, the motion 
of tlie ſtone would be tianſverle, and not perpendicular. But] 
ſhall anſwer, that ſhould the Tower move, it would be impoſſible 
that the ſtonc ſhould fail gliding along the {ide of it; and there. 
fore from its falling in that manner the ſtability of the Earth is in- 
tecred. ! 

S:'mypr. Itis fo; forif you would have the ſtone in deſcend. 
ing to grate upon the Tower , though it were carried round by 
the Farth, you mult allow the ſtone two natural motions, to wit, 
the ſt.aight motion towards the Centre, and the circular about 
the Centre, the which is unpoſlible. 

SaLlv. Ariſtotles detenle then confiſteth in the impoſſibilitie, 
or at leaſt in his cſteeming it an impollibility, that the ſtone ſhould 
move with a motion mix. of right and circular : for if he did 
not hold it impollible that the ſtone could move to the Centre, 
and about the Centre at once, he muſt have underſtood, that it 
might come to paſs that the cadent ſtone might in its deſcent, race 
the Tower as well when it moved as when it ſtood ſtill ; and con- 
ſequently he mult have perceived, that from this graring nothing 
could be inferred touching the mobility or immobility of the 
Earth. But this doth not any way excuſe AriStotle ; aſwell be- 
caulc he ought to have expreſt it, if he had had ſuch a conceit, it 
being lo material a part of his Argument ; as alſo becauſe it can 
neither be ſaid that {uch an effe& is impoſſible, nor that Ariſtotle 
did citeem it ſo. The firſt cannot be affirmed, for that by and 
by 1 ſhall ſhew that it 1s not onely poſſible, but neceſſary : nor 
much lels can the {econd be averred, for that Ariſtotle himſelf 
granteth fire to move naturally upwards in a right line, and to 
move about with the diurnal motion, imparted by Heaven to the 
whole Element of Fire, and the greater part of the Air : If there- 
tore he held it not impoſſible to mix the right motion upwards, 
with the circular communicated to the Fire and Air from the con- 
cave of the Moon, much leſs ought he to account impoflible the 
mixcure of the right motion downwards of the ſtone, with the 


circular 


Diatocus IT. 


4ircular which we preſuppole natural to the whole Terreſtrial 
Globe, of which the ſtone is a part. 

S1nPL. I lee no ſuch thing : for if the clement of Fire re- 
;olye round together with the Air, it is a very eaſe, yea a neceſlary 
;hing, that a ſpark of fire which from the Earth mounts upwards, 
;n paſſing chorow the moving air, ſhould receive the ſame motion, 
being a body ſo thin, light, and eafie to be moved : but that a 
very heavy ſtone, or a Canon bullet, that deſcendeth from on 
high, and that is at hberty ro move whither it will, ſhould juffer 
it {elf to be tranſported either by the air or any other thing, is 
alrogether incredible. Beſides that, we have the Experiment, 
which is ſo proper to our purpoſe, of the ſtone let fall from the 
round top of the Maſt of a ſhip, which when the ſhip lyech ill, 
falleth ar the Partners of the Maſt ; but when the ſhip faileth, falls 
ſo far diſtant from that place, by how far the ſhip in the time of 
the ſtones falling had run forward ; which will not be a few fa- 
thoms, when the ſhips courſe 1s ſwift. 

$4 Lv. Fhere is a great diſparity between the caſe of the Ship 
and that of the Earth, if the Terreſtrial Globe be ſuppoſed to have 
: durnal motion. Forit is a thing very -maniteſt, that the mo- 
on of the Ship, as i 1s not natural to it, ſo the motion of all thoſe 
things that are in it 1s accidental; whence it is no wonder that the 
ſtone which was retained in the ropnd top, being left at liberty, 
deſcendeth downwards without any obligation to follow the mo- 
tion of the Ship. But the diurnal converſion 1s aſcribed to the 
Terreſtrial Globe for its proper and natural motion, and conſe- 
quently, it is ſo toall the parts of che ſaid Globe ; and, as being 
impreſs'd by nature, 1s indelible in them; and therefore that ſtone 
that is on the top of the Tower hath an intrinſick inclination of 
erolving about the Cenere of its Whole in twenty four hours, and 
this ame natural inſtinR it exerciſeth eternally, be it placed in any 
fare whatſoever. And to be aflured of the truth of this, you 
hve no more to do but to alter an antiquated impreſſion made 
in your mind ; and to ſay, Likeas in that I hitherto holding it to 
be the property of the Terreſtrial Globe to reſt immoveable about 
its Centre, did never doubt or queſtion but that all whatſoever 
particles thereof do alſo naturally remain in the ſame ſtate of reſt : 
So 1t 1s reaſon, 1n caſe the Terreſtnal Globe did move round by 
natural inſtinE in twenty four hours, that the intrinſick and natu- 
al inclination of all its parts ſhould alſo be, not to ſtand ſtill, bur 
to follow the ſame revolution. And thus without running into 
any inconvenience, one may conclude, that 1n regard the motion 
Conterred by the force of * Oars on the Ship, and' by it on all the 
things that are contained within her, is not natural but forreign, it 
8 Very reaſonable that that ſtone, it being ſeparated from the ſhip, 
Q 2 do 


The diſparity be- 
tween the fall of = 
ſhone from the 
round top of a ſhip, 
and from the rop 
of 4 tower. 


*That you may nor 
luſpeRt my tranſla- 
tion, or wonder 
what Oars have to 
do with a ſhip, you 
are to know that 
the Author intends 
the Gallies uſed in 
the Mediterrane, 


124 


The part of the 
Air wmferiony to 
tz WTLIL 17 11- 
tam: dath follow 


the motion of the 
E arih. 


T he motion of the 
eAbr apt to Carry 
with it light things 


but not beavy, 


G. GatiLt#us, his Syſteme. 


do reduce its ſelf to its natural diſpolure, and return to exerciſe 
its pure ſimple inſtinct por it by nature. To this 1 add, tha; 


it's neceſſary, that at leaſt that part of the Air which 15 beneath the 
greater heights of mountains, ſhould be traniported and Carried 
round by the roughneſs of the Earths ſurface ; or that, as being 
mixt with many Vapours, and terrene Exhalations, it do na 
turally follow the diurnal motion , which occurreth not in the 
Air about the ſhip rowed by Oars : So that your arguing 
from the ſhip to the Tower hath not tbe force of an llation; 
becauſe that ſtone which falls from the round top of the Maſt, 
entereth into a medium , which is unconcern'd in the motion 
of the ſhip : but that which departeth from the top of the Tower, 
finds a medinm that hath a motion in common with the whole Ter- 
reſtrial Globe ; ſo that without being hindred, rather being aſſiſted 
by the motion of the air, it may follow the univerſal courle of the 
Earth. 

Simpy. I cannot conceive that the air can 1mprint in a very 
great ſtone, or in a grols Globe of Wood or Ball of Lead, zz 
{uppoſe of two hundied weight, the motion wherewith its ſelf is 
moved, and which it doth perhaps communicate to feathers, ſnow, 
and other very light things : nay} I ſee that a weight of that ne 
ture, being expoſed ro any the moſt impetuous wind, .is not there- 
by removed an inch from irs place ; now conſider with your {elf 
whether the air will carry it along therewith, 

Sar v. There is great difference between your experiment and 
our caſe. You introduce rhe wind blowing againſt that ſtone, 
ſappoſed in a ſtate of reſt, and we expoſe to the air, which already 
moveth, the ſtone which doth alſo move with the ſame velocity; 
ſo that rhe air is not to conferr, a new motion upon it, but onel 
to maintain, or to ſpeak better, not to hinder the motion already 
acquired : you would drive the ſtone with a ſtrange and preter- 
natural motion, and we defire to conſerve it in its natural. If 
you would produce a more pertinent experiment, you ſhould ſay, 
that it is obſerved, if not with the eye of the forchead, yet with 
that of the mind, what would evene, if an cagle that is carried by 
the courſe of the wind, ſhould let a ſtone fall from its talons; 
which, in regard that at its being let go, it went along with the 
wind, and after it was let fall it entered into a medium that mo- 
ved with equal velocity, I am very confident that it would not be 
{cen to deſcend inits fall perpendicularly, but that following the 
courſe of the wind, and adding thereto that of its particular gra- 
vity, 1t would move with a tranſverſe motion. 

S1MyL. But it would firſt be known how ſuch an experiment 


may be made; and then one might judg according to the event. 


In the mean time the effe& of the ſhip doth hitherzo incline to fa 
vOUr our OpWnIoN. SaLv. 


Driatocus. IT. 


Sarv. Well ſaid you hitherto, tor perhaps it may anon change 
countenance. And that 1 may no longer hold you in ſulpentt, 
icll me, Szmeplicins, do you really belicve, that the Experiment of 
che ſhip ſquares lo very well with our purpole,. as that it ought to 
be believed, that thar which we ſee happen in it, ought allo to 
eyene 1n the Terreſtrial Globe ? 

Sinet. As yer | amof that opinion; and though you have 
alledgcd ſome {mall diſparities, 1 do not think them of fo great 
moment, as that they ſhould make me change my judgment. 

SaLlv. I rather deſire that you would continue therein, and 
hold for certain, that the effe& of the Earth would cxaQtly anſwer 
char of the ſhip : provided, that when it ſhall appear prejudicial to 
your cauſe, you would not be humorous and alter your thoughts. 
You may haply ſay, Foraſmuch as when the ſhip ſtands ſtill, rhe 
ſtone falls at the foot of the Maſt, and when the is under (ail, it 
lights far from thence, that therefore by converſion, from the ſtones 
falling at- the foot is argued the ſhips ſtanding Rtill, and from its 
falling far from thence 1s argued her moving; and becauſe that 
which occurrerh to the ſhip, ought likewiſe to befall the Earth : 
that therefore from the falling of the ſtone at the foot of the Tow- 

er is necefſarily inferred the immobility of the Terreſtrial Globe. 
1s not this your argumentation? 


S1nyL. It is; and reduced into that conciſeneſs, as that it is 
become moſt caſe to be apprehended. 

SaLtv. Now tell me; if the ſtone let fall from the Round- 
cop , when the ſhip is in a {wift courſe, ſhould fall exaQtly in 
the ſame place of the ſhip, in which it falleth when the ſhip is at 


anchor, what {crvice would theſe experiments do you, in order to 
the aſcertaining whether the veſſel doth ſtand ſtill or move ? 

- StmpL. Juſt none : Like as, for exemple, from the beating of 
the pulſe one cannor know whether a perion be aſleep or awake, 
ſecing thar the pulſe beateth after the ſame manner in fleeping as 
in waking. 


$arv. Very well. Have you ever tryed the experiment of the 
Ship ? 

M y L. I have not; but yet I believe that thole Authors 
which alledg the ſame, have accurately obſerved it; beſides that 
the cauſe of the diſparity is ſo manifeſtly known, that it admits 
of no queſtion. 

Salv. That it is: poſſible that thoſe Authors inſtance in it, 
without having made tryal of it, you your ſelf are a good teſt; 
mony, that without having examined it, alledg it as certain, and in 
a Cedulous way remit it to their authority 3 as it 1s now not onely 
pollible, but very probable that they likewiſe did ; I mean, did 
remit the ſame to their Predecefiors, without ever arriving at one 


that 


T he fone falling 
from the Mait of 
4 ſhip lights in the 
ſame place, whe- 
ther the (ſhip deth 
move or ly till, 


' by promiling thax you would force Simplicixs to diſcover the 


G. Gar1tzus, his Syſleme. 


that had made the experiment : for whoever ſhall examine the 
ſame, ſhall find thc event ſucceed quite contrary to what hath 
been written of it : that is, he ſhall {ee the ſtone fall at all times 
in the ſame place of the Ship, whether it ſtand ſtill, or move with 
any whatſoever velocity. So that the ſame holding true in the 
Earth, as in the Ship, one cannot from the ſtones falling perpen- 
dicularly at the.foot of the Tower, conclude any thing touching 
the motion or reſt of the Earth. 

Sine. If you ſhould refer me to any other means than to 
experience, I verily believe our Diſputations would not come to 
an end in haſte ; be this ſeemeth to me a thing ſo remote from all 
humane reaſon, as that it leaveth not the leaſt place for creduluy 
or probability. | 

Sauv. And yet it hath left place in me for both. 

S1mpr. How is this? You have not made an hundred, no nor 
one proof thereof, and do you fo confidently afficm it for true? 
I for my part will return to my incredulity, and to the confidence 
I had that che Experiment hath been tried by the hen Au- 
thors who made uic thereof, and that the event ſucceeded as they 
affirm. 

SaLlv. Lam aſſured that the effeft wil] enſue as I tell you; for ſo 
it is neceſlary that it ſhould : and I farther add,that you know yow 
ſelf that it cannot fall put atherwiſe, however you feign or ſeem to 
tcign that you know it not. Yer I am fo good at taming of wits, 
that 1 will make you couteſs the ſame whether you will or no. But 
Sagredys ſtand; very mute, and yet, if I miſtake not, I ſaw him 
make ap offer to ſpeak ſomewhat, 

S4aGR. I bad an intent to {lay ſomething, but to tell you true, 
know not what it was; for the curiglity that you bave moved in me, 


knowledg which he would conceal from us, hath made me to de- 
pole all other thoughts : therefore I pray you to make good your 
vaunt: 

S aL y- Provideq that Simplicizs dp conſent to reply to what | 
ſhall ask him, I will not fail to do it. 

S1MeL- I will antwer what I know, affured that I ſhall not be 
much put to it, for that of thoſe things which I hold to be falſe, 
I chink nothing can be known, in regard that Science reſpeteth 
truths and not falſhoods. 

S a Lv. I defire not that you ſhould ſay or reply, that you know 
any thing, ſave that which you moſt afſuredly know. Therefore 
tell me ; If you had here a flat luperficies as polite as a Looking- 
glaſs, and of a ſubſtance as hard as ſteel, and that it were not p- 
calel ro the Horjzon, but ſomewhat inclining, and that upon it 
you did put a Ball perfectly ſpherical, and of a ſubſtance grave and 


hard, 


Diatocus IT, 


hard, as ſuppoſe of brals ; what think you it would do being let 
| v0? do not you believe (as for my part I do) thar it would lie 
ſtill? 

$ ie Li. If that ſuperficies were inclining ? 

Sar v. Yes; foro I have already {uppoled. 

$1\neLt- I cannot conceive how it ſhould lie ſtill : nay, T am 
confident that it would move towards the declivity with much pro- 
enſnels. 
F Sarv. Take good heed what you ſay, Simplicine, for I am 
confident that it would lie ſtill in what ever place you ſhould lay 
It. 
Sin L- So long as-you make uſe of ſuch ſuppoſitions, Sal- 
virtws, I ſhall ceale to wonder if you inferr moſt abſurd con- 
cluſtons. | 


Sar v. Are you aflured, then, that it would freely move to- 
wards the declivity ? 


SiMmyL» Who doubts it ? 

$a LV. And this you verily believe, not becauſe I told you ſo, 
«(for L endeavoured to perſwade you to think the contrary) but of 
your ſelf, and upon your nataral judgment. 

$1nyL- Nowl fce what you would be at ; you ſpoke nor this 
as really believing the fame 3 but to try me, and to wreft matter 
out of my own mouth wherewith to condemn me. | 

Sa1.v. You are 1n the right. And how long would that Ball 
move, and wita what velocity ? But take notice that I inſtanced 
in a Ball exactly round, and a plain exquiſitely poliſhed, thar all 
external and accidental impediments might be taken away. And 
lo would | have you remove all obſtruQions cauſed by the Airs rc- 
liſtance to divifion, and all other caſual obſtacles, if any other 
there can be. * | 

Sine u. I very well underſtand your meaning , and as to your 
demand, I anſwer, that the Ball would continue to move in 7n- 
fnitum, if the inclination of the plain ſhould fo long laſt, and con- 
tinually with an accelerating motion ; for fuch is the natare of 
ponderous moveables, that wires acquirant eundo : and the great- 
er the declivity was, the greater the velocity would be. 

Salv. But if one ſhould require that that Ball ſhould move 
_—_ on that ſame ſuperficies, do you believe that it would 
0do? | 


' v1? L. Not ſpontaneouſly ; but being drawn, or violently 
thrown, it may. 


Saryv. Andin caſc it were thruſt forward by the impreſſion of 


lome violent zmpetus from without, what and how great would 
ts motion be 2? 


914? . The motion would go continually decreafing and re- 
tarding, 


127 


125 


G. Garitzus, hi Syſleme. 


tarding , as being contrary to nature 3 and would be Lynger o 
ſhorter, according to the greater or lels impulſe, and according ty 
the greater or leſs acclivity. 

Sa L v. It ſecms, then, that hitherto you have explained to me 
the accidents of a moveable upon two different Planes ; and thar 
in the inclining plane, the grave moveable doth ſpontaneouſly de. 
ſcend, and goerh continually accelerating, and that to retain it in 
reſt, force muſt be uſcd therein : bur that on the aſcending plane, 
there is required a force to thruſt it forward, and alſo to ſtay it in 
reſt, and that the motion impreſſed goeth continually diminiſhing, 
till that in the end it cometh to nothing. You ſay yet farther, 
that in both the one and the other caſe, there do ariſe differences 
from the planes having a greater or leſs declivity or acclivity ; ( 
that the greater inclination 1s attended with the greater velocity; 
and contrariwiſe, upon the aſcending plane, rhe fame moveable 
thrown with the ſame force, moveth a greater diſtance, by how 
inuch the elevation is leſs, Now tell me, what would befall the 
ſame moveable upon a ſuperficies that had neither acclivity nor 
declivity ? | 

Sinner. Here you muſt give me a little time to conſider of an 


anſwer. There being no declivity, there can be no natural incli- 


nation to motion : and there being no acclivity, there can be no 


reſiſtance to being moved ; ſo that there would ariſe an indiffe 
rence between propenſion and reſiſtance of motion ; therefore, 
methinks it ought naturally to ſtand ſtill. Bur.I had forgot my 
{elf : it was but even now that Sagreds gave me to underſtand 
that it would ſo do. 

S at. v. Sol think, provided one did lay it down gently : but 
if it had an impetxs given it towards any part, what would f0þ 
low ? 


Sine. There would follow, that it ſhould move towards that 
part. 

SaLv. But with what kind of motion ? with the continually 
accelerated, as in declining planes; or with the ſucceflively re- 
tarded, as in thole aſcending. 

S1me. I cannot tell how to diſcover any cauſe of acceleration, 
or retardation, there being no declivity or acc: "ity. 

Sarv. Well : butif there be no cauſe of retardation, much 
leſs ought there to be any cauſe of reſt. How long therefore 
would you have the moveable to move ? 


Sine. As long as that ſuperficies, neither inclined nor decli- 
ncd ſhall laſt, | 

SaLlv. Therefore if ſuch a ſpace wgre interminate, the motion 
upon the ſame would likewiſe have no termination, that is, would 


be perpetual. 


S1MPL 


Driatocus, IT. 


S;,yy. I think lo, if {o be the moveable be of a matter 
durabic. | | | 

aL v. That hath been already {uppoled , when it was laid, 
char all external and accidental impediments were removed , and 
che brittlenefle of the moveable in this our caſe , is one of thoſe 
mpecdiments accidental. Tell me now , what do you think is thc 
caule that that Jame Ball moveth {pontaneouſly upon the inciting 
planc, and not without violence upon the ercted ? 

Si» e-. Becaule the inclination of grave bodies is to move to- 
wards the centre of the Earth , and onely by violence upwards to- 
wards the \circumference 3; and the inclining ſuperficies is that 
which acquireth vicinity to the centre , and the alcending one, 
remoteneſle. ” 

S a L v- Therefore a {uperficies , which ſhould be neither de- 
clining r.or a{cending , ought in all its parts to be equally di- 

ſtant from the centre. But is there any ſuch (ſuperticies in the 
World ? 

$1 me. There 1s no want thereof : Such is our Terreſtrial 
Globe , ifit were moreeven , and not as it is rough and montai- 
nous 3 bur you have that of the Water, at ſuch time as it is calm 
and ſtill. 

SaLlv. Then a ſhip which moveth in a calm at Seca , is one of 
thoſe moveables , which run along one of thoſe ſuperticies that 
are neither declining nor aſcending , and therefore diſpoſed, in 
cale all obſtacles external and accidental were removed, to move 
with the unpulſe once imparted inceſſantly and uniformly. 

SineL. Ir ſhould ſeem to be lo. 

Satv. And that ſtone which is on the round top , doth not it 
move , as being together with the ſhip carried about by the cir- 
cunference of a Circle about the Centre ; and therefore conle- 
quently by a motion 1n 1t indelible , it all extern obſtacles be 
removed ? And 15 not this motion as {wift as that of the ſhip. 

Simnypi. Hitherto all is well. But whar followeth ? 

Sau v. Then in good time recant , I pray you, that your laſt 
concluſion , if you are ſatisfied with the truth of all the pre- 
miles, 

SimeL. By my laſt concluſion, you mean, That that ſame 
ſtone moving with a motion indelibly impreſſed upon it, is not to 
leave, nay rather is to follow the ſhip', and in the end to light in 
ic ſelf ſame place , where it falleth when the ſhip lyeth ſtill ; and 
lo I allo grant it would do, in cale there were no outward impe- 
anents that might diſturb the ſtones motion , after its being let 
go, the which unpediments are two, the one is the moveables 
ability to break through the air with its meer impetxs onely , it 
being deprived of that of the ſtrength of Oars , of which it had 

R been 


i 


130 


The projett ac- 
cording to Ariſto- 
tle,ts not moved by 
vertive impreſſed , 
but by the wedium. 


G. Gar 1txzus, bi Syſleme. 


been partaker , as part of the ſhip , at the time that it was ugg 
the Maſt; the other is the new motion of delcent, which all 
muſt needs be an hinderance of that other progreſſive morion. 
SAL v. As to the impediment of the Air , I do not deny kt 
you; andif the thing falling were a light matter, as a feather, 
or a lock of wool, the retardation would be very great, butin 
an heavy ſtone is very exceeding ſmall. And you your ſelf by 
even now did ſay , that the force of the moſt impetnous wing 
ſufficeth not to ſtir a great ſtone from its place 3 now do bur cop. 
ſider what the calmer air is able to do, being encountred by ; 
ſtone no-more {wift than the whole ſhip. Nevertheleſle, as 1 ſaid 
before , 1 do allow you this. ſmall effte&, that may depend upon 
ſuch an impediment ; Ike as I know, that you will grant to me, 
that if the air ſhould move with the ſame velocity that the ſhip 
and ſtone hath , then the impediment would be nothing at all, 
As to the other of the additional motion downwards -; in the firf 
place it is manifeſt, that theſe two, I mean the circular, about 
the centre , and the ſtreight, towards the centre, are not contra- 
ries, or deſtructive to one another, or incompatible. Becauſe that 
as to the moveable , it hath no repugnance at all to ſuch motions, 
for you your ſelf have already confeſt the repugnance to be + 
gainſt the motion which removeth from the centre , and the incli- 
nation to be towards the motion which approacherh to the centre. 
Whence ut dothof neceſlity follow , that the moveable hath n& 
ther repugnance , nor propenfion to the motion which neither ap- 
proacheth , nor gocth from the centre, nor conſequently is there 
any cauſe for the diminiſhing in it the faculty impreſſed. And tor 
aſmuch as the moving cauſe is not one alone , which it hath 


rained by the new operation of retardation ; but that they ar 
rwo , diſtin& from cach other, of which, the gravity attends or- 


ly to the drawing of the moveable rowards the centre, and the 


vertue umpreſs't to the conducting it about the centre , there re 
maineth no occaſion of impediment. 


SiMe 1. Your argumentation , to give you your due, is very 
probable ; bur in reality it 1s invelloped with certain intricacies, 
that are not eaſie to be extricated. You have all along built upon 
a luppolition , which the Peripatetick, Schools will not caſily grant 
you , as being dire&ly contrary to AriStotle , and it is to take for 
known and manifeſt , That the proje& ſeparated from the proji- 
cient, continueth the motion by wertye impreſſed on it by che 
laid projicient z which wertze impreſſed is a thing as much dete- 
ſted in Peripatetick Philoſophy , as the paſſage of any accident 
from one ſubje& into another. Which do&rine doth hold , asl 
believe it 1s well known unto you , that the proje& is carried by 
the medium, which in our caſe happeneth to be the Air. And 


there- 


Diatocue, IT. 


thercfore if that ſtone let fall from the round top, ought to fol- 
low the motion of the ſhip , thar effe& ſhould be aſcribed to the 
Air, and nor to the vertue impreſſed. But you preſuppole that 
the Air doth not follow the morion of the ſhip , but is tranquil. 
Moreover, he that letterh it fall , is not to throw it, or to give 
ic ampet es with his arm, but ought barely to open his hand and let 
it £05 and by this means, the ſtone , neither through the vertue 
impreſſed by the projicient , nor through the help of the Air, 
hall be able to follow the ſhips motion, and therefore ſhall be 
left behind. 

Sau v- I think then that you would ſay , that if the ſtone be 
nor thrown by the arm of that perſon , it is no longer a pro- 
JCt1ON. 

S1»eL. It cannot be properly called a motion of projection. 

$aLVv. So then that which Ariſtotle ſpeaks of the motion, the 
moveable, and the mover of the projeds , hath nothing ro do 
with the bulinefſe in hand ; and it it concern not our purpoſe, 
why do you alledg the {ame 2? 

S1my. I produce it on the ocea(ion of that impreſſed vertue, 
named and introduced by you , which having no being in the 
World, can be of no force; for non-entium null e ſunt operatio- 
nes; and therefore not onely of projeted , but of all other pre- 
ternatural motions, the moving cauſc ought to be aſcribed to the 
medium , of which there hath been no due conſideration had ; 
aad therefore all that hath been ſaid hitherto is to no purpole. 

S+Lv. Go to now, in good time. Bur tell me , ſeeing thar 
your inſtance 1s wholly grounded upon the nullity of the vertue 
mpcefled , if I ſhall demonſtrate ro you, that the medinm hath 
norhing to do in the continuation of projets, after they are (c- 
patated from the projicient , will you admit of the impreſſed ver- 
te, or will, you make another attempt to overthrow it ? 

S1my. The operation of the medium being removed, I ſee not 
how one can have recourſe to any thing elle fave the faculty im- 
peſled by the mover. 

Sa Lv. It would be well, for the removing, as much as 1s 
poſlible , the occations of multiplying contentions , that you 


operation of rhe medium 1n continuing the motion of the projeRt. 
$1»y. The projicient hath the ſtone in his hand,” and with 
torce and violence throws his arm , with which jatation the 
lone doth not move ſo much as the circumambient Air ; ſo that 
When the ſtone at its being forſaken by the hand , findeth it ſelf 
the Air , which at the ſame time moveth with impetouſity , it 
bthereby born away 3 for, if the air did not operate , the ſtone 

would fall at the foot of the projicient or thrower. 
R 2 SAL Y. 


wopld explain with as much diſtin&neſſe as may be , what 18 that 


31 


Operation of the 
medium inconting- 
ing the motion of 
the projett, 


132 


Many experi» 
ments , and roa- 
ſons againſt the 
cauſe of the mati- 
on of projelts, aſs 


Signed by Arittocle, 


G. Gar1tzus, his Syſeme. 


SAa1lv. And was you fo credulous , as to ſuffer your ſelf to be 


perſwaded to believe thele fopperics , ſo long as you had your 


lenſes about you to confute them , and to underſtand th. 
truth thereof 2 Therefore tell me, that great ſtone, and that 
Canon bullet , which but onely laid upon a table, did continye 
immoveable againſt the moſt impetuous winds , according as yoy x 
little before did affirm , if it had been a ball of cork or other light 
ſtuffe, think you that the wind would have removed it from its 
lace ? 
: S1Mp, Yes, and I am aſſured that it would have blown jt 
quite away , and with fo much more velocity , by how much the 
matter was lighter , for upon this reaſon we {ee the clouds to he 


tranſported with a velocity equal to that of the wind that drives 
them. 


Sary. And what is the Wind ? 

S1Mp, The Wind is defined to he nothing elſe but air moved. 

SaLtv., Then the moved air doth carry light things more 
ſwiftly , and to a greater diſtance , then it doth heavy. 

S1MP. Yes certainly. | 

SAaLlv. Butif you were to throw with your arm a ſtone, anda 
lock of cotton wool , which would mave i{wiſteſt and fartheſt ? 
R Sia1P. The ſtone by much; nay the wool would fall at my 

ect. 

Sar v. But, if that which moveth the projefted ſubſtance, at 
ter it is delivered from the hand , be no other than the air moved 
by the arm, and the moved air do more cafily bear away liht 
than graye matters, how cometh it that the projze& of wool flictl 
not farther , and ſwifter than that of ſtone? Certainly it argy 
eth that the ſtone hath ſome other impulſe befides the motion of 
the air. Furthermare 4 if two ſtrings of equal length did hang 
at yonder beam, and at.the end of one there was faſtened a bul- 
let of lead, and a ball of cotton wool at the other, and both 
were carried to an equal diſtance from the perpendicular , and 
then let go; itis not to be doubted, but that both rhe one and 
the other would mave towards the perpendicular , and that being 
carried by their own izzpetxs , they would go a certain ſpace be- 
yond it , and afterwards return thither again. But which of theſe 
two pendent Globes do you think , would continue longeſt in mo- 
tion , before that it would came to reſt in its perpendicularity ? 

S1my. The ballof lead would ſwing to and again many times, 
and that of wool but two or three at the moſt. 

SA LV. So that that zupetis and that mobility whatſoever 15 
the caule thereof , would conſerve its felf longer in grave ſub- 
ſtances , than light; I proceed now to anocher particular, and de- 


mand of you , why the air doth not carry away that Lemon 
which & npon that {ame Table ? S1MP. 


Diatocus II. 

$;»1y- Becaule that the air it ſelf is\not moved 

Sar v. It is requilite then , that the projicient do confer mo- 
tion onthe Air > with which it afterward moyeth the projet. Bur 
if ſuch a motion cannot be impreſſed | 3. e. imparted] it being im- 
poſlible to make an accident paſſe out of one ſubje& into anorher, 
how can it paſſe from the arm into the Air ? Will you ſay that th- 
Air is not a ſubject different from the arm ? 

$11y. To this 1tis anſwered that the Air, in regard it 1s nej- 
ther heavy nor light in its own Regjon , 1s diſpoſed with facility to 

receive every impulle , and allo to retain the ſame. 
|  $aLv-. But if thoſe penduli even now named , did prove 
unto 115, that the moveable , the lefle it had of gravity , the leſle 
apt it was to conſerve its motion , how can it be that the Air 
which in the Air hath no gravity at all , doth of it ſelf alone re- 
rain the motion acquired ? I beheve, and know that you by this 
time are of the ſame opinion , that the arm doth not ſooner re- 
rurn to reſt , than doth the circumambient Air. Let's go fnto the 
Chamber , and with a towel let us agitate the Air as much as we 
can , and then holding the cloth ſtill , ler a little candle be 
brought , that was lighted in the next room , ' or inthe ſame place 
let a leaf of beaten Gold be left at liberty to flic any way, xe | you 
ſhall by the calm vagation of them be aſſured that the Air is imme- 


daately reduced to tranquilty. I could alledy many other experi- * 


ments to the ſame purpoſe, bur if one of theſe ſhould nor ſuf- 
fice , I ſhould think your folly altogether incurable. | 
Sack. When an arrow is ſhot againſt the Wind, how incredi- 
ble a thing 18 it , that that ſame (mall filament of air , impeled by 
the bow-ſtring » ſhould in deſprec of face go along with the arrow? 
But I would willingly know another partteular of Ariſtotle , to 
which I intreat Simplicizs would youchſafe me an anſwer. Sup- 
poling that with the fame Bow there were ſhot two atrows, one 
juſt after the uſual manner , and the other fide-wayes, placing ir 
long-waycs upon the Bow-ſtring , and then letting it flie, I would 
know which of them would go fartheſt. Favour me, I ptay you 
with an anſwer, though the queſtion may ſeem to you rather 
rxiculous than otherwile ; and excuſe me , for that I, who am, as 
you lee , rather blockiſh, than not , can reach no higher with my 
[peculative faculty, 
$1nyL. I have never feen an arrow ſhot in that manner, yet 
nevertheleffe 1 believe » that tt would not flie fide-long , the 
Wenticth part of the fpace that it goeth end-wayes. 
 daG6 KR And for that I am of the ſame opinion, hence it is, that 
[ have a doubt riſen in me , whether Ariftotle doth not contradit 
Aperience.. For as to experience, if I lay two arrows upon this 
Table, ina time vvhen a ſtrong Wind blovveth, one dis 
the 


13 


n 


— - FP) & 
- SF 


The medium dotb 
impede avd not core 
fer the motion of 
projets, 


G. Gar1it=us, his Syſteme, 


the courſe of the wind, and the other ſidelong, the wind wil 
quickly carry away this later, and leave the other where it was; 
and the ſame to my ſceming, ought to happen, it the Do&rine of 
Ariſtotle were true, of thole two ſhot our of a Bow : foraſmuch 
as the arrow ſhot ſideways 1s driven by a great quantity of Ajr 
moved by the bowſtring, to wit by as much as the ſaid [tring i; 
long, whereas the other arrow recciveth no greater a quantity of 
air, than the ſmall circle of the ſtrings thickneſs. And 1 cannor 
imagine what may be the reaſon of luch a difference, but would 
fain know the ſame. 

S1My. The cauſe ſcemeth to me ſufficiently manifeſt; and it 
is, becauſe the arrow ſhot endways, hath bur a little quantity of 
ajr to penetrate, and the other is ro make its way through a quan- 
rity as great as Its whole length. 

Sar v. Then it ſeems the arrows ſhot, are to penetrate the air ? 
but if the air goeth along with them, yea, is that which carrieth 
them, what penetration can they make therein ? Do you not ſee 
that, in this caſe, the arrow would of neceſſity move with greater 
velocity than the air ? and this greater velocity, what doth confer 
it on the arrow? Will you ſay the air giveth them a velocit 
greater than its own? Know then, Simplicixs, that the buſinel; 
proceeds quite contrary to that which Ar:ſtotle ſaith, and that the 
medium conferreth the motion on the projet, is as falſe, as it 
true, that it 1s the onely thing which procureth its obſtru&ion; and 
having known this, you ſhall underſtand without finding any thing 
whereof to make queſtion, that it the air be really moved, it doth 
much better carry the dart along with it longways, than endways 
for that the air which impelleth it in that poſture, is much, and in 
this very little. But ſhooting with the Bow, foraſmuch as the air 
ſtands ſtill, the tranſverſe arrow, being to force its paſſage through 
much air, comes to be much impeded, and the other that was nock't 
cafily overcometh the obſtruction of the ſmall quantity of air; 
which oppoleth it ſelf thereto. : 

Sarv. How many Propoſitions have I obſerved in Ariſtotle, 
(meaning ſtil] m Natural Philolophy) that are not onely falſe, 
but falſe in fuch fort, that its diametrical contrary is true, as it 
happens in this caſe. But purſuing the point in hand, I think that 
Simplicins is perſ[waded, that, from fecing the ſtone always to fall 
in the {ame place, he cannot conjecture either the motion or ſta- 
bility of the Ship : and if what hath been hitherto ſpoken, 
ſhould not ſuffice, there is the Experiment of the medznm which 
may thorowly aſſure us thereof ; in which experiment, the moft 
that could be ſeen would be, that the cadent moveable might be 
left behind, if it were light, and that the air did not follow the 
motion of the ſhip : but in caſe the air ſhould moye with equal 

velocity, 


Diatocus Il. 

relocity, NO imaginable diverſity could be found either in this, 
or any other experiment whatſoever, as I am anon to tell you, 
Now if in this caſe there appeareth no difference at all, what can 
be pretended to be cen in the ſtone falling from the top. of the 
Tower, where the motion in gyration is not adyentitious, and ac- 
cidental, but natural and eternal; and where the air exaGtly fol- 
lowcth the motion of the Tower, and the Tower that of thi Ter- 
reſtrial Globe ? have you any thing elſe to ſay, Simplicius, upon 
this particular ? 

$1 y. No more but this, that I ſee not the mobility of the 
Earth as yet proved, | 

Saiv. Nor have | any intention at this time, but onely to 
ſhew, that nothing can be concluded from the experiments alledg- 
ed by our adverſaries for convincing Arguments : as I think 4 
ſhall prove the others to be. | 

$4aG 8. I beleech you, Salwiatss, before you proceed any far- 
ther, to, permit. me to ſtart certain queſtions, which have been 
rowing in my fancy all the while that you with ſo much patiencso 
and equanimity, was minutely explaining ro Simplicius the expe- 
ment of the Ship. | 

Sarv. We are here met with a purpoſe to diſpute, and it's fit 
that every one ſhould move the difficulties that he meets withall ; 
for this is the way to come to the knowledg of the truth. 
Therctore ſpeak freely. . 

SaGs. If it be true; that the izepetus wherewith the ſhip moves 
doth remain indelibly impreſ{'d in the ſtone, after it is let fall from 
the Maſt ; and if it be farther truc, that this motion brings no im- 
pediment or retardment to the motion diretly downwards, na- 
tural to the ſtone : it's neceſſary, that there do an effe& enſue of 
a very wonderful nature. Leta Ship be ſuppoſed to ſtand ſtill, 
and let the time of the falling of a ftone from the Maſts Round-rop 
to the ground, be two beats of the pulle ; let the Ship afterwards 
be under ſail, and ler the ſame ftone depart from the ſame place; 
and it, according to what hath been premiſed, ſhall ſtill take up 
the time of two pulſes in its fall, m which time the ſhip will have 
run, ſuppoſe, twenty yards; ſo that the true motion of the ſtone 
will be a tranſverſe line, conſiderably longer than the firſt ſtraight 
and perpendicular line, which is the length of the * Maſt, and yer 
nevertheleſs the * ſtone will have paſt it in the ſame time. Let 
it be farther {uppoled, that the Ships motion 1s much more accele- 
ted, {o that the ſtone in falling ſhall be to pals a tranſverſe line 
mich longer than the other ; and in ſum, increaſing the Ships ve- 
locity as much as you will, the falling ſtone ſhall deſcribe its tranſ- 
Verle lines C1]! longer and longer, and yet ſhall paſs them all in 
hoſe (eIf ſamac two pulſes. And in this faſhion, if a Canon wy 

| tevel 


135 


en admirabls 
accid:nt in the mc- 
riow of projelts, 


*By the length of 
the mat he means 
the diſtance be- 
eween the upper» 
d:ck and Round» 
tOP. | 

*La pallas 


G. Gartit*us, his Syſteme, 


level'd on the top of a Tower, and ſhots were made theregjyþ, 
point blank, that 15, paralcl ro the Horizon, let the Piece haye , 
'reater or Icls charge, ſo as that the ball may tall {ometimes : 
thouſand yards diſtant; ſometimes faur thouſand, ſometimes ſix, 
| ſometimes teny &*c. and all thele ſhots ſhall curry or finiſh they 
ranges in times equal, to each other, and every one equal tg the 
time which the ball would take to pals from the mouth of th. 
Piece to the ground, being left, without other umpulle, to fall 
ſimply downward 10 4 perpendicular line. Now it ſeems a yer 
admirable thing, that in the lame ſhort time of its falling perpen- 
dicularly down to the ground, from the height of, ſuppoſe, an 
hundred yards, the ſame ball, being rhruſt violently out of the 
Piece by the Fire, ſhould be able to paſs one while four hundred, 
another while a thouſand, anotker while tour, another while ten 
thouſand yards, lg as that the laid ball in all ſhots made point 
blank, always continueth an equal time 1 the air. 

Sar v. The conſideration for its novelty is very pretty, and if 
the efte& be true, very admirable : and of the truth thereoh, | 
make no queſtion : and were it not for the accidental impediment 
bf the air, I veiily believe; that, if at the time of the balls going 
out ol the Picce, another were let fall from the ſame height di- 
realy downwards, they would both come to the ground at the 
ſame inſtant, though that ſhould have curried ten thouſand 
miles in its range, and this but an hundred .onely : preſuppoſing 
the ſurface of the Earth to be equal, which to be aſſured of, the 
experiment may be made upon fome lake. As for the impediment 
which might come from the air, 1t would contiſt in rerarding the 
extreme {witt motion of the ſhot. Now, it you think fit, we wil 
proceed to the ſolution of the other ObjeGtions, leceing that Sin- 
plicius (as far as I can lee) is convinc'd of the nullity of this fir, 
taken from things falling from on high downwards. 

Sine. 1 findnot all my (cruples removed, but it may be the 
fault is my own, as not being of ſo caſie and quick an apprehenſion 
as Sagredus. Andit ſeems to me, that if this motion, of which 
the ſtone did partake whilſt it was on the Round-top of the Ships 
Maſt, be, as you ſay, to conſerve it ſelf indelibly in the ſaid ſtone, 
even after it 15 {eparated from the Ship, it would follow, that like- 
wile in caſc any one, riding a horſe that was upon his ſpeed, ſhould 
let a bowl drop out of his hand, that bowl being fallen to the 
ground would continue its motion and follow the horſes ſteps, 
without tarrying behind him : the which effe&, I believe, is not 
to be (cen, unleſs when he that 15 upon the horſe ſhould throw it 
with violence that way towards which he runneth 3 but otherwiſe, 
I believe it will ſtay on the ground in the ſame place where 1t 


tcll. 


RS ELL YT 


GALV, 


Diatocus [T. 


$a v. I bclieve that you very much deceive your ſelf, and am 
certain,that experience will ſhew you the contrary,and that the ball 
being oace arrived at the ground, will run together with the hore, 
ot ſtaying behind him, unleſs ſo far as the alperity and uneven- 
nels of the Earth ſhall hinderic. And the realon ſeems to me 
yery manifeſt : for if you, ſtanding ſtil}, throw the ſaid ball a- 
Jong the ground, do you think it would nor continue its motion 
even afrer you had delivered it out of your hand ? and that for ſo 
much a greater ſpace , by how much the {uperficies were more 
ſmooth, 1o that &. g. upon ice it would run a great way ? 

$1ny. There 1s no doubt of it, if 1 give it zmpetws with my 
arm; but in the other caſe it is ſuppoled, that he who is upon the 
horſe, onely drops it out of his hand. 

S$a1v. So I deſire that it ſhould be : but when you throw it 
with your arm, what other remaineth to the ball being once gone 
out of your hand, than the motion received from your arm, which 
motion being conſerved in the boul, it doth continue to carry ir 
forward ? Now, what doth it import, that that impetus be con- 
ferred on the ball rather from the arm than from the horſe? Whilſt 
you were on horſeback, did not your hand, and conſequently the 
ball run-as faſt as the horfe it (elf? Doubtleſs it did : therefore 
in onely opening of the hand, the ball departs with the motioa al- 
ready conceived, not from your arm, by your particular motion, 
buc from the'mibtion dependant on the ſaid horſe, which cometh to 
be communicated to you, to your arm, to your hand, and laſtly to 
the ball. Nay, I will tell you farther, that if the rider upon his 
{peed fling the ball with his arm to the part contrary to the courſe, 
It ſhall, after it is fallen to the ground, ſometimes (albeit thrown to 
the contrary part) follow the courſe of the horle, and ſometimes lie 
ſtill on the ground 3 and ſhall onely move contrary to the ſaid 
courſe, when the motion received from the arm, ſhall exceed that 
of the carrier in velocity. And it is a vanity, that of ſome, who 
ſay that a horſeman 1s able to caſt a javelin thorow the air, that 
way which the horſe runs, and with the horſe to follow and over- 
take the ſame 3 and laſtly, to catch it again. Ir 1s, I ſay, a vanity, 
for that to make the proje& return into the hand, it is requiſite to 
caſt it upwards, in the ſame manner as if you ſtood ſtill. For, let 
tbe carrier be never fo ſwift, provided it be uniform, and the pro- 
| not over-light, it ſhall always fall back again into the hand of 
the projicient, though never {o high thrown. 

Sack. By this Do&rine I come to know lome Problems very 
Uious upon this ſubje& of projeRions the firſt of which muſt 
leem very ſtrange to Simplicius. Andthe Problem is this; I af- 
frm ic to be poſſible, chat the ball being barely dropt or let fall, 
dy one that any way runneth very (wiftly, being arrived at by 

Earth, 


137 


Sundry Crrions 
Problems, touch« 
ing the motions of 
projetts. 


w 


4 . at 


Mm h 


13d 


G. Garit=us, his Syleme 


Earth, doth not onely follow the courſe of that perſon, but doth 
mach out go him. Which Problem 1s connexcd with this, that 
the moveable being thrown by the projicient above the plane of 
the Horizon, may acquire new velocity, greater by far than that 
confer d upon it by the piojicient. The which cfte& I have with 
admiration obicrvcd, in louking upon thoſe who uſe the {port of 
rops, which, (o 1001 «+ they are let out of the hand, are ſeen to 
movein the air with « certain velocity, the which they afterwardz 
much encreaſe at t]:cir coming to the ground z and if whipping 
them, they rub at any uneven place that makes them skip on high, 
they are (cen to move very ſlowly through the air, and falling a. 
gain to the Earth, they ſtill come to move with a greater velocity : 
But that which is yet more ſtrange, I have farther obſerved, that 
they not onely turn always more {wiftly on the ground, than in 
the air, but of two ſpaces both upon the Earth, ſometimes a mo, 
tion in the ſecond ſpace is more {wift than in the firſt. Now what 
would Simplicins ſay to this ? - 

Sine. He would ſay in the firſt place, that he had never made 
ſuch an obſervation. Secondly, he would ſay, that he did not be- 
lieve the ſame. He would ſay again, in the third place, that if 
you could aſſure him thereof, and demonſtratively convince him of 
the ſame, he would account you a great Dzmon. 

SaG«. I hope then that it is one of the Socratick, not infernal 
ones. Bur that I may make you underſtand this particular, you 
muſt know, that if a perſon apprehend not a truth of himſelf, i 
15 impoſſible that others ſhould make him underſtand it : I may in- 
deed inſtru you in thoſe things which are neither true nor fal(e; 
but the true, that is, the neceſſary, namely, ſuch as it is impoſlible 
ſhould be otherwiſe, every common capacity either comprehendeti 
them of himſelf, or elſe it is impoſſible he ſhould ever know thew- 
And of this opinion I am confident 1s. Salwviatus alſo : and there 
fore I tell you, that the reaſons of the preſent Problems are knowg 
by you, but it may be, not apprehended. 

Simy. Let us, for the preſent, paſs by that controverſie, and 
permit me to plead ignorance of theſe things you ſpeak of, and try 
whether you can make me capable of underſtanding theſe Pro- 
blems. 

Sa Gr. This firſt dependeth upon another, which is, Whence 
cometh it, that ſetting a top with the laſh, it runneth farther, and 
conſequently with greater ED than when its ſet with the fin: 
gers ? 

S1imy. Ariſtotle alſo makes certain Problems about theſe kinds | 
of projze&as. 

Sayv. Hedoth fo; and very ingenious they are : particulat- 


ly, That, Whence it cometh to paſs that round tops run better than 
the ſquare ? SaGR 


Diatocus IT. 

Sack. And cannot you, Simplicius, give a reaſon for this. 
wichour others prompring you ? Peres 

S1ve. Very good, I can lo; but leave your jeering. 

S4aGRr. In like manner you do know the reaſon of this other 
110. Tell me therefore; know you that a thing which moyeth. 
':1ag impeded ſtands til] ? 

Sine. I know it doth, if che impediment be fo great as tv 
* futhce. E045 
 $4Gsx. Do you know, that moving upon the Earth is a greater 
- impediment to the moveable, than moving in the air, the Earth be- 
1g rough and hard, aud the air fofr and yielding ? 

Sin y. And knowing this, I know that the rop will turn faſter 
ju the air, than on the ground, io that my knowledg is quite con- 
trary to what you think it. | 

Sac 8. Fair and loftly, Simplicize. You know that in the 
parts of a moveable, that rurneth about its centre, there are found 
motions towards all fides; fo -that fome aſcend, others deſcend ; 
ſome go forwards, others backwards ? 

$11 ey. I know ut, and ArzStotle raught me the ſame. 

Sa cr- And with what demonſtration, | pray you? +» 

$1ny. Wirh that of ſenſe. | 

Sack. Ariſtotle, then, hath made you ſee that which withour 
him you would not have feen ? Did he ever lend you his eyes? 
You would lay, that. Ar:iftotle hath told, advertiſed, remembered 
you of the lame 3 and not. taught youit. When then a top, with- 
out changing place, turns round, (or in the childrens phraſe, fleep- 
cth) not paralel, but cre to the Horizon, {ome of its parts aſcend, 
and the oppoſite defcend.3 the fuperiour go one way, | the infe- 
riour another. Fancie,now to yaur{clf, a top, that without chan- 
zing place, ſwiftly. turns round in.that manner, and ſtands ſuſpen- 
ded in the air, and that in that manner turning, it be ler fall to the 
Eacth perpendicularly, do you believe, that when it is arrived at 
the ground, it will continue to turn round in the ſame manner, 
vithouc changing place, as before ? 

d1M yp. No) SIr. 

$aG rk. What will it do then ?. 

S1vy. It will run along the ground very faſt. 

$46 x. And towards what part ? 

S1m e. . Towards that, whither its *reeling carrieth it. 

SaGR. Inics reeling there are parts, that 15 the uppermoſt,which 
0 move contrary to the inferiour ; therefore you muft inſtance 
Which it ſhall obey : for as to the parts aſcending and deſcending, 
cone kind will not yield to the other; nor will they all go 
downwards, being hindered by the Earth, nor upwards as being 


heavy, 


S 2 SIMP. 


139 


* Vertioine, 


# . an; Wh 5545 A 
—_— —_ - 


f 


140 


G. Garirt#®us, his Syſteme. 


Sine. The top will run recling along the floor towards thi 
part whither its upper parts encline it. 

S a 6 R. And why not whither the contrary parts tend, namely 
thole which touch the ground ? 

S1My. Becauſe thole upon the ground happen to be impeded 
by the rouginels of the rouch, that is, by the floors unevenneſ;; 
but the ſuperiour, which are in the tenuous and flexible air, are 
hindred very little, if at all ; and therefore the top will obey their 
inclination. 

S aG x. So that that tation, if I may to fay, of the neither 
parts on the floory is the cauſe that they ſtay, and onely the upper 
parts ſpring the top forward. 

Sa v. And therefore, if the top ſhould fall upon the ice, or 
other very ſmooth ſuperficies, it would not ſo well run forward, bur 
might peradventure continue to revolve in it ſelf, (or fleep) with- 
out acquiring any progrefiive motion. 

Sack. It is ancatie thing for it fo to do; but yet neverthe. 
leſs, it would not ſo ſpeedily come to fleep, as when It falleth on 
a {uperficies ſomewhat rugged. Burt tell me, Simplicivs, when 
the rop-turning round abour ir ſelf, in that manner, is let fall, why 
doth it not move forwards 1n the air, as it doth afterwards when it 
s upon the ground ? 

S1mMr. Becaulc having air above it, and beneath, nenther tho: 
parts, nor thele haye any where to touch, and not having more o6 
caſien to go forward than backward, it falls mhnny >, 

SaGR- So then the onely reeling about its ſelf, without other 
inepetus, can drive the top forward, being arrived at the ground, 
very mimbly. Now praceed we to what remains. That lad 
which the driver tycth to his Top-ſtick, and with which, windi 
it about the top, he ſets it ( z. e. makes it go) what effeht hath it on 
the (aid top 2 | 

Sin r. It conſtrains itto turn round upon its toe, that ſoit may 
free it felf from the Top-laſh. 

Sa Gr. Sothen, when the top arriveth at the ground, it cometh 
all the way turning about its (elf, by means of the laſh. Hath it 
not reaſon then to move in it ſelf more {wiftly upon the ground, 
than it did whilſt it was in the air ? | 

S1nv. Yes doubtleſs; for in the air it had no other impulle 
than that of the arm of the projicient 3 and if it had alſo the recl- 
ing, this (as hath been (aid) in the air drives it not forward at all: 

but arriving at the floor, to the motian of the arm is added the 
proppefiion of the reeling, whereby the velocity is redoubled. And 
L know already very well, that the top skipping from the ground 
its velocity will deminiſh, becauſe the help of its circulation !s 
wanting 3 and returning to the Earth will get it again, and by that 
means 


Dratocus. II. 
cans MOVE again faſter , than in the air. Ir onely refts for me to 
1nderſtand > whether 1n this ſecond motion on the Earth it move 
more {wiftly , than in the firſt; for then it would move ir infin;- 
un > alwayes accelerating. 

$aG &-. I did not abſolutely affirm , that this ſecond motian is 
more {wift than the firſt ; but that it may happen ſo ro be ſome- 
tunes. 

$1MP. This ts that , which I apprehend not, and which I 
defire to know. 

SaGr- And this alſo you know of your ſelf. Therefore tell 
we: When you let the top fall out of your hand , without ma- 
king it turn round (3. e. ſetting it) what will it do at its coming to 
the ground ? 

$1nr. Nothing , but there lie ſkill. 

Sac. May it not chance, that inits fall to the groundit may 
acquire a motion ? Think better on it. 

$1 e. Unleſſe we let i fall upon ſome inclining ſtone , as 
clldcen do playing at * Chioſa , and that falling fide-wayes upon 
the fame, it do acquire the motion of turning round upon its toe, 
wherewith. it afterwards continueth ta more progrefiively on the 
floor, I know not in what other manner it can do any thing but 
he till where it falleth. 

Sacs. You ſee then that in ſame cafe it may acquire anew 
revolution. When then the top jerked up from the ground, falleth 
down again , why may t not caſually bit upon the declivity of 
ſome ſtone fixed in the floor , and that hath an inclination that 
way towards which it moveth, and acquiring by that ſlip a new 
whicle over and above that conferred by the laſh ,. why may it 
not redauble its motion , and make it {wifter than it was at its 
it lighting upon the ground 2 | 

S$1xcy. Now fee that the ſame may cafily happen... AndI 
an thinking that if the top ſhould turn the contrary way » in ar- 
txing at the ground , it would work a contrary effe& , that is, 
the motion of the accidental whirl would retard that of the pro- 
Jicient. | ES, 

$4Gz. And it would ſometimes wholly retard and ftop it, in 
ale the revolution of the top were very (wift. And from hence a- 
ileth the reſolution of that ſlight , which the more skiltul Tennis 
flyers uſe to their adyantage 3 that is, to gull the adverfary by 
atting (for ſo is their Phraſe) the Ball; whach is, to recucn it 
"ith a fide Rachet , in ſuch a manner , that it doth thereby ac- 
Ure a motion by it {elf contrary to the prozeted motian , and (0 
by that means, at its coming to the ground. , the rebound, which 
t the ball did not turn in thatmanner , would be towards the 
averlary , giviog him the uſual riwe to toe it back again , -_ 

ail, 


*A Game in Italy, 
which is, to glida 
down an 
inclining Rone , 


bullets 


[<ax 


Jai 


— ASE -- 


142 


A Game 1n rally, 
whereinthey (trive 
who ſhall trundle 
or throw awooden 
bowle neereſt £O all 
affigned mark. 


G. Gar zus, bi Syſteme. 


fail , and the ball runs tripping along the ground, or rebounds ef 
than uſual , and breakerh the time of the return. © Hence it ;; 
that you ce, thoſe who play ar *Stool-ball , when they play in 
a ſtony way , or a place full of holes and rubs that make the bali 
trip an hundred ſeveral wayes , never luffering it to'tome neer the 
mark , to avoid them all , they do not trundle the ball upon the 
ground , but throw it, as if they were ro pitch a quait. But be. 
cauſe in throwing the ball , it 1fſueth out of the hand with ſome 
roling conferred by the fingers , when ever the band is finderthe 
ball,;as-it is moſt commonly held; whereupon the ball in its lighting 
on the ground neer to the mark, between rhe motion'of the pro- 
jicient and that of the roling , would run a great way from the 
ſame : To make the ball ſtay , they hold it arcificially ; with then 
hand uppermoſt , and it undermoſt , which in' its delivery hath 
a contrary twirl or roling conferred upon it by the fingers , by 
means whereof in its coming to the ground neer the mark it ſtays 
there, or runs very very little forwards. Byt to return to our 
principal problem which gave occaſion for ſtarting theſe others ; | 
{ay it 1s poſſible that a perſon carried very ſwiftly , may ler a ball 
drop out of his hand, that being come to the Earth , ſhall not 
onely follow his motion, but alſo out-go it , moving with a great- 
er velocity. And to ſee ſuch an effe&, I defire that the courſe 
may be that of a Chariot , to which on the out-ſide ler a decl 
ning board be faſtened; ſo as that the neither part may be rowark 
the horſes, and the upper towards the hind Whee). Now, if in 
the Chariots full career, a man withinit , let a ball fall gliding 4- 
long the declivicy of that board, it ſhall in roling downward ac- 


uire/a particular . /ertigo or turning , the which added to the 


motiorimpreſſed by the Chariot , will carrie the ball along the 
ground much faſter than the Chariot: -And if one accommodate 
anorher declining board over againſt it',; the motion of the Cha- 
riot maybe qualified ſo, that the ball , gliding downwards along 
the board, :in its coming to- the ground ſhall reſt immoveable, 
and alſo fhall ſometimes run the contrary way to the Chatiot. But 
we are ſtrayed too far from the purpoſe , therefore if Simplicis 
be ſatisfied with the reſolution of the firſt argnment againſt the 
Earths mobility , taken from things falling perpendicularly , we 
may paſſe to the reſt. 

\..Sarv. The digrefſions made hitherto., are not ſo alienated 
from the matter in hand, as that one can ſay they are wholly 
ſtrangers to it. - Beſides theſe argumentations depend on thole 
things that ſtart up in the fancy not of one perſon , but of three, 
that we are : And moreover we diſcourle for our pleaſure , nor 
are we obliged to that ſtriftneſſe of one who ex profeſſs treateth 
methodically of an argument , with an intent to publiſh the _ 


Driatocues. IT 


| will not conſent that our Poem ſhould be fo confined to that 
unity > as not to leaveus fields open for Eplody's, which ever 
(mall! connection ſhould fuftice to introduce ; but with almoſt as 
much liberry as it we were met to tell ſtories , it ſhall be lawkil 
for me to [peak , what ever your dilcourle brings into mymind. 

$aGk- [like this motion very well; and tince we are at this 
liberty » let me take leave , before we paſle any farther to ask of 
you Salviatus » whether you did ever conlider what that line ma 
be that is deſcribed by the grave moveable naturally falling down 
fom the top of a Tower; andif you have refleged onit, be 
pleaſed to tell me what you think thereof. 

Sar v-. I have lometimes conſidered of it, and make no que- 
ion, that if one could be certain of the nature of that motion 
wherewith the grave body deſcendeth to approach the centre of 
the Terreſtrial Globe , mixing it ſelf afterwards with the common 
arcular motion of the diurnal converſion 3 it might be exa&ly 
found what kind of line that is , that the centre of gravity of the 
moveable deſcribekh in thoſe two motions. 

Sack. Touching the ſynple motion towards the centre de- 
pendent on the gravity , I think that one may confidently , with- 


outerror , believe that it is by a right line, as it would be , were 
the Earth immoveable. - | 


' 


Sarv. As to this particular , we may not onely believe it, but 
experience rendereth us.certain of the ſame. 

S ac. But how doth experience aſſure us thereof, if we ne- 
ver ſee any motions but ſuch as are compoſed of the two , circular 
and deſcending. 


Satv. Nay rather Sagredxs we onely (ce the ſimple motion of 
deſcent 3 ſince that other circular one common to the Earth , the 


Tower and our ſelves remains, imperceptible , and as if it never 
were, and there remaineth perceptible to us that of the ſtone , one- 
ly not participated by us , and for this, ſenſe demonſtrateth that 
tis by a right line , ever parallel to the ſaid Tower , which is 
built upright and perpendicular upon the Terreſtrial ſurface. 

Sacx. You arc in the right; and this was but too plainly de- 
monſtrated to me even now , {ceing that I could not remember {o 
calie athing 3 but this being ſo manifeſt , what more is it that you 
lay you deſire , for underſtanding the nature of this motion 
downwards ? | 

Sal v. It ſufficeth not to know that it is ſtreight , but its requi- 
lite to know whether it be uniform, or irregular 3 that is , whe- 
ther it maintain alwayes one andthe ſame velocity , or elſe goeth 
retarding or accelerating, 


Sack. It is already clear, that it goeth continually accelle- 
ating, 


SALY. 


143 


L 0 _— « 
I meets at 0 9 - E < - —_ 


CE VEE IEEE TENG JONI nn wo mn_ PT — — = Yy < 


- a 
- LOS 


{ 14 


* This is that :x- 
cellent rrat which 
we give the {rl} 
place in our ſecond 


Volume, 


G. Gallltzus, his Syſleme. 


S a1 v. Neither doth this {uftice , but its requiſite to know ac. 
cording to what proportion luch accelleration 1s made ; a Pro. 
blem , that 1 believe was never hitherto underſtood by any Phi. 
loſopher or Mathematician 3 although Philolophers, and particy. 
larly the Peripateticks , have writ great and entire Volume, 
touching motion. 

S 11 vp, Philoſophers principally buſie themſelves abour univer. 
fals; they find the definitions and more common {ymptomes, o. 
mitting certain ſubrilties and niceties , Which are rather curio- 
fities to the Mathematicians. And AriStotle did content himſelf 
ro define excellently what motion was in general ; and of the [o. 
cal , to ſhew the principal qualities, to wit , that one is natural, 
another violent ; one is ſimple , another compound ; one is 
equal, another accellerate ; and concerning the accelerate , con- 
tents himſelf to give th reaſon of acceleration , remitting the 
finding out of the proportion of ſuch acceleration , and other 
particular accidents to the Mechanitian , pr other inferiouc 
Artilt. 

Sacr. Very well Simplicius. But you Salwiatus , when you 
deſcend ſometimes from the Throne of Perzpatetick Majeſty, 
have you ever thrown away any of your hours in ſtudying to find 
this proportion of the acceleration of the motion of deſcending 
grave bodies? _ 

S a 1. v. There was no necd that I ſhould ſtudy for it , in regatd 
that the 'Academick our common friend , heretofore ſhewed me a 
Treatiſe of his * De Motu , where this, and many other acci- 
dents were demonſtrated. But it would be too great a digreſlion, 
if tor this particular, we ſhould interrupt our preſent diſcouile, 
(which yer it ſelf is alſo no better than a digreflion) and make 
the Saying is, a Comedy within a Comedy. 

SaGu. Iam content to excuſe you from this narration for the 
preſent , provided that this may be one of the Propoſitions reſer- 
ved ro be examined amongſt the reſt in another particular meeting, 
for that the knowledg thereof is by me very much deſired ; and 
m the mean rime ler us return to the line deſcribed by the grave 
body in its fall from the top of the Tower to its baſe. 

Sar v. If the right motion towards the centre of the Earth was 
unitforme , the circular towards the Eaſt being alſo uniforme, you 
would ſee compoled of them both a motion by a ſpiral line , of 


that kind with thoſe defined by Archimedes in his Book De Spira- 
libus , which are , when a point moveth uniformly upon a right 
line, whileſt that line in the mean time turneth uniformly about 
one of its extreme points fixed, as the centre of his gyration- 
Br:'r becauſe the right motion of grave bodies falling , is continu 
ily accelerated, it is neceſſary , that the line reſulting of the 

com- 


Diatocus [T. 


compoſition of the two motions do go alwaycs receding with 
reater and greater proportion trom the circumference of that cir- 
cle , which the centre of the ſtones gravity would have deſigned, 
if ic had alwayes ſtaid upon the Tower 3 it followeth of neceſlity 
that this receflion at the firſt be but litcle , yea very ſinall, yea, 
more, as ſmall as can be imagined , {ecing that the delcendin 
grave body departing from reſt, that 1s, from the privation 'E 
motion , towards the bottom and entring into the right motion 
downwards , it muſt necds paſſe through all the degrees of tardi- 
ty, that arc betwixt reſt , and any afligned velocity ; the which 
degrees are infinite 3 as already hath been at large diſcourſed and 
roved. 

; [t being ſuppoled therefore , that the progreſſe of the accele- 
ration being after this manner , and it being moreover true , that 
the deſcending grave body gocth to terminate in the centre of the 
Farth, it is neceflary that the linc of its mixt motion be ſuch, tha t 
it go contiaually receding with greater and greater proportion 
from the rop of the Tower , or to {peak more properly , from 
the circumference of the circle deſcribed by the top of the Tower, 
by mcans of the Earths converſion ; but that ſuch receſſions be 
leſſer and leſſer in infinitym ; by how much the moveable finds ir 
ſelf to be lcfſe and lefſe removed from the firſt term where ir 
reſted. Moreover it is neceſlary , that this line of the compound- 
ed motion do go to terminate in the centre of the Earth. Now 
having preluppoled theſe two things, I come to deſcribe about 
the centre A | in Fig. 1. of this ſecond Dialogue; | with the ſemi- 
diametcr AB, the circle BI, repreſenting to me the Terreſtrial 
Globe, and prolonging the {emidiameter AB to C, I have de- 
(cribed the height of the Tower B C ; the which being carried 
about by the Earth along the circumference B I, deſcribeth with 
its top the arch C D : Dividing, in the next place, the line C A 
in the middle at E ; upon the centre E, at the diſtance E C, I de- 
ſnbe the ſemicircle C I A : In which, I now afficm , that it is very 
probable that a ſtone falling from the top of the Tower C , doth 
move, with a motion mixt of the circular , which is in common, 
and of its peculiar right motion. lt therefore in the circumference 
CD, certain equal paris C F, F G, GH, HL, be marked, and 
from the points F, G, H, L, right lines be drawn towards the 
centre A , the parts of them intercepted between the two cir- 
cumferences C D and BI , ſhall repreſent unto us the ſame 
Tower C B, tranſported by the Terreſtrial Globe towards DI; 
1 which lines the points where they come to be interſe&ed by the 
arch of the ſemicircle CI, are the places by whichfrom rime to 
ume the falling ſtone doth paſſe ; which points go continually 
with greater and greater propo:tion receding from the top of the 
Tower. 


14% 


The line deſcri> 
bed by a moveable 
in its natural de 
ſcent , the motion 
of the Earth a» 
banut its own centre 
being preſuppoſed, 
would probably be 
the circumference 
of a circle, 


1 : 
© agg —_—_— PR Aer rotor mann os oo a tt, c—_ 


_—_— 


«_. wa __ 


7 Om 
m— . .. 


A moveable fat- 
ling from the top of 
the Tower, moveth 
1m the 'circumſe- 
renceof a circle, 

It moveth neither 
more nor leſſe, than 
if it had ſtaid al- 


wayes there. 


It moverh with 
an wunif,rm , not 
an Accelerate my- 
TTL 


G. Gaiirtfus, his Sylne. 


Tower. And this is the caule vvhby the right motion made alon 
the (ide of the Tower appcarcth to us more and more accelerate. 
|: appearcth alſo , how by 1calon of the infinite acuteneſſe. gf 
the conta& of thole two circles D C, C1, the receſſion of the 
cadent moveable from the circumference C F 1); namely, from 
the top of the Tower , is towards the beginning extream ſmal} 
which 15 as much as if one ſaid its motion downwards 1s very ſlow, 
and more and more flow n infinitum , according to its VICInity to 
the term C, that is to the ſtate of reſt. And laſtly it is ſeen how 
in the end this ſame motion gocth to terminate 1n the Centre of the 
Earth A. 

S aGr. I underſtand all this very well , nor can I perſwade my 
ſelf that the falling moveable doth delcribe with the centre of its 
gravity any other line, bur tuch an one as this. 

S a 1 v. But ſtay a little Sagred»s , for 1 am to acquaint you 
alſo with three Oblervations of mine, that its poſlible will nor dif- 
pleaſe you. The tirſt of which is, that if we do well conſider, the 
moveable moveth not really with any more than onely one motion 
{imply circular, as when being placed upon the Tower, it moved 
with one ſingle and circular motion. The lecond is yet more plea 
{ant ; for, it moveth neither more nor lefle then if it had ſaid con- 
tinually upon the Tower, being that to the arches CF, F G,GC H, 
&c. that it would have paſlcd continuing alwayes upon the Tower, 
the arches of the circumference C I are exactly equal , anſweri 
under the ſame C F, F G, G H, &c. Whence followeth the third 
wonder, That the true and real motion of the ſtone 1s never acce- 
lerated, but alwaycs even and uniforme, ſince that all the equal ar- 
ches noted in the circumference C D, and their reſpondent ones 
marked in the circumference C I, are paſt in equal times; ſo that 
we are left at liberty to ſeek new cauſes of acceleration , or of 0- 
ther morions, [eeing that the moveable, as well ſtanding upon the 
Tower, as deſcending thence, alwayes moveth in the ſame faſhion, 
that 15, circularly, with the {ſame velocity , and with the ſame.uni- 
formity. Now tell mc what you think of this my fantaſtical con- 
jecturc. 


SAaGs- I muſt tell you, that I cannot with words ſufficiently 
expreſſe how admirable it ſeemeth to me ; and for vvhat at pie- 
lent offercth it {elt to my underſtanding, I cannot think that the 
buſinels happeneth otherwiſe; and vvould to God that all the 
demonſtrations of Philoſophers were but half ſo probable as this. 
However tor my perfect ſatisfaQtion I would gladly hear how you 
prove thole arches to be equal. 

SAaLV. The demonſtration is molt caſie. Suppoſe to your ſelf 
a line drawn from | to E. And the Semidiameter of the circle CD, 
that 1, the line C A, being double the Semidiameter C E of rhe 

Ciſ- 


Diatocus IT, 
\ orcle G 1, the circumference ſhall be double to the circumference, 
ind every arch of the greater circle double to every like /arch of 
che letlier 3 'and conſequently, the half of the arch of the preater 
circle, equal ro the whole arch af the lefle. And becauſe 'the an- 
ke C E L made in the centre E of the leſler circle, and which in(i- 
Neth upon'the arch C1, is double the angle CAD, mate in the 
centre &ob the greater circle, to which the arch C D tubrendeth; 
therefore the arch C D is halt of the arch of the greater circle like 
to the archC 1, 'and therefore the two arches CD and C | are e- 
qual ; and'm the lame manner we may demonſtrate of all their 
parts. But that the buſineſs, as ro the-morion of defcznding grave 
bodice, proceederh exa@ly thus, 1 will not at this rime affirm ; bur 
chis I will ay; «that if the line deferibed by the" cadent moveable 
be not-exa&ly the fame with this, ic doth cxtream neerly reſemble 
the ſame. ''! © £ pro rag 

Sa 6 x. Burl, Salviatys, am juſt now conſidering another pat« 
ticular very admirable; and this it is; That admitting theft ton- 
fiderations, the right: motion doth go wholly * mounting, and that 
Nature never makes: ule [thereof ſince that, even thar'that'wle, 
which was from the beginning granted to 1t,, which was of redit- 
cing the partsof integral bodies to their place, when' they were 
ſeparated from their whole, and thetefore conftitated in a depra- 
red diſpoſition, 15 taken from it , and aſſigned to the circular 
motion... 7: MEETS -oty 044 | - 

Sarv. This would neceſlarily follow , if it were concluded 
that the Terreſtrial Globe moveth circularly; a thing, which [ 
pretend not to'be done, but have onely hitherto attempted , as [ 
hall {ti]l ; xo: examine the ſtrength 'of thoſe reaſons, which have 
been alledged: by Philoſophers to prove the immobility of the 
Earth , of which this firſt taken' from things falling perpendicu- 
laly, hath begar the doubts , that have been mentioned , which 
| know nor of what force they may have {cemed ts Simplicins; 
and theretore before I patle ro the examination of the remaining 
aguments , it would be convenient that he produce what he hath 
to reply to the contrary. ; 

Siny. AS to this firſt , I confelſe indeed that I have heard 
lundry pretty notions , which L never thought upon before, and 
in regard they are new unto me , I cannot have anſwers ſo ready 
for them, but this argument taken ſrom things falling perpendi- 
ularly, I cſteemat not one of the ſtrongeſt proofs of rhe mobi- 
Ity of the Earthz and 1 know not what may happen touching the 
ſhot of great Guns, eſpecially thoſe aimed contrary to rhe diur- 
nal motion. 

dack, The flying of the birds as much pnzzleth me as the 
objeGtion of the Gun-ſhot , and all the other experiments above 

T 2 a}- 


147 


Right notion 
ſeemerh wholly ex+ 
cluded in natwre. 
*VYadia del turto a 
monte, rendered in 
the Latixe omnje 
no peſſum eat, 


148 G. Gar1itixus, his Syleme. 


alledged. For theſe birds which at their pleaſure flie for- 
wards and backwards , and wind to and again in a thouſand 
faſhions , and, which more importeth , lie whole hours upon the 
wing » theſe I {ay do not a little poſe me , nor do I ſee, how a. 
mongſt ſo many circumgyrations , they ſhould not loſe the motion 
of the Earth , and how they ſhould be able ro keep pace with 
ſo great a velocity as that which they fo far exceed with they 
flight. | | | 
a LV. To ſpeak the truth, your ſcruple is not withour reaſon, 
| and its poſſible Copernicus himſelf could not find an anſwer fort, 
that was to himſelf entirely ſatisfaQtory 3 and therefore haply pak 
it over in filence 3 albeit he was, indeed, very brief in examin; 
the. other allegations of his adverſaries , 1 believe through his 
height of wit, placed on greater aud ſublimer contemplations, 
like as Lions are not much moved at the barking of little 
We will therefore reſerve the inſtance of birds to the laſt place, 
if and for the preſcar, ſee if we can give Simplicins ſatisfaftionin 
'N the ochers, by ſhewing him in our wonted manner, that he him- 
ſelf hath their anſwers at hand, though upon firſt thoughts he doth 
not diſcover them. And to begin with the ſhots made at randone, 
with the (elf ſame piece, powder,and ball,the one towards the Eaſ, 
the other towards the Weſt (if the diurnal converſion belonged 
the Earth) ought to be much longer than that towards the Eaſt, 

S1myp. I am moved fo to think; becauſe in the ſhor made to. 

= _ »by wards the Eaſt, the ball whilſt it is out of the piece , is folloy. 

to _ rw to. ed by the ſaid piece , the which being carried round by the Earth, 

wards the ef runneth alſo with much velocity towards the ſame part , where 

£48 "© 4+ upon the fall of the ball ro the ground , cometh to be bur little 
diſtant from the piece, On the contrary in the ſhot towards the 
Weſt, before that the ball falleth to the ground , the piece is re- 
tixed very far towards the Eaſt , by which means the ſpace be- 
tween the ball and the piece , that is Range, will appear loage: 
than the other , by how much the piece , that is the Earth, had 
run in the time that both the bals were in the air. 

SaLv. I could wiſh, thatwe did know ſome way to make an 
experiment correſponding to the motion of theſe projets, as that 
of the ſhip doth to the motion of things perpendicularly falling 
from on high 3 and I am thinking how it may be done. 

| Sack. I beheve, that it would be a very oppoſite proof, to 
f pgs take an open Chariot , and to accomodate therein a * Stock-bow 
710 to find our the AT half elevation, to the end the flight may prove the greatelt 
<f rence of Ran- that my be, and whilſt the horſes ſhall run, to ſhoot firſt towards 
*Baleſtrone da bol- the part Whither you drive , and then another backwards towards 
£500 the contrary part, caufing ſome one to mark diligently where 


the Chariot was in that moment f time when the ſhafc came to 
the 


Diatocur. 11. 


the ground, as well in the one ſhot as in the other : for thus you 
ma v lee exactly how much one ſhaft flew farther than rhe other. 

$1ne- In my thoughts this experiment is very proper : and [ 
do not doubt bur that the flight, that is, the {pace between the 
ſhaft and the place where the chariot was at the ſhafts fall, will be 
leſs by much when one ſhooteth cowards the chariots courſe, than 
when one ſhooteth the contrary way. For an example, let the 
flight of it {elf be three hundred yards, and the courſe of the cha- 
rior in the time whilſt the ſhaft Rayeth in the air, an hundred 
yards, therctore ſhooting towards the courſe, of the three hundred 
yards of the flight, the chariot will have gone one hundred ; ſo 
then at the ſhafts coming to the ground, the ſpace between it and 
the chariot, ſhal] be but two hundred yards onely ; but on the 
contrary, in the other ſhoor, the chariot running contrary to the 
ſhaft, when the ſhaft ſhall have paſſed its three hundred yards, and 
the chariot its other hundred the contrary way, the diſtance inter- 
poling ſhall be tound to be four hundred yards. 


Salv. Is there any way to ſhoae {© that theſe flights may be 
equal ? | 


$14 v. 1 know no other way, unleſs by making the chariot to 


Salv., This we know; but I mean when the chariot runneth 
in full carrcer. | 

Sine. In that caſe you are: to-draw the Bow higher ia ſhoot- 
ing forwards, and to {lack it in choocing the contrary way. 

SaLiv. Then you ſee that there is one way more. Bur how 
much is the bow to be drawn, and how much ſlackened ? 

Sine. In our caſe, where we have ſuppoſed that the bow car- 
ned three hundred yards, ie would be requilite to draw it (o, as 
that it might carry four hundred, and in the other to flacken it fo, 
a;that.3t_ might carry no more than two hundred. For lo each 
of the flights would be but three hupdred in relation to the chariot, 
the which, with its courſe of an hundred yards which it ſubſtrats 
from the ſhoot of four hundred, and addeth to that of two hun- 
ded, wauld reduce them both to three hundred. 

Sa v. But what cftcd hath the greater or leſs iatenſneſs of the 
bow upon the ſhaft ? 

S1» e. The ſtiffer bow carrieth it with greater velocity, and the 
weaker with leſs ; and the ſame ſhaft flieth ſo much farther at one 
ume than another, with how much greater velocity it goeth out of 
the tiller at one time, than another. 

dat v. So that to make the ſhaft ſhot either way, to flie at e- 
yo diſtance from the rugning chariot, it is requiſite, that if in the 

iſt ſhoot of the precedent example, it goeth out of the tiller with 
%. g. tour degrees of velocity, that then in the vther ſhoot it de- 


part 


149 


| | 5c CG. GCALILEAUS, hs Syſteme. 
part but with twoonely : but if the ſame bow be uſed, it always 
receiveth thence three degrees. 

S;mvy. It doth ſo; and for this reaſon, ſhooting with the 

| ſame bow in the chariots courle; the ſhoots cannot be equal. 

Sarv. I had forgot ro ask, with what velocity it is {uppoledin 
this particular experiment, that the chariot runneth. 

S 1 1 e. The velocity of the chariot muſt be ſuppoſed to be one 
degree in; compariſon to that of the bow, which is three, - 

S a 1.v. Very right, for lo compuration gives it. - Bur tell me, 
when the chariot moveth, doth not all things in the ſame move 
with the {ame velocity ? | 

S1ime. Yes doubtlels. 1 

S a 1 v. Then ſo doth the ſhaft alſo, and the bow, and rhe ſtring, 

| upon which the ſhaft is nockt. 
S1mvy+, They doo. 4360 

SAarv. Why then, in diſcharging the ſhaft towards the courſe 
of the chariot, the bow impreſſeth its three degrees of velocity on 
a ſhaft that had one degree of velocity before, by means of the 


{ | chariot which tranſported it ſo faſt rowards that part ; ſo that m 
A its going off it hath four degrees.of velocity. On the contrary, 
'” in the other ſhoot, the ſame bow conferreth its (ame three degrees 


of velocity on a ſhaft that moveth: the contrary way, with one de- 
gree ; {othat in its departing from the bow-ſtring, it hath no more 
left but onely two degrees of.vcddocty. But you your ſelf have 
already (aid, that the way to- make the ſhoors equa], is to caule 


''T that the.ſhaft be let flic the firſt time with four degrees of velocity, 
L, and the ſecond time with two. | 'Therefore without changing the 
" bow, the very courſe. of the chariot is that which adjuſteth the 


The ſolwtion of flights, and the experiment doth ſo repreſent them to any one who 
| -” Ne rote 1s not either wilfully or naturally incapable of reaſon. Now 
Gunz foot E Otay' apply this diſcourle to Gunnery,and you ſhall find,that whetherthe 
in the Eat & Weſt, Farth move or ſtand ſtill, the ſhots made with the ſame force, will 
n always curry equal ranges, to what part {oever aimed. The error 
q of Ariſtotle, Ptolomey, 1ycho, your lelf, and all the reſt, is ground- 
43 cd upon that fixed and ſtrong perſuaſion, that the Earth ſtandeth 
{ii]l, which you have not judgment nor power to depoſe, no not 
when you have a defire to argue of that which would enſue, pre- 

{uppoling the Earth to move. And thus, in the other argument, 

not conſidering that whil'ſt the ſtone is upon the Tower, it doth, 

14 as to moving or not moving, the {ame that the Terreſtrial Globe 
p doth, becaule you have concluded with your ſelf, that the Earth 
TN ſtands ſti]l, you always diſcourſe touching the fall of the ſtone, as 
1 it it were to depart from reſt : whereas it behooveth to ſay, that 
if the Earth ſtanderh ſtill, the ſtone departreth from reſt, and de- 
{cendeth perpendicularly ; but if che Earth do move, the ſtone 


hkewalc 


Diartocus. II. 


likewite moveth with like velocity, nor doth it depart from reſt, 
ut from a motion equal to that of the Earth, wherewith it inter- 
nixcth the ſupervenient motion of deicent, and of thoſe two com- 
poſerh a third which is tran{verſal or ſide-ways. 

$1» y. But for Gods ſake, if it move tranlverſty, how is it that 
| bchold it ro move direftly and perpendicularly ? This is no bet- 
rer than the denial of manifeſt ſenſe; and if we may not believe 
ſenſe, at what other door ſhall we enter into diſquiſitions of Philo- 
{ophy ? 

ke i v. In reſpe@ to the Earth, to the Tower, and to our ſelves, 
which all as one piece move with the diurnal motion together with 
the ſtone, the diurnal motion 15 as if it never had been, and becom- 
eth in(cnſible, imperceptible, and without any a&ion at all; and 
the onely motion which wecan perceive, is that of which we par- 
rake not, that is the deſcent gliding along the fide of the Tower : 
You are not the firſt that hath felt great tepugnance in apprehen- 
ding this non-operating of motion upon things to which it is com- 
mon. | 

Sxacr. Now I do remember a certain conceipt, that came one 
day into my fancy, whilſt I failed in my voyage to Aleppo, whither 
I went Conſul for our Countrey, and'poflibly it may be of ſome 
uſe, for explaining this nullity of operation of common mbtion, 
and being as 1f-it never were to all the partakers thereof. And if 
ic ſtand with the-good liking of Simplicius, I will reaſon with 
him upon that which then I thought of by my ſelf alone. 

SiMe. The novelty of the things which I hear, makes me not 
lo much a patient, as a greedy and curious auditor : therefore go 
00. | | | 

SaGr. If theneb of a writing pen, ' that'I carried along with 
mein the ſhip, through all my navigation from Venice to * Scan- 
deron, had had a faculrie of leaving viſible marks of its whole voy- 
we, what ſigns, whar marks, what lines wouldit have left ? 

Sine. Ir would have left a line diſtended from Venice thither, 
not perfealy ſtreight, or to ſay better, diſtended in a perfe& arch 
of a circle, but in ſome places more, in ſome leſs curved, according 
as the veſſel] had gone more or leſs fluuating ; but this its infle- 
Cling in ſome places a fathom or two to the right hand or to the 
left, upwards or downwards, in a length of many hundred miles, 
would haye brought bur little alteration to the 1ntire trad of the 
line, ſo that it would have been hardly ſenſible ; and without any 


-- error, might have been called the part of a perfe& 
arch, 4 


d4aGR. $0 that the true and moſt exa&t motion of the neb of 
my pen would have alſo been an arch of a perfe& circle, if the 
rellels motion, the AluQuation of the billows ceaſing, had been 


calm 


ft 


eA notable caſe 
of Sagredus, to ſhew 
the non-oper ating 
of common motto», 


* Al:\ſangretta. 


—_— 


> 


_—_— 


——C FC. eee dRen de os ur 


I52 


G. Gar1txus, hi Syſleme. 


calm and tranquill. And if I had continually held that pegin 
my hand, and had onely moved it ſometimes an inch or two this 
way or that way, what alteration ſhould I have made in that jr; 
principal, and very long trac or ftroke ? 

S1my. Leſsthan that which rhe declining in ſeveral places from 
abſolute re&itude, but the quantity of a flea's eye makes in a right 
line of a thouſand yards long. 

Sack. Ifa Painter, then, at our launching from the Port, had 
began to deſign upon a paper with that pen, and continued his 
work till he came to Scanderon, he would have been able to have 
taken by its motion a perfe& draught of all thoſe figures perfe4] 
interwoven and ſhadowed on ſeveral ſides with countreys, build. 
ings, living creatures, and other things ; albeit all the true, real, 
and eſſential motion traced out by the neb of that pen, would 
have been no other than a very long , but ſimple line : and as to 
the proper operation of the Painter, he would have delineated the 
ſame to an hair, if the ſhip had ſtood ſtill. That therefore of the 
huge long motion of the pen there doth remain no other marks, 
than thole tracks drawn upon the paper, the reaſon thereof is be- 
cauſe the grand motion from Venice to Scanderon, was common to 
the paper;the pen, and all that which was in the ſhip : but the petty 
motions forwards and backwards, to the right, to the left, com- 
municared by the fingers of the Painter unto the pen, and not to 
the paper, as being peculiar thereunto, might leave marks of it felt 
upon the paper, which did not move with that motion. Thus i 
is likewiſe true, that the Earth moving, the motion of the ſtone in 
deſcending downwards, was really a long tra of many hundred: 
and thoutands of yards, and if it could have been able to have d- 
lineated in a calm air, or other ſuperficies, the track of its courl, 
it would have left behind an huge long tranſverſe line. But that 
part of all this motion which is common to the ſtone, the Tower, 
and our {e]ves, is imperceptible to us, and as if it had never beey, 
and that part onely remaineth obſervable, of whick neither the 
Tower nor we are partakers, which is in fine, that wherewith the 
ſtone falling meaſureth the Tower. 

Salv. Amoſt witty conceipt to clear up this point, which wa 
not a little difficult to many capacities. Now if Simplicins will 
make no farther reply, we may paſs to the other experiments, the 
unfolding of which will receive no ſmall facility from the thing 
already declared. 

S1nv. Ihave nothing more to ſay : and I was well-nigh trand- 
ported with that delineation, and with thinking how thoſe ſtrokes 
drawn ſo many ways, hither, thither, upwards, downwards, for- 
wards, backwards, and interwoven wirh thouſands of turnings, a* 
not eflentially or really other, than ſmall pieces of one _ _ 

raw 


Diatocus IT : 


drawn all one way, and the ſame without any other alteration ſave 
the declining the direCt reQitude, ſometimes a very inlenſible mar- 
ter towards one fide or another, and the pens moving its neb one 
while ſofter, anorher while flower, but with very (mall inequality. 
And I think that it would in the fame manner write a letter, and 
that thole frollike penmen, who to ſhew their command of hand, 
without taking their; pen from the paper in one ſole ſtroke, with 
:nfinite turnings draw a pleaſant knot, if they were in a boat that 
did tide it along {ſwiftly they would convert the whole motion 
of the pen, which in reality is but one (ole line, drawn all towards 
one and the lame part, and very little curved , or declining from 
perfect reftitude, into-a knot or flouriſh. AndI am much pleaſed 
that Sagredus hath helped me to this conceit : therefore let us go 
on, for the hope of meeting with more of them, will make me the 
ſtriger in my attention. | | | 

Sa 8. It you have a curioſity to hear {uch like ſubriltics, which 
occurr not thus to every one, you will tind no want of them, eſpe- 
cially in this particular of Navigation;and do you not think that a 
witty conceit which I met with likewiſe in the ſame voyage,when [ 
obſerved that the maſt of the ſhip, without either breaking or bend- 
ing, had made a greater voyage with its round-top, that is with its 
top-gallant,than with its footzfor the round top being more diſtant 
from the centre of the Earth than the foot is , it had deſcribed the 
arch of a circle bigger than the circle by which the foot had paſſed. 

Sine. And thus whena man walketh he goeth farther with 
his head than with his feet. NG 
| $acs. You have found out the matter your ſelf by help of 
your own mother-vvit : But let us not interrupt Salviatus. 

SaLv. It pleaſeth me to ſee Simplicinus hoyv he ſootheth up 
binſelf in this conceir, if happly it be his ovvn, and that he hath not 
borrovved it from a certain little pamphlet of concluſions, vvhere 
there are a great many more {uch fancics no leſs pleaſant 8& vvitty. 
It follovveth that vve ſpeak of che peice of Ordinance mounted per- 
pendicular to the Horizon, that is , of a ſhot tovvards our vertical 
point, and to conclude, of the return of che ball by the fame line 
unto the ſame peice, though that in the long time vvhich it is ſe- 
parated from the peice , the earth hath tranſported it many miles 
tovvards the Eaſt ; novy it ſeemeth,that the ball ought to fall a like 
diſtance from the peice tovvards the Weſt ; the vvhich doth not 
happen : therefore the peice vvithout having been moved did ſtay 
expeting the ſame. The anſvver 1s the tame vvith that of the 


ſtone falling from the Toyver ; and all the fallacy, and equivocati- 
on conſiſterth in ſuppoling ſtill for rrue, that vyhich is in queſtion ; 
for the Opponent hath it ſtill fixed in his conceit that the 
ball departs from its reſt , being diſcharged ' by the fire 

V from 


nf ” 
AY * 
WAS 


Subrilties foes 
ently inſipid, jrons- 
cally, ſpoken and 
taken from 4 cer- 
tainEncyclopzdn. 


eAn inſtance a- 
gant the diurnal 
m:tion of theearth, 
taken from the ſhox 
of a Peece of Ordi- 
nance perpendicus 


larly. 


T he anſmer tothe 


ebjeftion, ſhrwing 
the equtycke , 


-— _ > en 
Ee ee ee ee ee a ESD od 
"* So 


_— 


Ano: her a»Fyer 
to the ſame ovjeti- 
”, 


Projeits conti- 
ne their motion 
by the vioht line 
that followeth rhe 
direflion of the 
morion , made t1- 
gether with the 
proticient , whii* 7 
they were conjoin'd 


therewith, 


G. Gartit#us, his Cyſkar?. 


from the piece ; and the departing from the ſtate of reſt , cannox 
be , unlefſc the immobility of the Terreſtrial Globe be preſuppy. 
ſed, which is the conclution of that was in diſpute ; Therefore, 
I reply , that thole who make the Earth moveable, anſwer , that 
the piece, and the ball that is in it , partake of the ſame motion 
with the Earth 3 nay that they have this together with her from 
nature; and that therefore the ball departs 1a no other manner 
from its quieſcence , but conzoyned with its motion about the ceq- 
tre , the which by its projection upwards ,} 1s neither taken away, 
nor hindered; and in this manner following , the univerſal motign 
of the Earth towards the Eaſt, it abwayes keepeth perpendicylay 
over the ſaid piece, as well in its riſe as in its return. And thy 
ſame you ſee to enſue , in making the experiment 1n -a ſhip with 
a bullet ſhot upwards perpendicularly wich a Crofſe-bow , which 
returneth to the {ame place whether the ſhip doth move, or ſtand 
ſtill. | 

Sa Gr Thisſatisfieth very well to all; but becauſe that I haye 
{een that Simplicivs taketh pleaſure with certain ſubtilties to 
puzzle his companions » I will demand of hin whether , {uppo- 
ting for this time that the Earth ſtandeth Rill , and the piece ae- 
Qed upon it perpendicularly, dire&ed to our Zenith , he do atal| 
queſtion: that to be the true perpendicular ſhot , and that the ball 
in depatting, and in its return is to go by the ſame right line, 
ſtill ſappoſing all external and aceidental impediments to be re 
moved ? 

Sim ye. I underſtand that the matter ought to ſucceed exaQly 
in that manner. 

SaGx. Butif the piece were placed, not perpendicularly, but 
inclining rowatds ſome place , what would the motion of the ball 
be ? Would it go haply , asin'the otli6r' ſhot , by the perpends- 
cular line , and return again by the ſame ? 

S1my. It would not ſo do; but ifſuing out of the piece, it 
would purſue its motron by a right line which pcolongeth the e- 
re& perpendicularity of the ooncave cylinder of the piece , unletſk 
lo far as its own vveight vvould make it decline from that creion 
rowards the Earth. 

S a G6 &- So that the mounture of the cylinder is the regulator of 
the motion of the ball , nor doth it , or would it moye out of that 
line, if its own gravity did not make it decline downwards: : And 
therefore placing the cylinder perpendicularly , and ſhooting the 
ball upwards, it returneth by the ſame right line downvvards ; be- 
cauſe the motion of the ball dependent oa its gravity is down- 
ward , by the ſame perpendicular. Th: journey therefore of the 
ball our of the piece , continueth or prolongeth the reftitude of 
perpendicularity of that ſmall part of the ſaid journey , vvhich® 
made vvithin the ſaid piece ; is it not fo ? SIMP- 


DOTizLOoOetth 

G1 M v. SO it 15, 1n my opinton. | 

S. G8. Now imagine the cylinder to be ereftcd, and that the 
Earth doth revolve about vvith a diuraal morioa , carrying the 
piecC alog vvith it; tell me vyhart ſhall be the motion of the bat! 
within the cylinder, having given tire ? 

Sine. [c ſhall be a ſtreight and perpendicular motion, the cylin- 
der being cretted perpendicularly. 

Sz 6. Conſider vvell yvhar you lay : for I believe that it vvill 
not be perpendicular. It vvould indeed be perpendicular , if the 
Earth ſtood ſti!l , for fo the ball vvould have no other morion but 
that proceeding from the fire. Bur in cale the Earth turns round, 
the ball that 151n the piece, harh likewiſe a diurnal morion , {o 
that there being added to the ſame the impulle of the fire , it mo- 
veth from the breech of the piece ro the muzzle with two motions, 
from the comp>o{ition whereof it cometh to paſſe that the motion 
made by the centre of the balls gravity is an inclining line. And 
for your clearer underſtanding the ſame , let rhe piece A C [| in 
Fig. 2.] be erctted , andin it the ball B 3 it is manifeſt , that the 
picce ſtanding 1mmoveable , and fire being given roir, the ball 
will make its way out by the mouth A , and with its centre , paſ- 
ſing thorow the the piece , ſhall have delcribed the perpendicular 
lineB A, andit ſhall purſue that re&itude when it 1s out of the 
piece , moving toward the Zenith. Bur in caſe the Earth ſhould 
move round , and conſequently carry the piece along withir , in 
the time that the ball driven out of the piece ſhall move alon 
the cylinder , the piece being carried by the Earth , ſhall paſſe in- 
fo the lituation D E,, and the ball B, in going off, would be at 
the corniſh D, and the motion of the bals centre , would have 
deen according to the line B 1 , no longer perpendicular , but in- 
ciniag towards the Eaſt ; and rhe ball (as hath been concluded) 
being ro continne 1ts motion through the air , according to the 
direction of the morion made in the piece , the {aid motion ſhall 
continue on according to the inclination of the line B D, and ſs 
ſhall no loager,be perpendicular , but inclined rowards the Eaſt, 
to which parc the piece doth allo move ; whereupon the ball may 
follow the motion of the Eecth,and of the piece. Now S:mplicins; 
you (ee it demonſtrated, that the Range which you took to be 
perpendicular, is not fo. 

Sine. | do not very well underſtand this buſineſs; do you; 
Salviatys ? 
| SaLv. I apprehend it in part; but I have a certain kind of 
(cruple, which 1 wiſh I knew how to expreſs. It ſeems to me, that 
according to what hath been ſaid, if the Piece be erected perpen- 
dicular, and the Earth do move, the ball would not be to fall, as 
Ariſtotle and Tycho will have ir, far from the Piece towards the 


V 2 Welt; 


$ - 


5% 


The revolution 
of the Earth ſup= 
poſed , the ball in 
the piece erelted 
perpendicularly, 
doth not move by 4 
perpendicular, but 
an inclined line 


= nu 


_—— 


OS 5 


x 
C 
. 
| 
' 
| 


Mmm. Sulu CC e_]._.  ) Cw nw cc 


G. Gaiit*®us, his Sylkme. 


Weſt, nor as you would have it, upon the Picce, but rather fa; 
diſtant rowards the Eaſt. For according to your explanation, it 
would have two motions, the which would with one conſent car 
it thitherward, to wit, the common motion of the Earth, which 
carrieth the Piece and the ball from C A towards ED; and the 
fire which carricth it by the inclined line B D, both motions to. 
wards the Eaſt, and therctore they are {uperiour to the motion of 
the Earth. 

SaGk. Not ſo, Sir. The motion which carrieth the ball (9. 
wards the Eaſt, cometh all from the Earth, and the fire hath n» 
part at al] therein : the motion which mounteth the ball upwards, 
1s wholly of fire, wherewith rhe Earth hath nothing to do. And 
that it is ſo, if you give not fire, the ball will never go out of the 
Picce, nor yct riſc upwards a haus breadth; as alſo if you make 
the Earth immoveable, and give fire, the ball without any incli- 
nation ſhall go perpendicularly upwaids. The ball therefore ha- 
ving two motions, one upwards, and the other in gyration, of both 
which the tranſverſe line B D is compounded, the impulle upward 
1s wholly of tire, the circular cometh wholly from the Earth, and 
is equal to the Earths motion : and being equal to it, the ball 
maintaineth it ſelf all che way diretly over the mouth of the 
Piece, and at laſt falleth back into the fame : and becauſc it al. 
ways obſerveth the erection of the Piece, it appeareth alſo conti- 
nually over the head of him that is near the Piece, and therefore 
it appeareth to mount exactly perpendicular towards our Zenith, 
or vertical point. | 

S1my. I have yet one doubt more remaining, and it is, that in 
regard the motion of the ball is very {wift in the Piece, it ſeems 
not pqflible, that in that moment of tinre the tranſpoſition of the 
Piece from C A to AD (hould confer ſuch an inclination upon 
the tranl(verſe line C D, that by means thereof, the ball when « 
cometh afterwards into the air ſhould be able to follow the courſe 
of the Earth, 

Sa Gr. Youerr ypon many accounts 3 and firſt, the inclination 
of the tranlyerle line C D, 1 believe it is much greater than you 
take it to be, for I verily think that the velocity of the Earths mo- 
tion, not onely under the EquinoGual, but in our paralel allo, 13 
greater than that of the ball whilſt it moveth in the Piece; ſo that 
the interval C E would be abſolutely much bigger than the whole 
length of the Piece, and the inclination of the cranſverſe line con- 
ſequently bigger than half a right angle : but be the velocity of 
the Earth more, or be it leſs, in compariſon of the velocity of the 
tire, this imports nothing 3 for if the velocity of the Earth be {mal}, 
and conſequently the. inclination of the tranſverſe line be little 
allo; there is then alſo necd but of little inclination to my 

| a 


Dratccus, IT. 


ball ſutpead ir 1elt 18 its range directly over the Piece. And in a 
word, 1f you do bur attentively contider, you will comprehend, 
chat the motion ot the Earth in transferring the Piece along with 
- from C A to E D, conferreth upon the tragſverle line C D, fo 
much of liccle or great inclination, as is required to adjuſt the 
range 12 irs perpendicularity. Bur you err, {econdly, in that you 
referr rac taculty of carrying the ball along with the Earth to the 
:mpulic of the tire, and you run into the {ame error, into which 
Salviatys, but even now ſeemed to have fallen; for the faculty 
of following the motion of the Earth, is the primary and perpetual 
motion, indelibly and inteparably unparted to the (aid ball, as to a 
thing eerreſtrial, and that of its own nature doth and ever ſhall 
pollc [5 the lame. 

Salv. Let us yield, Simplicizs, for the buſineſs is juſt as he 
ſaith. And now from this diſcourlc let us come to underſtand the 
reaſon of a Venatorian Problem, of thoſe Fowlers who with their 

uns ſhoot a bid flying 3 and becaulc I did imagine, that in regard 
the bud flieth a great pace, therefore they ſhould aim their ſhot far 
from the bicd, anricipating its flight for a certain ſpace, and more 
or leſs according to ics velocity and the diſtance of the bird, that 
ſo the bullet haſting direftly to the mark aimed at, it might come 
to arrive at the (elt {ame time in the fame point with its motion, 
and the bird with its flight, and by that means one to eficounter 
the other : and asking one of them , if their practiſe was not fo 
toCco; He told me, no; but that the flight was very eafte and 
certain, and that they rook aim juſt in the ſame manner as if the 
had ſhot at a bird that did fit ſtill 3 that is, they made the flying 
bird their mark, and by moving their fowling-piece they followed 
her, keeping their aim ſtill full upon her, till luch time as they let 
fly,and in this manner ſhot her as they did others ſitting ſtill. It is 
neceſſary therefore that that motion, though ſlow, which the fowl- 
ing-picce maketh in turning and following after the flight of the 
bud do communicate it ſelf ro the bullet alſo, and that it be joyned 
with that of the fire ; fo that the ball hath from the fire the mo- 
tion direly upwards, and from the concave Cylinder of the barrel 
the declination according to the flight of the Bird, juſt as was faid 
before of the ſhot of a Canon; where the ball receiveth from the 
fie a virtue of mounting upwards towards the Zenith, and from 
the motion of the Earth its winding towards the Eaſt, and of both 
maketh a compound motion that followeth the courſe of the 
Earth, and that to the beholder feemeth onely to go dire&ly up- 
wards, and return again downwards by the fame line. The hold- 
ng therefore of the gun continually dire&ed towards the mark; 
maketh the ſhoot bit right, and that you may keep your gun di- 
rected ro the mark, in caſe the mark ftands ſtill; you muſt alſo hold 


your 


Ti 


The manner how 
Fowlers ſhoot birds 


flying. 


155 


The anſw:r to 
the obje(lion tak n 


from th: ſhots if 


great 41s mare 
C 


towards the North 
nad South, 


G. Gartit us, hs Syſeme. 


your gun ſt:]];and if the mark ſhall move,the gun muſt be kept uPon 
the mark by moving. And upon this dependeth the proper aniwe: 
ro the other argument taken from the ſhot of a Canon, at the 
mark placed towards the South or North : wherein 15 alledped, 
that it the Earth ſhould move, the ſhots would all range Wefſ. 
ward of the mark, becaulc that in the tine whilſt the ball, bein 
forc'd out of the Piece, goeth through the air to the mark, the (aid 
mark being cariicd toward the Eaſt, would leave the ball to the 
Weſtward. I anſwer therefore, demanding whether if the Ca- 
non be aimed true at the mark, and permitted fo to continue, jt 
will conſtantly hit the ſaid mark, whether the Earth move or ſtand 
ſtill ? Ic muſt be replied, that the aim altereth not ar all, for if 
the mark doth ſtand ſtill, the Piece allo doth ſtand ſtill, and if ir, 
being tranſported by the Earths motion, doth move; the Piece doth 
alſo move at the lame rate, and, the aim maintained, the ſhort 
proveth always true, as by what hath been ſaid above, is mani- 
tcſt. | 

SaG&. Stay alittle, I entreat you, Selviatss, rill I have pro- 
pounded a certain conceit touching theſe ſhooters of, birds flying, 
whole proceeding | believe to be the {ame which you relate, and 
believe the cffe& of hitting the bird doth likewiſe tollow : but yer 
| cannot thiok that act altogecher conformable to this of ſhooting 
in great Guns, which ought to hit as well when the piece and mark 
movethy as when they both ſtand ſtill ; and theſe, 1a my opinion, 
are the paiticulars in which they dilagree. In ſhooting with a 
great Gun both it and the mark move with equal velocity, bei 
both tranſported by the motion of the Terreſtrial Globe : andal- 
beit ſometimes the piece being planted more rowards the Pole, 
chan the mark, and conſequently its motion being Jomewhat floy- 
er than the motion of the mark, as being made 1n a leſſer circle, 
ſuch a difference is inlenſible, at that little diſtance of the piece 
from the mark : bur in the ſhot of-the Fowler the motion of the 
Fowling-picce wherewith it goeth following the bird, is very flow 
1n compariſon of the flighr of the {aid bird ; whence me thinks it 
ſhould follow, that that ſmall motion which the turning of the 
Birding-picce conferreth on the bullet that is within it, cannot, 
whea it 1s once gone forth of ic, multiply it (elf in the air, untll it 
come to equal the velocity of the bicds flight,ſo as that the ſaid bullet 
ſhould always keep dire& upon it : nay, me thinketh the bird 
would anticipate it and Jeave it behind. Let me add, that in this 
a&, the air through which the bullet is to pals, partaketh not of the 
motion of the bird - whereas in the caſe of the Canon, both it; 
the mark, and the intermediate air, do equally partake of the com 
mon diurnal motion. So that the true cauſe of the Marks-man 
his hitting the mark; as it ſhould ſeem, moreover and befides the 


following 


Driartocus. II. 


following the birds flight with the piece, is his ſomewhat anticipa- 
ting It raking his am before it ; as alſo his ſhooting (as [ believe) 
nor with one buller, but with many* (mall balls ( called ſhot) the 
which (cattering 1n the air poſſeſs a great ſpace; and allo the ex- 
[reme velocity wherewith theſe ſhot, being diſcharged from the 
Gun, go towards the bird. _ I 

$1. v. See how far the winged wit of Sagredus anticipateth, 
and out-goeth the dulneſs of mine ; which perhaps would have 
light upon'theſe diſparities, bur not without long ſtudic. Now 
curning to the matter in hand, there do remain to be cohſidered 
by us the ſhots at point blank, towards the Eaſt and rowards the 
Weſt ;: the firſt of which, if the Earth did move, would always 
happen to be to00 high above the mark, and the ſecond too low ; 
foraſmuch as the parts of the Earth Eaſtward, by reaſon of the di- 
urnal motion, do continually deſcend beneath the tangent paralel 
tothe Horizon, whereupon the Eaſtern ſtars to us appear to aſcend; 
and on the contrary, the parts Weſtward do more arid more al- 
cend, whereupon the Weſtern ſtars do in our ſeeming delcend : 
and therefore rhe ranges which are leveled' according to the ſaid 
tangent at the Oriental mark , (which whilſt rhe ball pafſerh 
along, by the tangent 'deſcendeth) ſhould prove too high, and the 
Occidental rog low-by- means of the elevation of the mark, whilſt 
the ball paſſeth along the tangent. The anſwer is like to the reſt : 
tor as the Eaſtern mark goeth continually deſcendigg, by reaſon 
of the Earths motion, under a tangent that continueth immove- 
able; fo likewiſe the piece for the ſame reaſon goeth continually 
inclining, 'and with 1ts mounture purſuing the ſaid mark : by 
wiuch mchns the ſhort proveth true. | | 

But here 1 think ic a convenient opportunity to give notice of 
certain conceſſions, which are granted perhaps over liberally by 
the followers. of Copernicus unto their Adverſaries ': I mean of 
yielding to them certain experiments for ſure and certain, which 
yet the Adverſaries themſelves had never made tryal of : as for 
:xample, that of things falling from the round-top of a ſhip whilſt 
t 51n motion, and many others ; amongſt which 1 vetily believe, 
that this of ' experimenting whether the ſhot made by a Canon to- 
wards the Eaſt proveth too high, and the Weſtern ſhot too low, 
Ks one : and becaule I believe that they have never made tryal 
thereof, I deſire that they would tell me what difference they 
tink ought ro happen between the ſaid ſhots, ſuppoſing the Earth 
moveable, or (uppoling it moveable; and ler Swmplicizs for this 
une an{wer for them. 

51e. I will not undertake to anſwer fo confidently as another 
more mtelhgent perhaps might do 3 but ſhall ſpeak what thus upon 
the ſudden | think they would reply ; which is tn effe& the ſame 


with 


SF, 


The anſw:y to the 
eArgument tahen 
from the Tots at 
point blanck to- 
wards the Eaft & 
Weſt, 


T he followers of 
Copernicus r00 
freely admit cer= 
tain propoſitions for 
true, which are 


very doubrful. 


* _ 


A Computation 
how much the ran- 
ges of great ſhot 
owg ht to vary from 
the marke, the 
E arths motion be- 
"my framed. 


G. GxL1iLtzus, bi Syſleme. 


with that which hath been ſaid already, namely, that in cafe the 

Earth ſhould move, the ſhots made Eaſtward would proye too 

high, &c. the ball, as it is probable, being to move along the rag. 
ent. ' 

F S av. Butif I ſhould ſay, that ſo it falleth out upon trial] 

how would-you cenſure me ? ; 

Sine. It is neceſſary to proceed ro experiments for the Pro- 
ving of it. 

Sar v. But do youthink, that there is to be found a Gunner { 
$kilful, as to hit the mark at every ſhoor, in a diſtance of v.g. five 
hundred paces ? | 

S1my. No Sir 3 nay [I believe that there is no one, how good a 
marks-man ſoever that would promile to come within a pace of 
the mark, | | 

Satv. How can we then, with ſhots ſo uncertain, aſſure our 
ſelves of that which is in diſpute ? 

S1imp. We may be aſſured thereof two wayes; one, by ma- 
king many ſhots ; the other, becauſe in reſpe& of the great velo- 
city of the Earths motion , the deviation from the mark would in 
my opinion be very great. 

'Sarv. Very great, that is more than one pace; in regard that 
the varying lo much, yea and more,is granted to happen ordinarily 
even in the Earths mobility. 

Sine. I verily believe the variation from the mark would be 
more than {o. 

Sartv. Now I dcfire that for our ſatisfaQtion we do make thus 
in grofle a ſlight calculation, if you conſent thereto, which will 
ſtand us in ſtead likewiſe (if the computation ſucceed as I expeR) 
for a warning how we doin other occurrences ſuffer our ſelves, as 
the ſaying 18, to be taken with the enemies ſhours, and ſurrender 
up our belief to what ever firſt preſents it {elf to our fancy, And 
now to give all advantages to the Peripatcticks and Tychonicks, 
let us ſuppole our {clves to be under the EquinoQial, there to ſhoot 
a piece of Ordinance point blank Eaſtwards at a mark five hun- 
dred paces oft. Furſt, let us fee thus (as I ſaid) in a level, what 
time the ſhot after it is gone out of the Piece taketh to arrive at 
the mark ; which we know to be very little, and is certainly no 
more than that wherein a travailer walketh two ſteps, which allo 
is leſs than the ſecond of a minute of an hour ; for {uppoſing 
that the travailer walketh three miles in an hour, which are nine 
thouſznd paces, being that an hour containes three thouſand, fix 
hundred {econd minutes, the travailer, walketh two ſteps and an 
half in a ſecond, a ſecond therefore is more than the rime of the 
balls motion. And for that the diurnal revolution is twenty four 


hours, the Weſtern horizon riſeth fifteen degrees in an hour, that 
, % 


Diatocus IT. 


i fitrcen fiſt mionres of a degree, 1n one firſt minute of an hour; 
hat is, fifreen leconds of a degree, 1n one lecond of an hour; and 
hecaule One (ccond 15 the time of chE#ſhor! therctore in this time 
the Weſtern horizon rileth fifreen {ſeconds of a degree, and fo 
much likewiſe the mark ; and rheretore titceen iccouds of rhat cir- 
cle, whole ſemidiameter 1s tive hundred paces (for iv much the di- 
tance of the mark from the Piece was {uppoled. ) Now let us 
look in the table oi Arches and Chords (ce here 1s Copernicas his 
book) what part 1s the chord of fifreen leconds of the {-midiame- 
ter, that is, five hundred paces. Here you {ce the chord (or ſub- 
renle) of a firſt minute to be leſs than thirty of thoſe parts, of 
which the ſemidiameter 18 an hundred thouſand. Therefore the 
chord of a ſecond minute ſhall be leſs then halt of one of thoſe 
parts, that 1 leſs than one of thole parts, of whichthe {cmidiame- 
ter is two hundred thouſand; and therefore the chord of itreen 
conds ſhall be leſs than fifteen of thoſe ſame two hundred thouland 
parts; but that which 1s lels than (4) fifteen pars of two hun- 
dred thouſand, is alſo more than that which 1s four centeſmes of 
five hundred ; therefore the aſcent of the mark in the time of the 
balls motion is lefſe than four centeſmes, that is, than one twenty 
fifth part of a pace 3 it ſhall be theretore (b) about rwo inches : 
And lo much conlequeryly ſhall be the variation of each Weſtern 
ſhot, the Earth being-ſuppoled to have a diurnal motion. Now if I 
ſhall tell you, that this variation (I mean of tailing rwo inches ſhort 
of what they would do 1n caſe the.Earth did not move) upon tri- 
all doth happen in all ſhots, how.will you convince me Simplicins, 
ſhewing me by an experiment that it is not ſo? Do you not ſee 
that it is impoſlible ro confure me, unlets you firſt ind out a way 
toſhoor ar a' mark with ſo much exattnelſle, as never ro mifle an 
hairs bredth ? For whilſt the ranges of great ſhot conſiſt of diffe- 
rent numbers of paces, as de facto-they do, I will affirm that in 
each of thoſe variations there 1s contained that of two inches cau- 
ſ{edby the motion of the Eacth. 

$a G*. Pardon me,Salwiatrs, you are too liberal. For I would 
tel! the Perzpateticks, that though every ſhort ſhould hit the very 
centre of the mark, that ſhould-not in the leaſt diſprove the motion 
of the Earth. For the Gunners are ſo conſtantly imployed 1n le- 
velling the ſight and gun ro the mark, as that they can hit the ſame, 
notwithſtanding the motion of the Earth. And I ſay; that if the 
Farth ſhould ſtand ſtill, the ſhorts would not prove true 3 but the 
Occidental would be too low, and the Oriental too high : now let 
Simplicins diſprove me if he can. 

Salv. This is a ſubtilty worthy of Sagredzs : But whether 
this variation be to be obſerved in the motion, or in the reſt of the 
Earth, it muſt needs be very ſmall, it muſt needs be (wallowed-up 

X in 


t61 


(a) Thatis, in 
Plainer termes the 
fraction IT3z3h 1s 
more thai: * 1c tras 
ion T35534,tor die 
viding the denomij- 
nators by their :10- 
minators, and the 
firlt produceth 
133333 the other 
but 1 2500, 

(6) Ic ſhall be 
neer 25 inches, ac. 
counting the Pace 
to be Geometrical, 
containing 5 foot. 


It i demonſt; a« 
ted with great ſub- 
wlty, that the 
Earths motion ſup* 
poſed , Canon ſhox 
ought not to vary 
more than in reſt, 


162 


It ts +:q :4fre fo 
b- Very Caitlin as in 
4amitimg ex; ovi* 
ww nts for tr”, to 
thoiſ- who never 
tried them, 


Exp-rivcs.ts and 
arguments againſt 
the Earth; motion 
ſeem ſo far C0X- 
(luding, as they tte 
hid mnder qui» 


Voher, 


G. Gartit#us, his yſicme. 


in. thoſe very great ones which ſundry accidents continually pro. 
duce. And all this hath been - pra and granted on good grounds 
to Simplicius, and only witin 1ntent to advertile him how much 
it importeth to be cautious in granting many experiments for true 
to thoſe who never had tried them, but only eagerly alledged them 
juſt as they oughtto be for the {crving their purpole : This is ſp. 
ken, I ſay, by way of ſurpluſlage and Corollary to Simplicixs, for 
the real truth is, that as concerning theſe ſhots, the ſame Onght ex. 
ally to befall aſwell in the motion as 1n the reſt of the Terreſtrial 
Globe ; as likewiſe it will happen in all the other experiment 
that cither have been or can be produced, which have at tirſt bluſh 
ſo mnch ſemblance of truth, as the antiquated opinion of the 
Earths motion hath of equivocation. ; 

Sacr. As for my part Iam fully ſatisfied , and very well un- 
derſtand that who ſo ſhall imprint in his fancy this general com- 
munity of the diurnal converſion amongſt all things Terreſtrial, 
to all which it naturally agreeth, aſwell as ip the old concet of its 
reſt about the centre, ſhall doubtleſſe diſcern the fallacy and equi- 
voke which made the arguments produced {eem - eoncluding, 
There yet remains in me {ome hzfitancy (as I have hinted be- 
fore) touching the flight of birds , the which having as it were an 
animate faculty of moving at their plealuge with a thouſand mo- 
tions , and to ſtay long in the Air ſeparated from the Earth, and 
therein with moſt irregular windings to go fluttering to and again, 
I cannot conceive how amongſt ſo great a contuſion of motions, 
they ſhould be able to retain the firſt commune motion ; and in 
what manner , having once made any ſtay behind , they can get 
it up again, and overtake the ſame with flying , and keep pace 
with the Towers and trees which hurry with ſo precipitant a courle 
towa:ds the Eaſt; I ay fo piecipitant , for in the great circle of 
the Globe it is little lefle than a thouſand miles an hour , whereof 
the flight of the {wallow I believe makes not fifty.” 

Sar v. If the birds were to keep:;pace with the courſe of the 
trees by help of their wings, they would of neceſlity flic very faſt; 
aruit they were deprived of the univerſal converſion , they would 
lag asfar behind ; and their flight would ſeem as furions towards 
the Weſt, and to him that could diſcern the ſame, - it would 
much exceed the flight of an arrow ; but I think we could not be 
able to perceive it , no more than we ſee a Canon bullet, whilſt 
driven by the fury of the fire , it flieth through the Ait : Butthe 
truth is that the proper motion of birds, I mean of their flight, 
hath nothing to do with the univerſal motion , to which it 1 ner 
ther an help , nor an hinderance ; and that which maintaineth 
the {aid motion unaltered in the birds, is the Air it ſelf ; thorough 
which they flie, which naturally follovving the Vertzgo - ar 

art 


Dtrartocus. IT. 


Earth > ike as it carrieth the clouds along with it, ſo it tranſporteth 
bird; and every thing elle which is pendent in the ſame; in ſb much 
chat as £0 the buſineſſe of keeping pe vvith the Earth , the birds 
nced take no care thereof , but Pt that work might ſleep perpe- 
cually-. | | 

$4G k- Thatthe Air can carry the clouds along with it, as 
being matters eaſle for their lightnefſe ro be moved and deprived 
of all other contrary inclination , yea more, as being matters that 
partake allo of the conditions and properties of the Earth ; I com- 
prehend without any difficulty 3 bur that birds, which as having 
life, may move with a motion quite contrary to the diurnal , once 
having ſurcealed the ſaid motion , the Air ſhould reſtore them to 
it, ſeems to me a little ſtrange, and the rather for that they are ſolid 
and weighty bodies 3 and withal, we ſee ; as hath been ſaid, ſtones 
and other grave bodies to lie unmoved againſt the izrpetus of the 
air 3 and when they ſuffer themſelves to be overcome thereby , 
they never acquire ſo much velocity as the wind which carrieth 
them. 4 

Sarv. We aſcribe not (0 little force , Sagredns, to the moved 
Air , which is able to move and bear before it ſhips full fraught, 
to tear up trees by the roots , and overthrow Towers when it 
moveth (wiftly ; and yet we cannot ſay that the motion of the 
Air in theſe violent operations 1s neer fo violent, as that of the 
diurnal revolution. 

S1my. You fee then that the moved Air may alſo cotinue the 
motion of proje&s, according to the Dofrine of Ariſtotle ; and 


it {cemed_ to me very ſtrange that he ſhould have crred in this 
particular. 


Say. It may without doubt, in caſe it could continue it ſelf, 
but lik as when the wind ceafing neither ſhips go on , nor trees are 
blown down ; ſo the motion in the Air not continuing after the 
ſtone is gone out of the hand, and the Air ceafing to move , it 
tollowerth that it muſt be ſomething elſe befides the Air that ma- 
keth the projets to move. | 

$1 vp... But how upon the winds being laid , doth the ſhip ceaſe 
to move ?? Nay you may fee that when the wind is down, and 
che ſails furl'd , the veſſel continueth to run whole miles. | 

S a Lv. But this maketh againſt your (elf Simplicizs , for thar 
the wind being laid that filling the fails drove on the ſhip , yet ne- 
<4 doth it without help of the medium continue its 
courſe. 

Sine. It might be ſaid that the water was the medinm which 
carried forward the ſhip , and maintain'd it in motion. ' 

IALv.. It might indeed be ſo affirmed, if you would ſpeak 
quite contrary to truth ; for the truth is , that the water , by rea- 

X 2 


163 


uw gr ae dn 


oo. I: oe I 
—_— X S — ES - _ : 


. ». Jy — 
: OT _— 2 
hy _ - 


ew —_ 


14 


The great fels- 
city for whsch they 
are much to be e2- 
vied who per ſwaade 
themſelves that 
they krow every 
thing. 


G. Gartitzus, hs Syſeme. 


ſon of its great reſiſtance to the diviſion made by the hull of the 
ſhip , doth with great noile retift the lame; nor doth it permit it. 
of a great while to acquire that velocity which the wind would 
conter upon it, were the obſtacle of the water removed. Per. 
haps Simplicius you have never conſidered with what fury the 
water belcts a bark , whilſt it torceth its way through a ſtandin 
water by help of Oars or Sails : tor if you had ever minded that 
cffc& , you would not now have produced tuch an abſurdiry. 
And 1 am thinking , that you have hitherto been one of thole who 
to find out how ſuch things ſucceed , and to come to the know. 
ledg of natural effe&s , do not betake themlelves to a Ship, a 
Croſſe-bow , or a piece of Ordivance , bur retire into their ſty- 
dies, and turn over Indexes and Tables to {ee whether Ariftorle 
hath ſpoken any thing thereof z and being aſſured of the true 
ſenſe of the Text , neither deſire nor care for knowing any 
more 

SaGkr. This isa great felicity , and they are to be much eq- 
vied for it. For if knowledg be deſired by all, and it to be wike, 
be to think ones ſelf io , they enjoy a very great happineſle , for 
that they may per{wade themlelves that the y know and underſtand 
all things , in {gorn of thoſe who knowing , that they underſtand 
not what theſe think they underſtand , axd conſequently fecking 
that they know not the very leaſt particle of what 1s knowable, 
kill themſelves with waking and ſtudying , and conſume their day 
in experiments and oblcrvations., But pray you let us return to 
our birds ; touching which you have {aid , that the Air being mo» 
ved with: grear velocity., might reſtore unto them that part of the 
Pres, motion which amongſt the windings of their flight they 
might; bave loſt 3 to which I reply., that.the agitated Air ſeemrth 
unable to confer on a ſolid and grave body., ſo great & velocityas 
its own,: And becauſe that of the Air is as great as..that of che 
Earth ,, I cannot think that the Air is able co make good the lothe 
of the birds retardation in Fight | | 


Sa Lv. Your diſcourle hath in it much of. probability, and to 
ſick ax trivial douhre1s not foriah acute wit 3 yet nevettheleſle the 
robability, being removed, l believed that it hath net a; jot more 
Wa than the others already contidered and. reſolved. 
-Sa6,8- It is moſt certaia thax if it be not neceflatily coaclu- 
dent , its. efficacy muſt needs be juſt nothing at all ; ' for iti! 
oncly when the concluſion is neceſſary that the opponent;hath no- 
thing to alledg on the contrary. 
$S a. v., Your making a greater ſcruple of this than of the other 
inſtances dependeth, if I miſtake not, upoa the birds being am 
mated , and thereby enabled:to ule their Rrength at pleaſure 7 
gainſt he , primary, motion in-bred in terrene bodies ;Jike aſe 
L | - examp ©, 


Diatocus IJ, 


example, we ice them whil It they are alive to fly upwards, a thing 
altogether impoſſible tor them to do as they are grave bodies ; 
whereas being dead they can onely tall downwards ; and there- 
fore you ho:d that the realons that are of force jn all the kinds of 
projeds above named , cannot take place in birds : Now this is 
very true 3 and becauſe it is ſo , Sagreaus , that dorh not appear 
to be done in thoſe projeas , which we lee the birds ro do. For if 
from the rop of a Tower you ler fall a dead bird and alive one; 
the dead bird ſhall do the fame that a ſtone doth, that is, it ſhall 
firſt follow the general motion diurnal] , and then the motion of 
deſcent , as grave 3 but if the bird let fall , be alive, whar (hall 
hiader it, (there ever remaining 1n it the diurnal motion) from 
ſoaring by help of its wings to what place of the Horizon it ſhall 
pleaſe ? and this new motion , as being peculiar to the bird, and 
not participated by us, muſt of neceſſity be viſible ro us ; and if 
it be moved by help of its wings towards the Weſt , what ſhall 
hinder it from returning with a like help of its wings unto the 
Tower. And, becaule, in the laſt place , the bird swending its 
flight towards the Weſt was no other than a withdrawing from 
the diurnal motion, (which hath, {upppole ten degrees of velocity 
one degree onely , there did thereupon remain to the bicd whil it 
it was 1n ics flight nine degrees of velocity , and ſo foon as it did 
alight upon the the Earth , the ten common degrees returned to it; 
to which, by flying towards the Eaſt it might adde one, and with 
thoſe eleven overtake the Tower. And in {hort, if we well con- 
lider , and more narrowly examine the effeQs of the flight of 
birds , they differ from rhe prozzats ſhot or thrown to any part of 
the World in nothing, {ave onely that the projeRts are moved by an 
external projicient , and the birds by an interna] principle. And 
here fora final proof of the nullity of all zhe experiments before 
alledged , 1: conceive it. now a time and place convericat to 
demonſicace:'a way how co make an exact trial of them all. 
Shut your {elf up with {ome friend 1n the grand Cabbin between 
the decks of lore large Ship, and there procure gaars, flies, and 
luch other (mall wwged creatures : get alſo a great tub ( or 
dther veſſel) full of water, and: within it put certain. fiſhes 3 Jet 
allo a certain bottle be hung up, which drop. by drop letteth forth 
Ks wateraito another bottle placed underneath, having, a narrow 
neck : and, the Ship lying Gill, obſerve diligently how thoſe final 
winged animals fly with like velocity towards. all parts of the Ca- 
din; how the fiſhes ſwim indiffecently towards all fides ; and how 
the diſtilling drops all fall into the bottle placed underneath. And 
Glting any thing towards your; friend, you nced not throw it with 
More force one way then another, provided the diſtances be equal: 
and leaping, as the ſaying is, with your feet. cloſed, you will reach 


A$ 


167 


The ar{wer rs 
te aronument 1A- 
hen frem the flight 
of birds contrary 
to the m:tion of the 
Earth. 


eAn experiment 
with which alone 
is [hewn the »»/['1ty 
of all the objefti- 
ons produced as 
gainit the motion 


of the Earth, 


_— =—_— ng — a we. 
— =. l , an . _ 


a - aa 


flyer. 


G. Gar1it=us, his Cy?cme. 


as far one way as another. Having oblerved all theſe Particulary, 
though no man doubteth rhat lo Jong as the veſſel ſtands ill, they 
ought to ſucceed in this manner 3 make the Ship to move with 
what velocity you pleale; for ({o long as the motion is uniforme, 
and not fluuating this way and that way) you ſhall not diſcern 
any the leaſt alteration in all che forenamed effeCts ; nor can you 
gather by any of them whether the Ship doth move or ſtand ſj}, 
In leaping you ſhall reach as far upon the floor, as before ; nor for 
that the Ship moveth ſhall you make a greater leap towards the 
poop than towards the prow ; howbeit in the time that you ſtaid 
in the Air,the floor under your fcet ſhall have run the contrary way 
to that of your jump 3 and throwing any thing to your companion 
you ſhall not need to caſt it with more ſtrength that it may reach 
him, if he ſhall be towards the prow, and you towards the poo 
then if you ſtood in a contrary ſituation; the drops ſhall all diſtil] 
as before into the inferiour bottle, and not {ſo much as one ſhall 
fall towards the poop, albeit whilſt the drop is in the Air, the Ship 
ſhall have run many feet ; the Fiſhes in their water ſhall not (wm 
with more trouble towards the fore-part, than towards the hinder 
part of the tub 3 but ſhall with equal velocity make to the bait 
placed on any fide of the tub; and laſtly , the flies and gnats 
ſhall continue their flight indifferently towards all parts; nor 
ſhall they ever happen to be driven together towards the fide of 
the Cabbin next the prow , as if they were wearied with fol- 
lowing the ſwift courſe of the Ship , from which through their 
ſuſpenſion in the Air, they had been long ſeparated ; and if 
burning a few graines of incenſe you make a little (moke, 
you ſhall ſce it aſcend on high, and there in manner of a cloud 
ſuſpend ir ſelf, and move indifterently, not inclining more to one 
fide than another : and of this correſpondence of efte&s the cauſe 
1s for that the Ships motion is common to all the things contained 
in it, and to the Airalſo; I mean if thoſe things be ſhut up in the 
Cabbin : but in caſe thoſe things were above deck in the open Air, 
and not obliged to follow the courſe of the Ship, differences more 
or lefſe notable would be obſerved in ſome of the fore-named ef- 
feds, and there is no doubt but that the ſmoke would ſtay behind 
as much as the Air it ſelf ; the flies alſo, and the gnats being hin- 
dered by the Air would not be able to follow the motion of the 
Ship, if they were ſeparated at any diſtance from it. But keeping 
neer thereto, becaule the Ship it ſelf as being an unfraQuous Fa- 
brick, carrieth along with it part of its neereſt Air, they would 
follow the ſaid Ship without any pains or difficulty. And for the 
like reaſon we lee ſometimes in riding poſt, that the troubleſome 


* Tafaris, borſe. flies and * horners do follow the horſes flying ſometimes to one, 


ſometimes to another part of the body , but in the falling _ 
t 


Drarocus. IL. 


the difference would be very mall; and in the falrs, and projecti« 
ons of grave bodies altogether iunperceptible. 

Sack. Though it came not 1nto my thoughts to make triall of 
theſe obſervations, when I was art Sea, yet am I confident that they 
will ſucceed in the lame manner, as you have related ; in confirma- 
ton of which I remember that being in my Cabbin LI have asked 
an hundred times whether the Ship moved or ſtood ſtill ; and 
ſometimes I have imagined that it moved one way, when it ſteered 
quite another WAY. | am therefore as hitherto ſatisfied and con- 
vinced of the nullity of all choſe experiments that have been pro- 
duced in proof of the negative part. There now remains the ob- 
jection founded upon that which experience ſhews us, namely, that 
a ſwift Vertigo or whirling about hath a faculty ro extrude and 
diſperſe the matters adherent to the machine that turns round ; 
whereupon many were of opinion and Ptolomy amongſit the reſt, 
chat if the Earth ſhould tura round with (ſo grear velocity, . the 
ſtones and creatures upon it ſhould be toſt into the Skie, and 
that there could not be a morter ſtrong enough to faſten buildings 
ſo to their foundations, but that they would likewiſe ſuffer a like 
extruſion. 

Sa v. Before I come to anſwer this obzeQion, I'cannot but 
take notice of that which I have an hundred times oblerved, aud 
not without. Jaughter, to come into the minds of mult men {o foun 
as ever they hear mention made of this motion of the Earth,which 
is believed by them {o fixt and immoveable, that they not only ne- 
ver doubred of that reſt, but have ever ſtrongly believed. that all 
other men aſwell as they, have held it to be created immoveable, 
and fo to have continued through all ſuccceding ages : and being 
letled iv this perſwaſion, they ſtand amazed to hear that any one 
ſhould grant jt motion, as if, after that he had held it to be immo- 
veable, he had fondly thought it, to commence its motion then 
(and not tall then) when Pythagorss (or whoever elſe was the firſt 
hinter of its mobility ) (aid that it did move. Now that luch a foo- 
liſh concen {1 meanof; thinking - that thole who admit the motion 
of the Earth, have'firſt thought ir to ſtand ſtill from its creation, 
unnll the time of Pytbagoras, and have onely made # moveable 
alter that Pytbagor as eſteemed it ſo) findeth a place in the mindes 


ot the vulgar, and men'of ſhallow capacities, I do not much won- 


der; but that ſuch perſons as Ariftotle and Ptolomy ſhould alſo 
run into this childiſh miſtake, 1s to my thinking a more admirable 
and unpardonable folly. 4 
Sa 68. You believe then, Salviatus,that Prolomy thought, that 
mn tis Diſputation he was to maintain the ftability of the Earth 
22amſt [ach perſons, as granting it to have been immoveable, un- 
all the time of Pythagores , did affirm it to have been but w_ 
. made 


167 


The ſtupidity of 
ſome that think the 
Earth to have be- 
gun to move, when 
Pythagoras began 
ro affirme that «t 


did fo. 


Aiitotle axd 
Pt lomy ſeem to 
confure the mobilt- 
ty of the Earth a- 
gainſt thoſe who 
thoug ht that it ha- 
ving a long t1me 
flood Fill, did be- 
gin to move im the 


time of Pythagoras 


3. GaLlL=us, hi Syſleme. 
made moveable; when'the faid Pythagorss aſcribed unto it mo. 
tion. | | 
Satv. We can think no other, it we do but conſider the w; 
he taketh to confute their aflertion; the contutation of which 
conſiſts in the demolition of buildings, ard th= rofling of ſtones, 
living creatures and men themlelves up into the Air. Ard he. 
cauſe {uch overthrows and <cxtrutions cannot be made upon bujl- 
dings and men, which were not beforc on the Earth, nor can men 
be. placed, nor buildings erected upon the Earth, unlefſe when it 
ſtandeth ſtill; hence theretore it 1s cleer, that Prolomy argueth a- 
gainſt thoſe, who having granted the ſtability ot the Earth for 
{ome time, that 1s, (o long as living creatures, ſtones, and Maſons 
were able to abide there, and to build Palaces and Cities, make ir 
afterwards precipitatcly moveable to the overthrow and deſtrudti- 
of Editices, and living creatures, *&c. For it he had undertook to 
diſpute againſt {uch as had aſcribed that revolution to the Farth 
from its firſt creation, he would have confuted them by laying, 
that if. the Earth had alwayes moved, - there could never have been 
placed upon it either men or ſtones ; much leſs could buildings 
have been erected, or Citics founded, &c. 


-.'$1M:y.. 1 do not well conceive thele Ariſtotelick and Ptole- 
waick inconveniences. 


i! Sal v. Ptolomey either arguesh againſt thole who have eſtecn- 


ed the Earth always moveable ;or againſt ſuch as have held tha 
it ſtood for ſome time ſtill, and hath fince been fet on moving. 
If againſt the firſt, he ought to lay, that the Earth did not always 
move, for that then there would never have been men, animals or 
edifices on the Earth, its vertigo not permitting them to ſtay 
thereon. But in that he arguing, ſaith that the Earth; doth not 
move, becauſe that beaſts, men, and houſes before plac'd on the 


Earth would precipitate, he ſuppolſeth the Earth to have been once 
in ſuch a ſtate, as that it did admit men and beaſts to ſtay, and 


build thereon 3 the which draweth on the conſequence, that it 
did for ſome time ſtand ſtill, to wit, was apt for the abode of 
nimals and erection of buildings. Do you now conceive what | 
would lay ? | SIRE 

Simy. I do, and I donot : but this little importeth to the 
merit of the cauſe 3 nor can a ſmall miſtake of Prolomey, com- 
mitted through inadvertencie be ſufficient to move the Earth, 
when 1t is immoveable. But omitting cavils,” let us come to the 
ſubſtance of the argument, which to me {eems unan{werable. | 

Sar v. And], Simplicixs, will drive it home, and re-inforce 
by ſhewing yet more ſenſibly , that it is true that grave bodi 
turn'd with velocity about a ſettled centre, do acquire an iwptt®# 


of. moving, and receding to a diſtance from that centre, _ 
then 


Diatocus II. 


then when they are 1n a ſtate of having a propenſion of moviug 
Ily to the ſame. Tie a bottle that harh water in it, to 
naturally ; "op 
the end of a cord, and holding the other end faſt in your hand, 
and making the cord and your arm the lemi-diameter, and the 
knitting of che ſhoulder the centre, (wing the boctle very faſt a- 
bout, ſo as that it may deſcribe the circumference of a circle, 
which, whether it be parallel ro the Horizon, or perpendicular to 
_ jt, or any Way inclined, it ſhall in all caſes tollow, that the wa- 
ter will not fall out of the bottle + nay, he that ſhall ſwing it, 
ſhall find the cord always draw, and ſtrive to go farther from the 
ſhoulder. Andif you bore a hole in the bottom of the bottle, 
ou ſhall ſee the water ſpout forth no leſs upwards into the skie, 
than laterally, and downwards to the Earth ; and if inſtead of wa- 
ter, you ſhall pur Jictle pebble ſtones 1nto the bottle, and ſwing it 
in the (ame manner, you ſhall find that they will ſtrive in the like 
manner againſt the cord. And laſtly, we ſce boys throw ſtones 
a great way, by (winging round a piece of a ſtick, at the end of 
which the ſtone is let into a ſlit (which ſtick is called by them a 
ſling; ) all which are arguments of the truth of the concluſion, 
to wit, that the vertigo or ſwing conferreth upon the moveable, 
4 motion towards the circumference, in cafe the motion be (wit : 
and therefore if the Earth revolve about its own centre, the mo- 
tion of the ſuperficies, and eſpecially towards the great cucle, 
as being incomparably more ſwift than thoſe before named, ought 
to extrude all clfings up into the air. 

Sine. The Argument ſcemerh to me very well proved and 
inforced; and I believe it would be an hard macter to anſwer and 
pyerthrow it. | | 

Satv. Its ſolution dependeth upon certain notions no leſs 
known and believed by you, than by my ſelf : but becauſe they 
come not into your mind, therefore it is that you perceive not the 
anſwer ; wherefore, without telling you it (for that you know the 
lame already) I ſhall with onely affiſting your memory, make you 
to refute this argument. | 

$1n y. I have often thought of your way of arguing, which 
hath made me almoſt think that you lean to that opinion of Pla- 
to, Qu0d uoſtrum ſcare ſit quoddam reminiſci ; therefore I intreat 
you to free me from this doubt, by letting me know your judg- 
ment, 

SaLlv. Whatl think of the opinion of Plato, you may gather 
irom my words and ations. I have already in the precedent con- 
ferences expreſly declared my ſelf more than once ; I will purſue 
the ſame ſtyle in the preſent caſe, which may hereafter ſerve you 
tor an example, thereby the more eaſily to gather what my opt- 
Men 1s touching the attainment of al when a time ſhall 


Y offer 


i6g 


Onr k: ow'edg © 
4 kind of reminiſ- 
Cence according to 


Plato. 


ty r= a Emer. —_— 
_- ». my - - 


Th motion ime 
preſſed by the pro- 
Jrcrent ts onely by 4 
rig bt line. 


whe the circular motion determineth. 1 know whatt wotlld 


G. Cartizus, his Syime. 


offer upon ſome other day : bur I would not have Sagred ze of. 


4cnded at rhis digretlion. 


Sacr. 1 am rather very much pleaſed wut] it, for that } re. 


"member that when I ſtudied Logick,l could never comprehend that 


ſo much cry d up and moſt potent demonſtration of Ariſtotle. 

Sarv. Let usgo on therefore; and let Srmplicins, tell ne 
what that motion 1s which the ſtone maketh thar is held faſt jn the 
ſlit of the ſling, when the boy ſwings it about to throw it a great 
way ? 

$i p. The motion of the ſtone, fo long as it is in the lit, j; 
circular, that is, moveth by the arch of a circle, whoſe ſtedfaf 
centre 15 the knitting of the ſhoulder, and its {cmi- diameter the arm 
and ſtick. 

Sarv. And when the ſtone leaveth the ſling, what is its mo- 


tion? Noth it continue to follow its former circle, or doth it go 
by another line ? 


Stny. It will continue no longer t to {wing round, for then it 
would not go farther from the arm: of the projicient, whereas 
we (ce it go a great way off. 

S at v. With what motion doth it move then ? - 

$tme. Cive mea little time to think thereof; For 1 have ne- 


ver conlidered it before. 


9*Lv. Hark hither , Sagredns ; this is the Qnoddam reminiſt 
in a ſubjze&t well underſtood. You have pauled a great while, 
Simplicius. 
 $xms. As faras I can fee, the motion received in going out of 
the fling, can be no other than by a righr line ; nay, it muſt ne- 
ceſlarily be ſo, it we ipeak of the pure adventitious impetns. T1 
wis a little puzled to fee it make an arch, but becauſe that arch 
bended all the way upwards, and no other way, I conceive” that 


that incurvatiori.cometh from the gravity of the ſtone, vyhich nz- 


tutally dravverh it dovynvvards. The imprefled impetws, 1 ſay; 
vvithourt rceſpefting the natural, is by a right line. 

Sar v. But by what right line? Becauſe infinite, and towards 
every {ide may be produced from the flit of the ſling, and from! the 
point of the ſtones ſeparation from the ſling. | 

S1Mp. It moveth by that line which goeth direfly from the 
motion which the ſtone made in the ſling. 

Satv. The motion of the ſtone whilſt it was in the "y you 
have aftirmed already to be circular;' now circularity oppoſeth 
direAnefſs, there not being m the circular line any pomhav? io un 
rect or ſtreight. 

Simy. I mean not that the projze&ed motion 15 dire | m re- 
* pett of the whole circle, but in reference to that uſtimare point; 


{ay 


Diatocus [I]. 


ſay, but do not well know how to cxpreſs my ſelf. 

<,ty. AndlIallo perceive that you underſtand the buſineſs, 
but that you have not rhe proper terms, wherewith to expreſs the. 
fame. Now thele I can eallly teach you ; teach you, that is, as 
:0 the words, but not as to the truths, which are things. And that 
you may plainly ſee that you know the thing I ask you, and onely 
want language to exprels it, tell me, when you ſhoot a bullet out 
of a gun, towards what part 1s it, that its acquired impetus carti- 
eth it ? 

Sinv. Its acquired impetys carricth it in a right line, which 
continueth the retitude of the barrel, that is, which inclineth net 
ther to the right hand nor to the left, nor upwards nor down- 
wards. 

Sauv. Which in ſhort is aſmuch as to ſay, it maketh no angle 
with the line of ſtreight motion made by the ſling. 

S$, me. SOT would have ſaid. 

S,a1v. If then the line of the projets motion be to continue 
without making an angle upon the circular line deſcribed by it, 
whilſt it was with the projicient; and if from this circular motion it 
ought to pals to the right motion, what ought this right line to be ? 

Sine. It muſt needs be that which toucheth the circle in the 
as of (eparation, for that all others, in my opinion, being pro- 
onged would interle& the circumference, and by that means make 
ſome angle therewith, 

SaLv. You have argued very well, and ſhewn your ſelf half a 
Geometrician. Keep 1n mind therefore, that your true opinion 
1s expreſt in theſe words, namely, That the projet acquireth an 
impetus of moving by the Tangent, the arch deſcribed by the 
motion of the projicient, in the point of the ſaid projets ſepara- 
tion from the projicient. | 

S1my. I underſtand you very well, and this is that which I 
would ſay. 

Satv. Of a right line which toucheth a circle, which of its 
points 15 the _—_ to the centre of that circle ? 

$1ny. That of the conta@t without doubt : for that is in the 
circumference of a circle, and the reſt without : and the points of 
the ciccumference are all equidiſtant from the centre. 

SaLv. Therefore a moveable departing from the contaQ, and 
moving by the ſtreight Tangent, goeth continually farther and 
farther from the conta&t, and alſo from the centre of the circle. 

Ste. It doth ſo doubtleſs. 
| Salty. Nowif you have kept in mind the propoſitions, which 
Jou have told me, Jay them together, and tell me what you gathec 
from them. ; 

Se. I chink I am not ſo forgetful, but that I do remember 

T2 them. 


171 


= —_ 4 
9 I y— . -———_ en ma 6 > rh 
>. - mw 
- wo ot © __ < 


172 


y he oro 'e0( Mme» 
vith by the [ans 
gem of the circle of 
19e motion frees 
dent 1m the rome of 
ſeparation, 


G. Garrtzus, his Cytcme. 


them. From the things premiled I gather that the projet [wiftly 
ſwinged round by the projicient, in its ſeparating from it, doth re. 
tain an 2»zpctzs of continuing its motion by the right line, which 
toucheth the circle detcribed by the motion of rhe projicient jn 
the point of teparation, by which motion the projze&@ goeth con- 
cinually receding from the centre of the circle delcribed by the 
motion of the projicient. 

Srv. You know then by this time the reaſon why grave bo- 
dies ſticking to the rim of a wheele , iwitcly moved, are extruded 
and thrown beyond the circumference to yet a farther diſtance 
from the centre. 

Sine. I think | underſtand this very well ; but this new know- 
ledg rather increaſeth chan leflencth my incredulity that the Farth 
can turn round with fo great velocity, without extruding up into 
the sky, ſtones, animals, @c. 

Sar v. In the ſame manner that you have underſtood all this, 
you ſhall, nay you do underſtand the reſt : and with recolle&ing 
your ſelf, you may remember the ſame without the help of 0- 
thers : but that we may loſe no time, 1 will help your memory 
therein. You do already know of your (cf, that the circular mo- 
tion of the projicient imprefſeth on the projet an impetus of mo- 
ving (when they come to ſeparate) by the right Tangent, the 
circle of the motion in the point of ſeparation, and continuing x 
long by the ſame the motion ever go-cl recediag tarther and far- 
ther from the projicient : and you have ſaid, that the proje& 
would continue to move along by that right line, if there were nor 
by its proper weight an inclinatio: of delcent added unto it; from 
which the 1ncurvatton of the line of morioa is derived. Ir {cems 
moreover that you knew of your [clf, that this incurvation al- 
ways bended towards the centre of the Earth, for thicher do all 
grave bodics tend. Now [ proceed a little farther,and ask you,whe- 
ther the moveable ater its ſeparation, in continuing the right mo- 
tion gocth always equally receding from the centre, or if you will, 
trom the circumtcrence of that circle, of which the precedent mo- 
tion was a part 3 which is as much as to ſay, Whether a moveable, 
that forfaking the point of a Tangent, and moving along by the 
ſaid Tangent, doth equally recede from the point of contadt, and 
from the circumference of the circle ? 

Simy. No, Sir : for the Tangent near to the point of contact, 
recedeth very little from the circumference, wherewith it keepeth 
a very narrow angle, but in its going farther and farther 
off, the diſtance always encreaſeth with a greater proportion 3 lo 
that in a circle thar ſhould have ». g. ten yards of diameter, a point 
of the Tangent that was diſtant from the conta&t but two palms, 


would be three or four times as far diſtant from the circumference 
of 


Drartccous. LI. 


of che circle, as a point that was diſtant from the contaction one 

an, and rhe point that was diſtaric halt a palm, I hkewiſe believe 
would fearfe rccede the fourth part of the diftance of the ſecond : 
© that within an inch or two of the contact, rhe feparation of the 

Tangent from the circumference 1s (carle diſcernable. 

Sx v. Sothat che receſſion of the proze@ trom the circumfe- 
-ence of the precedent circular motion 15 very tmalt in the begin- 
ing ? i 

S;nep. Almoſt infenſible. : 

Su y- Now tell me a little 3 the projet, which from the mo- 
tion of the projictent receiveth an impetus of moving along the 
Tangent it2a right line, and that would keep unto the ſame, did 
pot ics own Weight depreſs it downwards, how long is it afrer the 
(eparation, Cre it begrn to decline downwards. 

Sie. E bclieve that it beginneth prefently ; for it not ha- 
ving any thing to uphold it, its proper gravity cannot bur ope- 
rate. 

$41 v. So that, if that ſame ſtone, which being extruded from 
that wheel turn'd about very faſt, had as great a natural propen- 
lion of moving towards the ceptre of the {aid wheel, as it hath to 
move towards the centre of the Earth, it would be an caiie mat- 
ter for it to retern unto the wheel, or rather nor ro depart fro:n it; 

in regard that upon the begining of the ſeparation, the recetſion be- 
mg (© fall, by reaſon of the ir:ftaire acurenet+ of the angle of 
contact, every very hrtrle of mclination that draweth it back to- 
wards the centre of the wheel, would be f{uthicienc to retain it up- 
on the rn or circumference. 

'$ray. I queſtion not, but that if one ſuppoſe that which nei- 
ther is, nor can be, to wit, that the inclination of thoſe grave bo- 
dies was to go towards the centre of the wheel , they would never 
come to be extruded or ſhaken off. 

$a 1 v. But I ncither do,nor need to ſuppoſe that which is nor ; 
for | will not deny but that the ſtones are extruded. Yet | ſpeak 
this by way of ſuppoſition, to the end that you might grant me 
the reſt, Now fancy to your ſelf, that the Earth is that great 
wheel, which moved with ſo great velocity is to extrude the ſtones. 
You could tell me very well even now, that the motion of proje- 
Gon oughr to be by that right line which roucheth the Earth in 
the point of ſeparation : and this Tangent, how doth it notably 
recede from the luperficies of the Terreſtrial Globe ? 

S1ny. I believe, that in a thouſand yards, it will not recede 
from the Earth an inch. 

Salv. And did you not ſay, that the proje@ being drawn by 


on -_ weight,, declinerh from the Tangent towards the centre of 
the Earth? | 


S1MP. 


175 


A orane projet, 
as ſon a5 it ts ſe- 
parared from the 
projicient bermeth 
to decline. 


Ln R 
DOT ETSY 


174 


G. Garltzus., hi Syſleme. 


Sim ev. I ſaid {o, and alſo confeſle the reſt : and do now Plainly 
underſtand that the ſtone will not ſeparate from the Earth, for 
that its receſſion in the beginning would be ſuch, and fo ſmall, 
that it is a thouſand times exceeded by the inclination which the 
ſtone hath to move towards the centre of the Earth, which cen. 
tre in this caſe 15 alſo the centre of the whee!. And indeed it muſt 
be confeſſed that the ſtones, the living creatures, and the other 
grave bodies cannot b2 extruded ; but here again the lighter things 
beget in me a new doubt, they having bur a very weak propenſion 
of deſcent towards the centre ; fo that there being wanting in 
them that faculty of withdrawing from the ſuperficies, I ſee not, 
but that they may be extruded ; and you know the rule, that ad 
deftruendum ſufficit unum. 

Savi. We will alſo give you fatisfation in this. Tell me 
therefore in the firſt place, what you underſtand by light matters, 
that is, whether you thereby mean things really ſo light, as thar 
they go upvvards, or elſe not abſolutely light, bur of fo ſmall gra- 
vity, that though they deſcend downwards, itis but very ſlowly; 
for if you mean the abſolutely light, I will be readier than your 
ſelf to admit their extruſion, 

S1my. Ifſpeak of the other ſort, ſuch as are feathers, wool, cot- 
ton, and the like ; to lift up which every ſmall force ſufficerh: 
yet nevertheleſle we ice they reſt on the Earth very quietly. 

SAaLlv-. This pen, as it hath a natural propenfion to deſcend 80- 
wards the ſuperticies of the Earth, though it be very ſmall, yet [ 
muſt tell you that it ſufficeth to keep it from mounting upwards : 
and this again is not unknown to you your ſelf; rherefore tell me 
if the pen were extruded by the Vertigo of the Earth, by what 
line would it move ? —_ 

S 1 a e. By the tangent in the point of ſeparation. 

Sartv. And when it ſhould be to return, and re-unite it ſelf to 
the Earth, by what line would it then move ? ; 

S1mye. By that which goeth from it to the centre of the 
Earth. 

S a L v. So then here falls under our conſideration two moti- 
onsz one the motion of projeQion, which beginneth from the 
point of contaR, and proceedeth along the tangent 3 and the 0- 
ther the motion of inclination downwards, which beginneth from 
the projet it ſelf, and goeth by the ſecant towards the centre; and 
if you deſire that the projeQtion follow, it is neceſſary that the im- 
petxs by the rangent overcome the inclination by the ſecant : it 
not ſo ? = 

S1my- Soit {eemeth to me. 

Sar v. But what is it that you think neceſſary in the motion 
of the projicient, ro make that it may prevail over that inclina- 

(100, 


Drartocue. II, 


tion, from which entucth the ſeparation and elongation of the 
pen from the Earth ? | 
Sine. I cannot tell. 

S x1 v. How, do you not know that? The moveable is here 
the ſame, that is, the ſame pen 3 now how can the ſame moveable 
{uperate and excced it felt in motion ? 

S 1» #. [do not fee how it can overcome or yield to it (elf in 
motion, unlefſe by moving one while faſter, and another while 

ower. 

: Sat v. You lee then, that you do know it. If therefore the 
projection of the pen ought to follow, and its motion by the tan- 
gent be to overcome 1ts motion by the ſecant, what is it requiſite 
that their velocities ſhould be ? | 

$12. Iris requiſite that the motion by the tangent be greater 
chan that other by the ſecant. Bur wretch that I am ! Is it not 
only many thouſand times greater than the deſcending motion of 
the pen, but than that of the ſtone? And yet like a Fare fellow 
[ had ſuffered my ſelf to be perſwaded, that ſtones could not be 
extruded by the revolution of the Earth. I do therefore revoke 
my former ſentence, and ſay; that if the Earth ſhould move, 
ſones, Elephants, Towers, and whole Cities would of neceſſity be 
toſt up into the Air 3 and becauſe that that doth not evene, I con- 
clude that the Earth doth not move. 


Sa1v. Softly Simplicizs, you go on ſofaſt, that begin to be 


more afraid for you;than for the pen: Reſt a little, and obſerve what 


[ am going to ſpeap. If for the reteining of' the ſtone or, pen an- 
Hos pen the Earths ſurface it were neceſſary that its motion of 
deſcent were greater, or as much as the motion made by the tan- 
gent 5 You would have had reafon to ſay, that it ought of neceſli 


to move as faſt, or fafter by the ſecane downwards, than by the x 


ungent Faſtwards : But did not you tell me even now, that a 
thouſand: yards of diftance by the tangent 'from the conta&, do 
remove hardly an inch from the circumference? Ir is not ſuffici- 
ent therofore that the motion by the tangent, which is the ſame 
with that.of the diurna!l Vertigo, (or haſty revolution) be ſimply 
more {wift than the motion by the {ecant, which is the ſame with 
that of the pen in deicending 3 but it is requiſite that the ſame be 
lo much more ſwift as that the: time whiich ſufficeth for the pen 
to move v.g. a thouſand yards by the tangent, be inſufficient for 
Kc to move one {ole inch by the (ome The which I tell you ſhall 
never be, though you ſhould make that motion never ſo ſwift, 
and this.never ſo flow. 

"| S\nmx.. And why might not that by the tangent be ſo ſwift, as 
not to pive the pen trme to return to the ſurface of the Earth ? 
 SaLy, Try whether you can ftate the caſe in proper termes, 

an 


175 


ef geometrical 
demonſtration to 
prove the impoſſi- 
bility of eectrufron 
by means of the 
erreftrial y:rtigos 


G. Garitzus, hi Syſleme. 


avd | will give you an anſwer. Tell me therefore , how much do 
you think (ufficeth to make that motion Iwifter than this ? 

S1my. 1 will ſay for example , that if that motion by the tan. 
gent were a million of tunes {wifter than this by the ſecame, the 
pen, yea, and the ſtone alſo would come to be extruded. 

SaLtv. You fay lo, and fay that which is falle, onely for 
want , not of Logick, Phyſicks, or Metaphyficks , but of Geome- 
try 3 forif you did but underſtand its firſt elements, you would 
know , that from the centre of a circle a right line may be drawn 
to meet the tangent , which interſe&eth it in luch a manner, that 
the part of the tangent between the contact and the fecant , may 
be one, two, or three millions of times greater than that part of 
the ſecant which lieth between the tangent and the circumference, 
and that the neerer and neercr the {ccant ſhall be to the contaR, 
this proportion ſhall grow greater and greater n infinitum ; ſo 
that it need not be feared , though the vertigo be {wift, andthe 
motion downwards ſlow , that the pen or other lighter matter can 
begin to riſe upwards, for that the inclination downwards always 
exceedeth the velocity of the projzeQion. 

S aG r. Ido not perfcaly apprehend this buſineſle. 

SA LV. I will give youa moſt univerſal yet very eafie demon- 
ſtration thereof. Let a proportion be given between B A [in Fig. 
3-Jand C: Andlet BA be greater than C at pleaſure. And let 
there be deicribed a circle, whoſe centre is D. From which iti; 
required to draw a {ecant, inſuch manner , that the rangent may 
be in proportion to the ſaid ſecant , asBA toC. Let Albe 
{uppoled a third proportional to B A and C. And as Blis to 
IA, folet the diameter FE betoECG; and from the point G, 


_ tet there be drawn the tangent G H. I ſay that all this is done as 


was required z and as BAvtoC,|ſois HGtoGE. Andinre- 
ard that asBlistoIl A, foi: FEto EG; therefore by compo- 
ition, as BAisto AI; lothallFGbetoGE, And becauſe C 
1s the middle proportjon between B A and AI; and GHis a 
middle term between FG andGE, therefore , as BA isto C, 
ſo ſhall FG betoGH; that is HG toGE, which was to be 
demonſtrated. 

SaG Rk. lapprehend this demonſtration ; yet nevertheleſle , | 
am not left wholly without . hzſfitation ; for I find certain; confu- 
ſed (cruples role to and again in my mind , which like thick and 
dark clouds, permit me not to diſcern the cleerneſle and neceſſity 
of the concluſion with that perſpicuity , which is uſual in Mathe- 
matical Demonſtrations. And that which I ſtick at is this. It i 
true that the ſpaces between the tangent and the circumference do 
gradually diminiſh ix infinitum towards the conra& , but it is allo 
true on the contrary, that the propenfion of the ha” co 

C4 


Diatocus [T. 


Ofcendiil g0Wem leis & lets in it, the nearcr 1t 13 to the firſt term 
of irs d:24Ccur 5 that 15, tO the ſtare of reſt ;, as 1s maniteſt from thar 
which 70 declare unto us,demonſtrating that the delcending grave 
body departing trom reſt, ought to P3 {lc thorow all the degrees of 
cardity comprebended between the laid reſt, & any aſſigned degree 
of velocity,the which grow Icls and lels in nſfinitum. To which may 
be added, that the laid velocity and propention to motion, doth tor 
anocher reaſon dimiaiſh to 1nfivity 3 and it 1* becaule the gravity of 
the [ail moveable may infinitely diminith. So that the cauſes which 
div:%aiſh che propention of aſcending , and conſequently favour 
to projectioisy Are two ; chat 1, the levity of che moveable, and its 
viciuity £ the {taccof reſt; both which are augmentable zn infinit. 
and thel- two on the contrary being ro contract but with one ſole 
cauſe of waking the projection, cannot conceive how it alone, al- 
though it a!lo do admit of infinite augmentation, ſhould be able to 
remain 1avincible againſt the union & contederacy of the others,w* 
are two, and arc 1 like manner capable of intinire augmentation. 
S a1 v. Thi>1s a doubt worthy of Sagredus; and io explain it fo as 
that we may more clecrly apprehend it , for chat you (ay that you 
your (cl have but a confuſed Idea of it, we will diſtinguiſh of the 
Jame by reducing it into figure ; which may allo perhaps afford us 
ſome calc in relolving the lame. Let us therefore | in Fig. 4.] draw 
a perpe::dicular line rowards the centre,and let ir be AC, and to it 
at right avgles let there be drawn the Horizontal line A B, upon 
which the motion of the projeCtion ought to be made; now the pro- 
ze& would coatinue ro move along the ſame with an even motion,if 
ſo be its gravity did not incline it dowawards. Let us ſuppole from 
the point 4 a right line to be drawa , that may make any angle at 
pleature with the line A Bz which let be A E, and upon AB let us 
mark ſore equal (paces AF, FH, HK, and from them let us let fall 
the perpendiculars FG, HI, K L, as far as AE. And becauſe, as al. 
ready hath been (aid,th- deſcending grave body departing from reſt, 
gocth from time to time acquiring a greater degree of velocity, 
according as the laid time doth (uccelſively encreale ; we may con- 
ceive the {paces AF, FH,HK, to repreſent unto us equal times; and 
the perpendiculars FG, HI, Ki., degrees of velocity acquired in the 
laid times; {o that the degree of velocity acquired in the whole time 
AK, isas the line K L, in relpe& to the degree H I, acquired in the 
time AH,and the degree FG in the time AF;the which degrees KL; 
HI,FG,are(as 1+ maniteſt)the ſame in proportion, as the times KA, 
HA, F A, and if other perpendiculars were drawn from the points 
marked at pleaſure in the line F A, one might [ucceſſively find de- 
grees le(le and lefle 1 infinitum , proceeding towards the point A, 
repreſenting the firſt inſtant of time, and the firſt ſtate of reſt. And 
this retieat towards A ; repreſenterh the firſt propenſion to the 
| Z mo- 


177 


175 


G. Gaitit=zus, his Syicme. 


motion of deſ{ccnt., diminiſhed zn 3" goa by the approach of 
the moveable to the tirſt ſtate of reſt, which approximation js 
augmentable in infinitum. Now let us find the other diminution 
of velocity , which likewile may proceed to infinity , by the di- 
minution of the gravity of the moveable , and this ſhall be repre. 
ſented by drawing other lines from the point A, which contein 
angles lefſe than the angle B A E , which would be this line AD, 
the which interſeCting the parallels K L, HI, F G, inthe points 
M, N, andO, reprclent unto us the degrees FO, HN, KM, 
acquired in the times AF, AH, AK, lefle than the other de. 
grees FG, HI, KL, acquired in the ſame times 3 bur theſe 
latter by a moveable more ponderous, and thole other by a 
moveable more light. Andit is manifeſt , that by the retreat of 
the line E A towards AB , contraQing the angle E A B (the 
which may be done in infinitum , like as the gravity may zn infi- 
nitum be diminiſhed) the velocity of the cadent moveable may 


10 like manner be diminiſhed iz infinitum , and lo conſequently 


the cauſc that impeded the projettion ; and therefore my thinks 
that the union of theſe two reaſons againſt the projzeion, dimi- 
miſhed to infinity , cannot be any impediment to the ſaid proje- 
on. And couching the whole argument in its ſhorteſt terms, we 
will ſay , that by contraQting the angle E A B , the degrees of ve- 
locity LK, IH, GF, are diminiſhed ; and moreover by the re- 
treat of the parallels K L, HI, FG, towards the angle A , the 
ſame degrees are again diminiſhed ; and both theſe diminutions 
extend to infinity : Therefore the velocity of the motion of de- 
ſcent may very well diminiſh ſo much, (it admitting of a twofold 
diminution i infinitum) as that it may not ſuffice to reſtore the 


moveable to the circumterence of the wheel , and thereupon may 


accaſion the projection to be hindered and wholly obviated. 
Again on the contrary , to impede the projection , it is nece(- 
ſary that the ſpaces by which the proje& is to deſcend for the 
reanitzng it ſelt ro the Wheel, be made fo ſhort and cloſe toges 
ther, that though the delcent of the moveable be retarded, yea 
more,diminiſhed zz znfernztum, yet it ſufficeth to recondud it thither: 
and therefore it would be requiſite, that you find out a diminuti- 
on of the ſaid ſpaces, not only produced to infinity, but to ſuch ag 
infinity, as that it may ſuperate the double infinity that is made in 
the : lug 4 of the velocity of the deſcending moveable. Bur 
how can a magnitude be diminiſhed more than another, which 
hath a twofold diminution iz znfinitum ? Now let Simplicius ob- 
ſerve how hard it is to philolophare well in nature, without Geo- 
wetry. The degrees of velocity diminiſhed in infinitum, as well 
by the diminution of the gravity of the moveable, as by the ap- 
proxination to the firſt term of the motion, that is, to the ſtate 


of 


Diatocus [TF, 


of reſt, are alwayes determinate, and anlwer 19 proportion to the 
parallel: comprchended between two right lines that concur in 
an angle > like to the angle BA E, or B A D » or any other 
:nfifiitely More Acute , always provided it be reGtilineall. 
But che diminution of the {paces thorow which the moveable is 
to be conducted along the circumterence of the wheel, is propor- 
rionate tO another kind of diminution, comprehended between 
lines that contain an anyle 1nfiuirely more narrow and acute, than 
any rect1lincal angle, how acute locver, Which is that in our pce- 
(ent caſe. Let any point b- taken in the perpendicular A C, and 
making it the ceativ, delcribe at the diſtance C A, an arch AMP, 
che which ſhall interic& the parallels that determine the degrees of 
velocity, though they b2 very minute, and comprehended within 
a moſt acute rectilineal angle ; of which parallels the parts that 
le between the arch and the tangent A B, are the quantities of 
the ſpaces, and of the returns upon the wheel, alwayes lefſer (and 
with greater proportion lefler, by how much neerer they approach 
to the contact) than the {aid parallels of which they are parts. 
The parallels comprehended berween the right lines in retiring to- 
wards the angle diminiſh alwayes at the ſame rate, as v.g. A H be- 
ing divided in two equal parts in F, the parallel H I ſhall be dou- 
ble to F G, and ſub-dividing F A, 1a two equal parts, the paral- 
le] produced from rhe point of the diviſion ſhall be the half of 
F G; andcontinuing the fub-diviſion i= infenitum, the ſubſequent 
parallels ſhall be alwayes half of the next preceding ; but it doth 
not lo fall out in the lines intercepted berween the tangent and 
the circumference of the circle : For if the ſame ſub-diviſion be 
mad? 1n F A 3 and ſuppoſing for example, that the parallel which 
com-th trom the poiut H, were double unto that which commeth 
from +, tiit> ſhall be more then double to the next following, and 
.1:2a!iy the neerer we come towards the contact A, we ſhall 
hu... the precedent lines contein the next following three, four, 
ten, an hundred, a thouſand, an hundred thouſand , an hundred 
millions of times, and more zx infinitum. The brevity therefore of 
luch lines is fo reduced, that it far exceeds what is requilite to make 
the project , though never {o light, return, nay more , continue 
uncremoveable upon the circumference. 

Sack. I very well comprehend the whole diicourle, and upon 
what it Jayeth all its ſtrefſe, yet nevertheleſle methinks that he 
that would rake pains to purſue it, might yer ſtart ſome further 
queſtions, by ſaying, that of thoſe two cauſes which render the 
delcect of the moveable (lower and (tower in infinitum, \t 15 mani- 
teſt, that that which dependeth on the vicinity to the tirſt term of 
the delcent, increaſeth alwayes in the ſame proportion, like as the 
parallels alwayes retain the ſam : proportion to each other, &c. 


4 2 bur 


-- 


179 


— 
—_ 


Yolo 


G, Garit=zus, his Syſeme. 


but that the diminution of the ſame velocity, d:*pendent on' the 
diminntion of the gravity of the moveable (which vyas the {econd 
caule) doth alſo obicrve the {ame proportion, :doth not {© plainly 
appear, And vvho ſhall aflure us that it doth nor proceed accor- 
ding to the proportion of the lines intercepted between the lecant, 
and the circumference ; or vvhether yvith a greater proportion ? 

' Sar v. I haveaſſumed for a truth, that the velocities of moyea- 
bles deſcending naturally, vvill tollovy the proportion of their pra- 
vities, with the favour of Simplicins, and of Ariſtotle, who | 6 
in many places affirm the ſame, as a propolition maniteſt : You, 
in favour of my adverſary, bring the ſame into queſtion, and ſay 
that its poſſible that the velocity increaſeth with greater propor- 
tion, yea and greater in infinitum than that of the gravity ; ſo that 
all that hath been ſaid falleth tro the ground : For maintaining 
whereof, I ſay, that the proportion of the velocities 15 much leffe 
than that of the gravities; and thereby I do not onely ſupport 
but confirme the premiſes. And for proof of this I appeal unto 
experience, which will ſhew us, that a grave body, howbeit thin 
or fourty times bigger then another ; as for example, a ball of 
lead, and another of ſugar, will not move-much more than twice 
as faſt. Now it the projettion would not be made, albeit the ve- 
locity of the cadent body ſhould diminiſh according to the pro- 
portion of the gravity, much lefle would it be made fo long as the 
velocity 15 but little diminiſhed, by abating much from the gravi- 
ty. Bur yet ſuppoſing that the velocity diminiſheth with a propor- 
tion much greater than that wherewith the gravity decreaſeth, nay 
though it were the (eli-ſame wherewith thoſe parallels conteined 
between the tangent and circumference do decreaſe, yet cannot [ 
{ce any neceſſity why I ſhould grant the projeQion of matters of 
never {o great levity ; yea [ farther averte, that there could no ſuch 
projettion follow, meaning alwayes of matters not properly and 
abſolutely light, that is, void of all gravity, and that of their own 
natures move upwards , but that deſcend very ſlowly, and 
have very ſmall gravity. And that which moveth me fo to think 
is, that the diminution of gravity, made according to the propor- 
tion of the parallels between the tangent and the circumference, 
hath for its ultimate arid higheſt term the nulliry of weight, as thoſe 

arallels have for their laſt term of their diminution the contaG it 
ſelf, which is an indiviſible point : Now gravity never diminiſheth 
ſo far as to its laſt term, for then the moveable would ceaſe to be 
grave ; but yet the ſpace of the reverſion of the proje& to the 
circumference is reduced to the ultimate minuity, which is when 
the moveable reſteth upon the circumference in the very point of 
conta& ; ſo as that to return thither it hath no need of ſpace : 


and therefore let the propenſion to the motion of deſcent be ne- 
ver 


Diartocus. II, 


ver ſo (mall, yet 15 it alwayes more than lufficient to recondu the 
moveable to the circumference, from which it is diſtant but its leaſt 
ſpace, that 15 nothing ar all. | 

$acx. Your diſcourſe, I muſt confeſs, is very accurate; and 
vet no leſs concluding than it is 1ngenuous; and it muſt be eran- 
(cd that to £0 about to handle natural queſtions, withour Geome- 
try, is to attempt an impoſſibility. 

Sat v. But Simplicins will not fay ſo; and yer I do not think 
that he is'one of thoſe Peripetericks that difſwade their Diſciples 
from _—y the Mathematicks, as Sciences that vitiate the rea- 
ſon, and tender it Tefle apt for contemplation. 

$1. I would nor do fo much wrong to Plato, but yet I may 
cruly ſay with AriStotle, that he too-much loft himſelf in, and too 
much doted upon that his Geometry : for that in concluſion theſe 


Mathematical ſubtilties Salwviatzs are true in abſtra&, bue applied 


co ſenfible and Phyfical matter, they hold not good. For the 
Mathematicians will very well demonſtrate” for example, that 
Sphara tangit planum in punto ; a poſition like to that in diſpute, 
but when one cometh to the matter, things facceed quite another 
way. And ſo I may fay of theſe angles of coma; and theſe 
proportions 3 which all evaporate into Air, when they are applicd 
to things material and ſenfible. 
- $a rv. Yoy do not think then, 'thac the tangent roucheth the 
ſuperficies of the terreſtrial Gldbe' in one point only ? 
Sine. No, not m one ſole point; but I believe rhar a right 


line goeth many tens and hundreds of yards CIOY the ſurface 


not onely of the Earth, but of the water, before it 
the ſame. 


SaLtv. Bur if I grant youthis, do not you perceive that it ma- 
keth ſo much the more apainfſt your caule ? For if ic be ſuppoſed 
that the tangent was ſeparated from the terreſtrial ſuperficies, yet 
it hath been however demonſtrated that by reafon of the great a- 
crity of the angle of contingence (if happily ir may be call'd an 
atigle ) the proje& would not ſeparate from the fame 3; how much 
lefle cauſe of ſeparation would it have, if that angle ſhould be 
wholly cloſed, and the ſnperfictes and the tangent become all one ? 
Perceive you not that the ProjeQion would do the ſame thing up- 
orr the {urface of the Earth, which 1s aſmuch as to ſay, it would 
do juſt nothing at all ? You ſee then the power of truth, which 
while you ſtrive ro oppole it, your own afſaults themſelves uphold 
and defend it. Bur in regard that you have retra&ed this errour, 

would be loth to leave you in that other which you hold, namely, 
that a material Sphere doth not rouch a plain in one ſole point : 
and1 could wiſh ſome few hours converſation with ſome perſons 
converlantin Geometry, might make you a little more intelligent 


amongſt 


eparate, from 


131 


The truth 
ſometimes games 
ſtrength by con- 
tradiltion. 


The #Þhere al- 
ebough material, 
foucheth the mate- 
rial plane but mm 
ove pornt onely, 


The definition of 
the Pere, 


i he demonſtra- 
11m of & Peripate® 
thb 4 ro prove the 
yrohie live ro berſe 
Torteſt of all lines. 


G. Gariliizus, bs Syſleme. 


a:nongſt thoſe who know nothing thereot. Now to ſhew you how 
great theic errour 1s who lay, that a Sphere V.Be of braſle, doth not 
touch a plain v.g. of ſtee] 1n one ſole point , Tell me what con- 
ceipt you would entertain of one that ſhould conſtantly aver, that 
the Sphere i not truly a Sphere. 

S 1 1 py. I would eſteem him wholly devoid of reafon. 

Sar v. He is in the ſame caſe who laith that the material Sphere 
doth not'touch a plain, allo material, in one onely point ; for to 
ſay this is the ſame, as to affirm that the Sphere 1s not ,a Sphere. 
And that this 15 true, te}i me 1n what it 15 rhat you; conſtitute the 
Sphere to conſiſt, that is, what it 15 that maketh the' Sphere differ 
from all other {olid bodies. © , | 

S1 my. | belicve that the efſence of a Sphere conliſteth in ha- 
ving all the right lines produced from its centre to the circumfe- 
rence, equal. S .. 

S a L v. So that, it thoſe lines ſhould not be equal, that ſame 
ſolidity would be no longer a ſphere ? 

Sime. True. , 

$aLv. Goto; tell me whether you believe that amongſt the 
many lines that may be drawn between two points, there may be 
more than one right line onely. . 


S1Mr. There can be but one. 

S a L v. But yet you underſtand that this onely right line ſhall 
again of neccſlity be the ſhorteſt of them all ? 4 

S1my. I known, and allo have a demonſtration thereof, pro- 
duced by a great Peripatetick Philoſopher, and as I take it, if my 
memory do not deceive me, he alledgeth it by way of reprehending 
Archimedes, that {uppoſeth it as known, when it may be demog- 
ſtrated. 

S a1. v. This muſt needs be a great Mathemartician, that knew 
how to demonſtrate that which Archimedes neither did, nor could 
demonſtrate. And it you remember his demonſtration, I would 
gladly hear it : for | remember very well, that Archimedes in his 
Books,cle Sphera @+ Cylindro, placeth this Propoſition amongſt the 
Poſtulata, and 1 verily believe that he thought it demonſtrated. 
Simy. I think I ſhall remember it, for it is very eaſie and 
ihort. 

Salv. The diſgrace of Archimedes, and the honour of this Phi- 
loſopher ſhall be ſo much the greater. 

S1iny. I will deſcribe the Figure of it. Between the points 
A and B, | in Fig 5.] draw the right line A B, and the curve line 
A C B, of which we will prove the right to be the ſhorter : and 
the proof is this; take a point in the curve-line, which let be C, 
and draw two other lines, A C and C B, which two lines together, 
are longer than the ſole line A B, for ſo demonſtrateth ge 

ut 


Diatocus. II, 


But the curve-line A C B, is greater than the two tight-lines A C, 
and C Bz therefore, 4 fortiort, the curve-line A CB, is much 
greater chan the right line A B, which was to be demonſtrated. 
$1 v. 1 do rot think thatit one ſhould ranſack all the Para- 
logilms of the world, there could be tound one more commodious 
than this, ro give an example of rhe moſt folemn fallacy of all 
fallacies, namely, than that which proveth rzgnotum per renotins. 

© (M91 P+ How lo? 

S atv. Do you ask me how fo? The unknown concluſion 
which you delire to prove, 15 it nor, that the curved line A C B, is 
longer than the right line AB; the middle term which is taken 
for known, 15 that the curve-line ACB, 15s greater than the two 
lines A C and C B, the which are known to be greater than A B; 
' Andif it be unknown whether the curve-line be greater than the 
fingle right-line A B, ſhall ir not be much more unknown whether 
« be greater than the two right lines A C & C B,which are known 
to be greater than the lole line A B, & yer you afſume it as known? 

S$1ny. I do not yet very well perceive wherein lyeth the fal- 
lacy. 

Sa1v. As the two right lines are greater than A B, (as may be 
known by Euclid ) and in as much as the curve line is longer than 


the rwo right lines ACand BC, ſhall it not not be much greater 
chan the {ole right line A B ? 


S1my. lt ſhall to. 

Sauv. That the curve-line A CB, is greater than the right 
line A B, 1s the concluſion more known than the middle term, 
which is, that the ſame curve-line is greater than the two right- 
lines ACand C B. Now when the middle term is leſs known 
than the concluſion, it is called a proving ignotum per ignotins. 
Burto return to our purpoſe, it 15 ſufficient that you know the 
tighr line to be the ſhorteſt of all the lines that can be drawn be- 
tween two points. And as to the principal concluſion, you fay, 
that the material ſphere doth not touch the {phere in one ſole 
point. What then 1s its contaG ? 

S1w ey. Ir ſhall be a part of its ſuperticics. 

Sa1v. And the contat hkewiſe of another {ſphere equal to the 
firſt, ſhall be alſo a like particle of its ſaperficies ? 

SiMe. There is no reaſon vvhy it ſhould be othervvile. 

S A Lv. Then the tvvo ſpheres vvhich touch cach other, ſhall 
touch vvich the tvvo ſame particles of a ſuperficies,for each of them 
azreeing to one and the ſame plane, they muſt of neceſſity agree 
In like manner to cach other. Imagine now that the two ſpheres 

in Fig.6.] whoſe centres are Aand B, do touch one another : 
and Jer their centres be conjzoyned by the right line A B, which 
paſſeth through the conta&t. Ir paſſeth thorow the point C, and 


apother 


133 


The Paralogiſes 
of the ſame Peripa- 
retich, which pro- 
veth ignotum per 
1orotius. 


Af demon{ration 
that the ſpbere tow- 
cheth the plant but 
in 018 peunts 


Why the (þheve 19 
abſtratt, toucheth 
thr plane onely mn 
one point, and not 
the material mm 
Comerete 


- 


G. GaLlitzus, bs Syleme. 


another point 1n the contact beiig taken as 1), conjoyn the two 
right lines A I and BD, lo as that they make the triangle ADR. 

» . by , 
of which the two tides A D and D B ſhall be equal to the other one 


AC B, both thole and this containing two lemidiamerers, which 
by rhe definition of the {phere arc all equal : and thus the right 
line A B, drawn between the two centres A and B, (hall not be the 
ſhorteſt of all, the two lines A D and D B being equal to it: which 
by your own concellion 1s ablurd. 

S 1m y. This demonſtration holdeth in the abſt: acted, bur not in 
the material {pheres. 

Sar v. Inſtance then wherein the fallacy of my argument con. 
fiſteth, it as you lay it 1s not concluding in the material ſpheres, bur 
holdeth good in the unmaterial and abſtracted. 

S1My. The material ſpheres are ſubze& ro many accidents, 
which the immaterial are tree from. And becaule it cannot be, 
that a iphere of metal paſling along a plane, its own weight ſhould 
not {o deprels it, as that the plain ſhould yield ſomewhat, or that 
the (phere it ielf ſhould not in the contat admit of ſome impreſſi- 
on. Moreover, it is very hard for that plane to be perfe&, if for 
nothing elle, yet at leaſt for that its matter is porous : and per- 
haps it will be no lefs difficult to tind a ſphere to perfe&, as that 
it hath all the lines from the centre to the ſuperficies, cxaQly 
equal. ; 

Sal v. 1 very readily grant you all this that you have faid ; but 
tis very much belide our purpolc : for whilſt you go about to 
ſhew me that a material iphere toucheth not a material plane in 
one point alone, you make ule of a ſphere that is not a ſphere, and 
of a plane that 1s not a plane; -for that, according to what you 
ſay, either thele things cannot be found in the world, ot if they 
may be tound, they are ſpoilcd in applying them to work the effed. 
It had been therctore a leis evil, for you to have granted the con- 
cluſion, but conditionally, to wit, that if there could be made of 
matter a ſphere anda plane that were and could continue perfed, 
they would touch in one (ole point, and then to have denied that 
any {uch could be made. 

Sine. I believe that the propoſition of Philolophers is to be 
underitood in this lenie ; for it 1s not to be doubted, but that the 
impciteftion of the matter , maketh the matters taken in con- 
cretc, to dilagree with thole taken in abſtract. 

Salv. Whar, dothey nor agree ? Why, that which you your 
le]t lay at this inſtant, proverh that they punQually agree. 

Siny. How can that be ? 

Sarv. Do you not ſay, that through the imperfeRion of the 
matter, that body which ought to be perfeGily ſpherical, and that 


plane which ought to be perfe&ly level , do not prove to be the 
lame 


Diarocue, II, 


Came in CONCTete, As they arc imagined to be in abſtra& ? 

Sy. This | do athrm. 

S.rv. Then whenever 1n concrete you do apply a material Sphere 
10 2 material plane, youapply an imperfect Sphere to an imperfc& 
plane, theſe you ſay do not touch only in one point. But I muſt 
cell you, that even 1n abſtca& an immaterial Sphere, that is, not a 
perfect Sphere, may couch an immaterial plane, that is, not a per- 
fe(t plane, not In one point, bur with part of its ſuperficics,{o that 
hitherto that which falleth our 1n concrete, doth in like manner 
hold truc in abſtraft. And it would be a new thing that the com- 
putations and rates made in 'abſtra&t numbers, ſhould not after- 
wards anſwer to the Coines of Gold and Silver, and to the mer- 
chandizes in Concrete. But do you know Simplicins, how this 
commeth to paſſe ? Like as to make that the computations agree 
with the Sugars, the Silks, the Wools , it is neceſſary that the 
accomptant reckon his tares of cheſts, bags, and (ſuch other things: 
So wheh the Geometricall Philoſopher would obſerve in concrete 
the effe&s demonſtrated in abſtrat, he muſt defalke the impedi- 
ments of the matter, and if he know how to do that, I do aflure 
you, the things ſhall jump no leſfe exaftly, than Arithmetical 
computations. The errours therefore lyeth neither in abſtra&, nor 
in concrete, nor in Geometry, nor in Phyſecks, but in the Calcula- 
tor, that knoweth not how to adjuſt his accompts. Therefore if 
you had a perfec& Sphere and plane, though they were material, 
you need not doubt but that they would touch onely in one point. 
And if ſuch a Sphere was and 15 impoſlible to be procured, it was 
much beſides the purpoſe to ſay, Q#0d Sphera enea non tangit in 
punto. Furthermore, if I grant you Srmplicins, that in matter a 
figure cannot be procured that is perfectly ſpherical, or perfealy 
level: Do.,you think there may be had two materiall bodies, 
whole ſuper ficies in lome-part, and in ſome ſort are incurvated as 
negularly as can be deficed ? 

Sine. Of theſe I believe that there is no want. 

Sa Lv. If ſuch there be, then they alſo will touch in one ſole 
point ; for this conta&t in but one point alone is not the ſole and 
peculiar priviledge of the perte& Sphere and perfe& plane. Nay, he 
that ſhould proſecute this point with more ſubtil contemplations 
would finde that it is much harder to procure two bodies that 
touch with part of their ſnperſicies, than with one point onely. 
For it two {uperficies be required to combine well together, it is 
neceflary either, that they be both exaAly plane, or that if one be 
convex, the other be concave; but in ſuch a manner concave, 
that the concavity do exaGtly anſwer to the convexity of the other: 
the which conditions are much harder to be found, in regard of 


their too narrow determina tion, than thoſe others, which in their 


caluall latitude are infinite. Aa S1MP, 


185 


T tags ave ex+ 
aitly the ſame mm 
abſtratl us in con» 
crete. 


Contallt in 4 ſine 
gle point is not pe- 
culiar to the per- 
felt Spheres onely, 
but belengeth to all 
curved fignres- 

It ts more diffi - 
cult to find Figures 
that touch with 4 
part of their ſtr- 
face, than in one 


ſole porn, 


OO EI 


7 be Sphericall 
Fignre ts eaſier to 
be made than any 
they 

The circular Fi- 
gure only us placed 
among it the cnty - 


lata of Mathema- 
f$ICrANS, 
* Demands or 


Petitions, 


G. Gatitzvns , bis Syſleme. 


SiMe. You believe then, that two ſtones, or two pieces of 1. 
ron taken at chance, and put together, dofor the moſt part touch 
in one {ole point ? 

Sar v. Incafual encounters, I do nor think they do; as well 
becaulc for the moſt part there will be ſome {mall yielding fileh 
upon them , as becaule that no diligence 1s uled in applying them 
withour ſtriking one another z and every {mall matter ſufficeth to 
make the one ſuperticies yield lomewhart to the other ; (© that 
they interchangeably, at leaſt in ſome {mall particle, receive figure 
from the impreſſion of each other. But in cale their an, 

were very ter(c and polite, and that they were both laid upon a 
table, that ſo one might not preſfle upon the other, and gently put 
towards one another, | queſtion not, but that they might be 
brought to the ſimple contaGt in one onely point. 

SaGk- It is requiſite, with your permiſſion, that I propound a 
certain {cruple of mine, which came into my minde, whil'ſt | heard 
propoſed by Simplicius, the impoſlibility of finding a material 
and ſolid body, that is, perfe&tly of a Spherical figure, and whil'ſ 
J ſlaw Salviatus ina certain manner, not gainlaying, to give his 
conlent thereto ; therefore I would know, whether there would 
be the ſame difficulty in forming a ſolid of ſome other figure, that 
is, to:expreſle my felt better, whether there is more difficulty in 
reducing a piece of Marble into the figure of a perfe& Sphere, than 
into a perfect Pyramid, or into a perte& Horle, oc into a perfe& 
Graſle-hopper ? 

Sar v. To this | will make you the firſt anſwer : and in the 
firſt place, I will acquit my ſelf of the afſent which you think 1 
gave to Simplicius, which was anly for a time 3 for I had it alſo in 
my thoughts, before I intended 40 enter upon any other matter, tv 
{peak that, which,it may be,is the ſame, or very like to that which 
you are about to ſay 3 And anſwering to your firſt queſtion, I ſay; 
that if any figure can be given to a Solid, the Spherical is the cafi- 
eſt of all others, as it 15 Iikewile the moſt ſimple, andholdeth the 
ſame place amongſt {olid figures, as the Circle holdeth amongſt 
the ſuperficial. The deſcription of which Circle, as beingimore ear 
ſie than all the reſt, hath alone been judged by Mathewaticians 
worthy to be put amongſt the * poſtulata belonging xo the deſcri- 
ption of all other _ And the formation of the'Sphere is 
lo very eaſe, that if in a plain plate of hard metal . you. take an 
empty or hollow circle, withia which any Solid goeth caſually ve- 
volving that was before but groſly rounded, it ſhall, without any 
other artifice be reduced to a Spherical figure, as perfe& as is pol- 
ſible for it to be; provided, that that ſame Solid be nor lefſe,than 


the Sphere that would paſſe thorow that Circle. And that which is 
yet more worthy of qur conſideration is, that within the felf-ſame 
| incavity 


Drartocues. II. 


;ncaviry One may form Spheres of ſeveral magnicudes. But what 
bh required ro the making of an Horle, or (as you ſay) of a Grals- 
hoppers I leave to you to judge, who know that there are but few 
faruaries in the world able ro undertake {uch a piece of work. 
And I think that herein Simplicius will not difſent from me. 

Siny. I know not whether Ido ar all difſent from you ; my 
opinion 15 this, that none «f the atore-named figures can be per- 
fe&ly obteined 3 bur for the approaching as neer as is poſſible to 
che moſt perfect degree, I believe thar it is incomparably more ea- 
fie ro reduce the Solid into a Spherical figure, than into the ſhape 
of an Horſe, or Grafle-hopper ? 

Sac. And this greater difficulty , wherein think you doth it 
depend ? 

Sine. Like as the great facility in forming the Sphere ariſcth 
from its abſolute ſimplicity and uniformity lo the great irregu- 
larity rendereth the conſtruftion of all other hgues difficult. 

$468. Thercfore the irregularity being the cauſe of the diffi- 
culry, than the figure of a ſtone broken with an hammer by 
chance, ſhall be one of the figures that are difficult to be introdu- 
ced, it being perhaps more irregular than that of the horſe ? 

S;ne. So it ſhould be. 

Sack. But tell me ; that figure what ever it is which the ſtone 
hath, hath it the ſame in perfection, or no ? 

$1ny. What it hath, it hath ſo perfeRly, that nothing can be 
more exact. 

SaGs- Then, if of figures that are irregular, and conſequent- 
ly hard to be procured, there are yet infinice which are moſt per- 
feRly obteined , with what reaſon can it be ſaid, that the moſt 
fimple, and conſequently the moſt eaſie of all, is impoſlible to be 
procured? 

Sar v. Gentlemen, with your favour, I may ſay that we have 
allied out into a diſpute not much more worth than the wool of a 
goat 3 and whereas our argumentations ſhould -continually be con- 
verſant about ſcrious and weighty points, we conſume our time in 
irivolous and impertinent wranglings. Let us call to minde, I pray 
you, that the ſearch of the worlds conſtitution, is one of the grea- 
teſt and nobleſt Problems that are in nature ; and ſo much the 
greater, inaſmuch as it is direQed to the reſolving of that other ; 


to by all the famous wen, that have hitherto been in the world, 
and poſſibly found out by none of them. Therefore if we have 
nothing more remaining for the full confutation of the argument 
taken from the Earths vertigo, which was the laſt, alledged to 
Prove its immobiliry vpon its own centre, let us paſſe to the ex- 


amination of thoſe things that are alledged for, and againſt the 


Arnual Motion. Aa 3 SAGR. 


157 


Sphericall Fi- 


gures of ſundry 


magnitudes may 
be made with one 
onely inſtrument. 


Irregular forms 
difficult to be mms 
troduced, 


The conſbit «tion 
of the Univerſe 
one of the moſt no- 
ble Problems. 


to wit, of the caule of the Seas cbbing and flowing, enquired wn \ 


q 


G. Gart1rt = us, his Syleme. 


Sack. I would not have you, Salviatrs, meaſure our wits h 
the ſcale of yours : you, who uſe to be continually buſicd about 
the ſublimeſt contemplations, eſteem thoſe notioas frivolous and 
below you, which we think matters worthy of our profoundeſi 
thoughts : yer ſometimes tor our [atisfaction do not diſdain to 
ſtoop ſo low as to give way a little to our curiolity. As to the 
refutation of the laſt argument; taken from the cxtruſions of the 
diurnal vertigo, far leſs than what hath been iaid, would have 
given me ſatisfaction : and yet the things lupertluouſly {poken, 
{cemed to me {o ingenipus, that they have been fo tar from wea. 
rying my fancy, as that they have, by reaſon of their novelty, en- 
tertaincd me all along with fo great delight, thar I know not how 
to deſire greater : Therefore, if you have any other ſpeculation 
to add, produce it, for I, as to my own particular, ſhall gladly 
hearken to it. 

Sarv. I have always taken great delight in thole things which 
I have had the fortune to diſcover, and next to that, which is my 
chief content, I find great pleaſure in imparting them to ſome 
friends, that apprehendeth and (ecmeth to like them : Now, in re- 
gard you are one of theſe, lacking a little the reins of my ambi- 
tion, which 15 much plealed when I ſhew my ſelf more perſyi- 
cacious, than ſome other rhat hath the reputation of a ſharp 
ſight, I will for a full and true meaſure of the paſt diſpute, pro- 
duce another fallacy of the SeQators of Ptolomey and Ariſtotle, 
which I take from the argument alledged. 

S aG Kr. Sce how greedily I wait to hear it. 

Sarv. We have hitherto over-paſled, and granted to Ptolomey, 
as an effect indubitable; that the extruſion of the ſtone proceed 
ing from the velocity of the wheel turn'd round upon its centre, 
the cauſc of the ſaid extruiion encreaſeth in proportion, as the ve- 
locity of the vertigo (or whirling ) 1s augmented : from whence 
it was inferred, that the velocity of the Earth's vertigo being 
very muci greater than that of any machin whatſoever, that we 
can make to turn round artificially z the extruſion of ſtones, of 
animals, &c. would conſequently be far more violear. Now, I 
obſcrve that there 1s a great fallacy in this diſcourſe, in that we do 
compare theſe velocities indifferently and abſolutely ro one ano- 
ther. It's true, that 1t I compare the velocities of the ſame wheel, 
or of two wheels equal to each other, that which ſhall be more 
(wittly tur:z.d round , ſhall extrude the ſtone with greater vio- 
lence; and the velocity encreafing, the cauſe of the projection 
ſhall likewiſe cncreaſe : but when the velocity is augmented, not 
by encreaſing the velocity in the ſame wheel, which would be by 
cauſing it to make a greater number of revolutions in equal times; 
but by encreaſing the diameter, and making the wheel greater, fo 


as that the converſion taking up the {ame time 1n the leſſer wheel, 
2s 


Drartocus. II. 


4c in the greater, the velocity 1s greater onely 1n the bigger whicel, 
for that 1c5 circumference 1s bigger ; there 15 no man that thinketh 
that the Caule of the extruſion 1n the great wheel will encreaſe ac- 
cording to the proportion of the velocity of its. circumference, to 
the velocicy of the circumference of the other leffer wheel; for that 


this i3 moſt falle, as by a moſt expeditious experiment 1 ſhall thus 


orolly declare : We may fling a ſtone with a ſtick of a yard long, 
farther than we can do with a ſtick ix yards long, though 
the motion of the cnd of the long ſtick, that is of the ſtone placed 
'n the (it thereof, were more than double as (wift as the mo- 
tion of the cnd of the other ſhorter ſtick , as ic would be if 
the velocities were {uch that the lefler ſtick ſhould turn thrice 
round in the time whilſt the greater is making one onely con- 
ver{10n- 

SaGR This which you tell me, Salviatus, muſt, I fee, necds 
ſucceed 1n this very manner 3 but I do not lo readily apprehend 
the caule why equal velocities ſhould not operate equally in 
extruding projeds, but thar of the lefſer wheel much more than 
the other of the greater wheel 3 theretore I 1ntreat you to tell me 
how this cometh to pals? 

Sip. Herein, Sagredrs, you ſeem to differ much from your 
(elf, for that you were wont to penctrate all things in an inſtant, 
and now you have overlook d a fallacy couched in the expetiment 
of che ſtick, which I my ſelf have been able to diſcover : and this 
15 the different manner of operating, tn making the projection one 
while with the ſhort fling and another white with the long one , 
for if you will have the ſtone fly out of the flit, you need not con- 
tinue 15 motion untormly, but at {uch time as it 1s at the {wifteſt, 
you are ro ſtay your arm and ſtop the velocity of the ſtick, where- 
upon the ſtone which was in its {wifteſt motion, flyeth our, and 
moverth wich impertuolity : but now that ſtop cannot be made in 
the grear ſtick, which by reafon of its length and flexibility, doth 
not entirely obey the check of the arm, but continuerh to accom- 
pany the ſtone for {ome ſpace; and holdeth it in with fo much leſs 
torce, and not as if you had with a ſtiff (ling ſent it going with a 
xk : for if both the ſticks or flings ſhould be check'd by one and 
the ſame obſtacle, I do believe they would fly aſwell oat of the 
oe a> out of the other, howbeit their motions were equally 
witt. 

SaGR. With the permiſſion of Salviatus, 1 will anſwer ſome- 
thing to Simplicius, in regard he hath addreſſed himſelf to me ; 
and | ſay, that in his diſcourſe there is ſomewhat good 
and fomewhar bad : good , becauſe it is almoſt all true ; 
bad, becauſe ir doth not agree with our caſe : Trath is, that when 

at which carcieth the ſtones with velocity, ſhall meet with a 


check 


19 

The cauſe of the 
projetti2n ircr #4ſ- 
eth not according 
tothe proportion of 
tle velocuy , 19- 
Creaſed by making 
the wheel big ger. 


Gran 5 g the di. 
urnal vertigo of 
the Earth, & that 
by (»me ſudden ſtop 
or o>/tacle uit were 
arreſted, Louſes , 
mountains them- 
ſetver, and perhaps 
the whole Globe 
wonula be ſhaken n 
precer, 


G. Garirt=us, his Cylme. 


check that is immoveable, they ſhall fly out with great impetuo- 

lity : the ſame cle& following in that calc, which we ſee dayly 

ro fa]l out in a boat that running a {wit courle, runs a-ground, gr 

meets with ſoine {ſudden ſtop, tor all thole 1n the boar, being ſur- 

prized, ſtumble forwards, and fall rowards the part whither the 

boat ſteered. And in caſe the Earth ſhould meet with ſuch a 

check, as ſhould be able to reſiſt and arreſt its vertigo, then indeed 

I do believe that not onely beaſts, buildings and cities, but moun- 

tains, lakes and ſeas would overturn, and the globe it ſelf would 

go near to ſhake in pieces but nothing of all this concerns our 

prelent purpole, for we {peak of what may tollow to the motion 

of the Farth, it being, turn'd round uniformly, and quietly about 

its own centre » howbeit with a great velocity. That likewiſe 

which you ſay of the ſlings, is true jn part; but was not alledged 

by Salviatus, as a thing that punQually agreed with the matter 
whereof we treat, but onely, as an example, for fo in grols it may 
prompt us in the more accurate conſideration of that point, whe. 
ther , the velocity increaſing at any rate, the cauſe of the proje- 
cion doth increaſe at the ſame rate : fo that v. g. if a wheel of 
ten yards diameter, moving in {uch a manner that a point of its 
circumference will paſs an hundred yards in a minute of an hour, 
and fo hath an impets able to extrude a ſtone, that ſame impetus 
ſhall be increaſed an hundred thouſand times in a wheel of a million 
of yards diameter; the which Salviatxs denieth, andI incline to hi; 
opinion ; but not knowing the rea{on thereof, I have requeſted it 
of him, and ſtand impartiently expeCting it. 

Sarv. Lam ready to give you the beſt fatisfaftion , that my 
abilities will give leave : And though in my firſt diſcourſe you 
thought that 1 had enquired into things eſtranged from our pur- 
pole , yet nevertheleſle I believe that in the ſequel of the diſpute, 
you will find that they do not prove ſo. Therefore let Sagredus 
tell me wherein he hath obſerved that the refiſtance of any move- 
able ro motion doth conſiſt. 
| $aGx. I ſee not for the preſent that the moveable hath any 
internal refiſtance to motion, unlefle it be its natural inclination 
and propenſion to the contrary motion , as in grave bodies , that 
have a propenſion to the motion downwards , the reſiſtance is to 
the motion upwards ; and I ſaid an internal reſiſtance, becaule 
of this, I think, it is you intend to ſpeak , and not of the external 


reſiſtances , which are many and accidental. 


Sar v. It is that indeed I mean , and your nimbleneſle of wit 
hath bcen too hard for my craftineſſe , bur if I have been too 
ſhort in asking the queſtion, I doubt whether Sagred#s hath been 
full enough in his anſwer to ſatisfic the demand ; and whether 


there be not in the moveable, beſides the natural inclivation to the 
contrary 


Diatocus IT. 
contrary term , another intrinſick and natural quality , which ma- 
Leth ic averſe to motion. Therefore tell me again ; do you nor 
think thar the inclination v. g. of grave bodies ro move down- 
wards, is equal to the reliſtance of the ſame to the motion of pro- 
zeion upwards ? 

SaGr. I believe that it is exaRtly the fame. And for this reaſon 
I ſee that two equal weights being put into a ballance , they do 
and ſtill in equilibrinm , the gravity of the one reſiſting its be- 
ing raiſed by the graviry wherewith the other preſſing down- 
wards would raile it. 

Sarv. Very well; ſo that if you would have one raiſe up the 
other "you muſt encreaſe the weight of that which deprefleth, 
or leſſen the weight of the other. Burt if the reſiftance to aſcend- 
ing motion cunſiſt onely in gravity , how cometh it to paſſe , that 
in ballances of uncqual arms , to wit in the * Stilzard , a weight 
ſometimes of an hundred pounds , with its preſſion downwards, 
doth not ſuffice to raiſe up on of four pounds; that ſhall counter- 
poiſe with it , nay this of four , deſcending ſhall raiſe up that 
of an hundred; for ſuch is the effe& of the pendant weight upon 
the weight which vve vvould vveigh ? If the refiſtance to motion 
reſideth onely in the gravity , hovy can the arm with its vveight of 
four pounds onely , refiſt the vveight of a ſack of wool, or bale of 
filk , vvhich ſhall be cight hundred , or a thouſand vveight ; yea 
more, hovv can it overcome the ſack vvith'its moment , and raiſe 
it up ? It muſt therefore be confeſt Sagredzs , that here it maketh 
uſe of ſome other reſiſtance, and other force , befides that of 
fimple gravity. 

SaGs. It muſt needs be ſo; therefore tell me vvhat this ſe- 
cond virtue ſhould be. | 

S«Lv. Te is that vyhich vvas not in the ballance of equal 
arms 3 you ſee then yvhat variety there is in the Stiliard 3 and up- 
on this doubtlefſe dependeth the cauſe of the nevy effeR. 

Sax. 'I think that your putting me to it a ſecond time, hath 
made me remember ſomething that may be to the purpoſe. In 
both theſe beams the bufineſs is done by the weight, and by the 
motion ; in-the ballance, the motions are equal, and therefore the 
one weight muſt exceed it in gravity before it can moveit; in the 
ſtliacd, the leſſer weight will not move the greater, anleſs when 
this latter moveth little, as being hung at a leſſer diſtance, and the 
other much, as hanging at a greater diſtance from the lacquet or 
cock, It is neceſſary therefore to conclude, that the lefſer weight 
overcometh the refiſtance of the greater, by moving much, whilſt 
the other is moved bur little. 

Salty. Whichis as muchas to ſay, that the velocity of the 


moveable leſs grave, compenſateth the gravity of the moveable 
More grave and leſs {witt. SAGR- 


191 
T ke i*clixation cf 
grave bodies 10 the 
motion downward:, 
uw equal ro thei 


reſiſtance to the 


m0140n wpwards, 


* A portable bal- 
lance wherewith 
market-peopl: 
weigh their coms 
modicies, giving it 
oravity by remo- 
ving the weight 
farther from the 
cock : call'd by the 
Latines, ( ampans 
E[THEINA» 


"ez 


T he greater velo- 
euy exatlly com- 


penſaresthegrearer able of v. g. tour pounds weight, 15 as great as thar of one of an 


gravity. 


G. Garit=us, his Syſitme. 


Sa Gr. But do you think that the velocity doth fully make 
ood the gravity ? thats, that the moment and force of a moye. 


hundred weight, whenſoever that the fi;ſt hath an hundred degrees 
of velocity, and the later but four onely ? 

Sar yv. Yes doubtlels, as I am able by many experiments to 
demonſtrate : but for che preſent, let this *onely of the ſtiliard 
ſuffice : in which you ſee that che light end of the beam is then 
able to ſuſtain and equilibrate the great Wool lack, when its di- 
ſtance from the centie, upon which the ſtiliard reſteth and turn- 
eth; ſhall ſo much cxceed the lefler diſtance, by how much the ah. 
ſolute gravity of the Wool-ſack exccedeth that of the pendent 
weight. And we (ce nothing that can cauſe this infufticiencie in 
the great ſack of Wool, to raile with its weight the pendent 
weight ſo much lels grave, ſave the dilparity of the motions which 
the one and the other ſhould make, whilſt chat the Wool-(ack by 
deſcending bur one inch onely, will raiſe the pendent weight an 
hundred inches : (ſuppoſing that the ſack did weigh an hundred 
times as much, and that the diſtance of the {mall weight from the 
centre of the beam were an hundred times greater, than the di- 
ſtance between the {aid centre and the point of the ſacks ſuſpenſi- 
on.) Andagain, the pendent weight its moving the ſpace of an 
hundred inches, in the time thar the {ack moveth but one inch 
onely, is the ſame as to ſay, that the velocity of the motion of the 
little pendent weight, is an hundred times greater than the velo- 
city of the motion of the ſack. Now fix it in your belief, as : 
true and manifeſt axiom, that the refiſtance which proceederh from 
the velocity of motion, compenſateth that which dependeth on 
the gravity of another moveable : So that conſequently, a move- 
able of one pound, that moveth with an hundred degrees of ve- 
locity, doth. as much reſiſt all obftruion, as another moveable 
of an hundred weight, whoſe velocity is but one degree onely. 
And two equal moveables will equally reſiſt their being moved, 
if that they ſhall be moved with equal velocity : bur, if one be 
to be moved more (wiftly than the other, it ſhall make greater re- 
ſiſtance, according to the greater velocity that ſhall be conferred 
on it. Theſe things being premiſed, let us proceed to the expla- 
nation of our Problem ;. and for the berrter underſtanding of 
things, let us make a ſhort Scheme thereof. Let two unequal 
wheels be deſcribed about this centre A, | in Fig. 7.] and let the 
circumfcrence of the lefler be B G, and of the greater C EH, and 
let the ſemidiameter A B C, be perpendicular to the Horizon; and 
by the points B and C, let us draw the right lined Tangents B F 
and CD; andin the arches BG and CE, take two equal parts 
BGandC E: and let the two wheels be ſuppoſed to be turn'd 


round 


Diatocus IJ], 


:ound upon their centres with equal velocities, fo as that two mo- 
veables, which {uppolc for example ro be two ſtones placed in the 

vines Band C, come to be carried along the circumterences B G 
and C E, with equal velocities 3 fo that in the lame time that the 
fone B ſhall have run the arch B G, the ſtone C will have paſt the 
arch C E. I ſay now, that the whir] or vert:go of the lefler wheel 
« much more potent to make the projzeGtion of the ſtone B, than 
the vertigo of the bigger wheel to make that of the ſtone C. 
Therefore the projeQtion, as we have already declared, being to be 
made along the tangent, when the ſtones B and C are to ſeparate 
{om theic wheet:, and to begin the motion of projeGion from the 
points Band C, then ſhall they be extruded by the impetus con- 
ceived from the vertigo by (or along) the tangents B F and CD. 
The rwo ſtones therefore have equal unpetuolities of running a-« 
jong the rangents B F and C D, and would run along the ſame, if 
they were not turnd aſide by fome other force : is it not ſo Sa- 
eredus ? | 

Sar. In my opinion the butineſle is as you fay. 

Sartv. But whar force, think you, ſhould that be which averts 
the tones from moving by the tangents, along which they are cer- 
ainly driven by the impetus of the vertigo. | 

Sac. It is either their own gravity, or elſe fome glutinous 
matter that holdeth them faſt and cloſe to the wheels. 

Sa 1 v. But for the diverting of a moveable from the motion 
ro which narure inciteth it, is there not required greater or leflex 
force, according as the deviation 1s intended to be greater or lef- 
ſer? that is, accordang as the {aid moveable inits deviation hath a 
greater or Jeffer tpace to move 1n the {ame time ? 

Sacn. Yes certainly : for it. was conduded even now, that ta 
make a moveable to move ; th= movent vertue muſt be increaſed 
in propottion to the velocity wherewith it 1s ro move. 

$ a Lv. Now contider, that for the deviating the ſtone upon 
the lefle wheel from the mation of projection, which it would 
make by the tangent B F, and forthe holding of it faſt to the 
wheel, it is required, that its own gravity draw it back the whole 
length of the tecant F G, or of the perpendicular raiſed from che 
Pouat G, to the line BF, whereas 1n the greater wheel the retraQti- 
02 needs ro be no more than the {ecant D E , or the pecpendicu- 
lar let fall from the tangent D C to the point E, lefle by much 
than F G, and alwayes leſſer and leſſer according as the wheel is 
made biyger. And foraimuch as theſe retraftions (as I may call 
them) are required to be made in equal times, that is, whil'ſt the 
wheels paſſe the two equal arches B G and CE, that of the ſtone 
B, thatis, the retraction F G otight to be more (witt than the 0- 
ther DE; and therefore much greater force will be required for 

B b holding 


193 


* Strappar la ca- 
Vez721, 4 to break 


the bridle. 


G.Garir=us, his Syleme. 
holding faſt the ſtone B to its little wheel, than for the holding 


the ſtone C to its great one, which is as much as to ſay, that ſuch 
a ſmall thing will impede the extruſion in the great wheel, as will 
not at all hinder it in the little one. It 1s manifeſt therefore that 
the more the wheel augmenteth, the more the cauſe of the pro- 
jection diminiſheth- | 
Sacr. From this which I now underſtand, by help of your mi- 
nute difſertation, 1 am induced-to think, that I am able to ſatisfie 
my judgment in a very few words. For equal impetws being im- 
preſſed on both the ſtones that move along the tangents, by the 
equal velocity of the two wheels, we fcc the great circumference, 
by mcans of its ſmall deviation from the rangent, to goſeconding, 
as it were, and in a fair way refraining in the ſtone the apperite, if 
I may ſo ſay, of ſeparating from the circumference ; fo that any 
(mall retention, either of its own inclination, or of ſome glutina- 
tion ſuſficerh to hold it faſt ro the wheel. W hich, again, is not a- 
ble to work the like effect in the little whee], which bur little pro- 
ſecuting the direQion of the tangent, ſeeketh with roo much ea- 
gerneſle to hold faſt the ſtone 3 and the reſtrition and glutination 
not being ſtronger than that which hoJdeth the other ſtone faſt to 
the great'r wheel, it * breaks looſe, and runneth along the tan- 
gent. Therefore 1 do not only tinde that all thoſe have erred, 
who have believed the cauſe of the projze&ion to increaſe accor- 
ding to the augmentation of the vertigo s velocity ; but I an 
further thinking, that the projection diminiſhiog in the inlarging of 
the wheel, ſo long as the ſame velocity is retcined in thoſe wheels; 
it may poſſibly be true, that he that would make the great wheel 
extrude things like the little one; would be forced to increaſe 
them as much in velocity; as they increaſe in diamerer, which he 
might do, by making them to finiſh their converſions in equal 
riumes ;z and thus we may conclude, that the Earths revolution or 
vertigo would be no more able to extrude ſtones , than any little 
wheel that goeth ſo (lowly,as that it maketh but one turn in ewen- 
ty four hours. | 
SaLlv. We will enquire no further into this point for the pre- 
ſent : let it ſuffice that we have abundantly (if I deceive not my 
ſelt ) demonſtrated the invalidity of the argument, which at fiſt 
ſight ſcemed very concluding, and was ſo held by very famous 
men : andI ſhall think my time and words well beſtowed, if 
have but gained ſome belief in the opinion of Simplicixs, I will 


not {ay ot the Earths mobility, but only that the opinion of chole 


that believe it, is not ſo ridiculous and fond, as the rout of vulgar 
Philolophers eſteem it. 
S1my. The an{wers hitherto produced againſt the arguments 


brought againſt this Diurzal Revolution of the Earth taken from 
grave 


Diatocus. IT. 


oravc bodics falling from the top of a Tower, and from proje- 
tions made perpendicularly upwards, or according to any inclina- 
on ſidewayes towards the Eaſt, Weſt, North, South, 8&c. have 
{omewhar abatcd in me the antiquated iacredulity I had conceived 
zvainſt that opinion : but other greater doubrs run in my mind 
at this very inſtant, which I know not in the leaſt how to free my 
{elf of, and haply you your ſelf will not be able to reſolve them; 
nay ,its poſſible you may not have heard them, for they are very 
modern. And thele are the objeftions of two Authours, that ex 
profeſſo write againſt Copernicys. Some of which are read in a 
litcle Trad of natural concluſions 3 The reſt are by a great both 
Philolopher and Mathematician, inſerted in a Treatiſe which he 
hath written in favour of Ari$totle, and his opinion touching the 
inalrerability of rhe Heavens, : where he proveth, that not onely 
the Comets, bur allo the new ſtars, namely, that anno 1572. in 
Caſſcopeia, and that aruo 1604. in Sagittarins were not above the 
Spheres of the Planets , but abſolutely beneath the concave of 
the Moon in the Elementary Sphere, and this he demonſtrateth a- 
gainſt Tycho, Kepler, and many other Aſtronomical Obſervators, 
and beateth them at their own weapon; to wit, the Do&rine of 
Parallaxes. If you like thereof, 1 will give you the reaſons of 
both theſe Authours, for I have read them more than once, 
with attention; and you may examine their ſtrenpth, and give 
your opinion thereon. = | 
SaLv. In regard that our principal end is to bring upon the 
ſtage, and to conſider what ever hath been ſaid for, or againſt the 


two Syſtemes, Prolomaick , and Copernican, it is not good to omit | 


any thing that hath been written on this ſubzeR. | 
S1nye. | will begin therefore with the objeQions which I finde 
in the Treatiſe of Conclufioas, and afterwards proceed to the 
reſt. In the firſt place then, he beſtoweth much paines in calcu- 
lativg exactly how many miles an hour a point of the terreſtrial 
Globe ſituate under the Equinoctial, goeth, and how many miles 
ae paſt by other points ſituate in other parallels: and not being 
content with finding out fuch motions in horary times, he findeth 
them alſo in' a minute of an hour ; and not contenting himſelf 
with a minute, he tindes them alſo in a ſecond minute ; yea more, 
he goeth on co ſhew plainly, how many miles a Cannon bullet 
would go 1a the {ame time, being placed in the concave of the Lu- 
nar Orb, ſuppoing it alfo' as big as Copernic#s himſelf repreſenteth 
it, to take away all ſ{ubterfuges from his adverſary. And havin 
made this moſt ingenious and exquiſite ſupputation, he ſheweth, 
thar a grave body falling from thence above would conſume more 
than (ix dayes in attaining-ro the centre of the Earth, to which all 
grave bodies naturally move. 


Bb 2 Power 


Now if by the abſolute Divine ” 


"T7 


Othiy objeftions 


of two modern Au- 
thors ag aint Co- 


pernicus, 


T be firſt obje- 
ion of the me» 
dern «Author of 
the little tralt of 
Concluſions, 


eA Cannon bul- 
let would ſpend 
more than ſix days 


£ in falling from the 


Concave of the 
Moon to the cen- 
tre 'of the Earth, 
according to the 0- 
inion ff that mo+ 
dern Author of c he 
Concluſions. 


== 


G. Galitzus, hi Syſeme. 


Power, or by ome Angel, a very great Cannon buller were Carri. 
ed up thither, and placed in our Zenuh or vercical point, and from 
thence ler go at liberty, it 1>1n his, and allo in my opinion, a moſt 
incredible thing that it, in deſcending downwards, ſhould all the 
way mainrain It ſelf in our vertical line, continuing to turn round 
with the Earth, about 41rs ccntre, for ſo many dayes, deſcribijy 
under the EquinoCtial a Spiral line 1n the plain of the great circle 
it ſc}f : and under other Parallels, Spiral lines about Cones, ang 
under the Poles falling by a timple right line. Hes, in the next 
place, ſtablitheth and confirmeth this great improbability by pro. 
ving, in the way of interrogations, many difficulties impollible to 
be removed by the followers of Copernicxs 3 and they are, if 1 dy 
well remember----- 

Sar v. Take upa little, good Simplicius, and do not load me 
with ſo many novelties at once : 1 have but a bad memory, and 
therefore 1 muſt not go too faſt. And in regard it cometh into 
my minde,thatI once undertook to calculate how long time ſuch a 
grave body falling from the concave of the Moon, would be in 
paſſing to the centre -of the Earth, and that I think I remembers 
that the_time would not be ſo long; it would be fit that you ſhew 
ns by what rule this Author made his calculation, ERS 

S1my. He hathdone it by proving his,intent 3 fortiori, a ſuff- 
cient advantage for his adverſaries, {uppoſing that the velocity of 
the body falling along the vertical line, towards the centre of the 
Earth, were equal to the velocity of its circular motion, which it 
made''in the grand circle of the concave of the Lunar Orh- 
Which by equation would come to paſſe in an hour, twelye thou: 
fand (ix bined German miles , a thing which indeed favours of 
impoſſjbility : Yec neverthelefe, to ſhew' his abundant caution, 
mock, of advantages to, his adverſaries, he ſuppgſeth it for 
true, and concludcth, that the, gime of the fall ought however to 
be more than ſix dayes. 


'S A'L 'V- And 1s this the ſum-of his method ? And dath he by 
this' demonſtration prove the time of the fall ro be above fix 
dayes ?. 5 FE 34 

's 4G R. Me thinks that he hath behaved himſclf tao modeſily; 
for that having it in the power gf his wiil to give what 'velocity be 
pleaſed to ſuch a deſcending body, and might aſwell have made it 
fix moneths, nay, ſix years in falling to the Earth, he is content 
with {ix dayes. Burt, good Salv1atus, ſharpen my appetite a lit- 
tle, by telling me'1n what manner you made your computation, 1n 
regard you ſay, that you have heretofore caſt it up : fox I am con- 
fident that if che queſtion had' not required ſome, ingenuity 18 


* , + S ( ' . . 
working'it, you would never have applied your minde unto 
an; 4 {ill ' FR ' 0 , > | 


FI 


Th" 23 | Wag SAL, 
4 { | 


DiatoGus IT. 


<\rv. It is not caough, Segredys, that the ſubze&s be noble 
and greats bur the buttneſle conſiſts in handling it nobly. And 
who knoweth not, that in the difleCtion of the ,members of 
\ beaſt, there may be dilcovered infinite wonders of provident 
and prudent Nature and yet for one, that the Anatomilt diſ- 
(es, the buecher cuts up a thoutand, Thus I, who, am now 
eking how to latistie your demand,cannot tell with which of the 
eo ſhapes | had beſt to appear on the Stage 3 bur yer, taking 
heart from the example of Simplicizs, his Authour, I will, with- 
out more delays, give you an account (if I have-not forgot) how 
| proceeded. Bur before 1 go any turther, | muſt not omit to tell 
you, that | much fear. that Szmplreixs hath not faithfully related 
the manner how this his Authour found, that the Cannon bul- 
let in coming trom the concave of the Moon to the centre of the 
Earth, would ſpend more than fix dayes; for if he had ſuppo- 
led that .its velocity in deſcending was equal to that of the 
concave (.as Simpliczxs faith he doth ſuppoſe) he would have 
ſhewa himtelt ignorant of the firſt, and more fimple principles 
of Geometry ;:yea, I admire that Simplicixs, in admitting the 
ſuppoſition which he:{peaketh of, doth not {ce the monſtrous ab- 
ſurdity char 1s couched 1n it. | , | 

$1». [ts poſlible- that I may have erred in relating it ; but 
that [ ſee any fallacy. 1a it, I am ſure is not true. 

S a Ly. Pechaps I did not nghtly apprehend that which you 
ſaid, Do you noti{ay , that: this Authour maketh the velocity. 
of the bullet in deſcending eqirall to that: which it had in tur- 
ning round:,. being. in the concave of the Moon , and thag com- 
ming dowa with che #aine velocity, it would reach to the centre 
n fix dayesd.. {yy cot f 

$1 e:'So,as I thuik, he writeth. TEre | 

$4a1.v.: And do:hotyou peeceive a: ſhametull erraur therein 2. 
But queſiioaleflce you difſemble it : For: it cannot be, but that. 
you ſhonld/ know that ghe {emidiameter of. the Circle ts lefle than 
the ſixth pare of the.circumference ; and:that -conlequently, the 
ume 10 which the mqvcable ſhall paſle the {emidiamexer, ſhall be 
lefle chan the ſixth part of the:tame:s in. which , being maved 
with the: {ame velocity, it would paſſe the circumference; and 
that therefore the-buller. deſcending with the velocity, where- 
with it moved 1n the Concave, Will: arrive 1h lefle than: four hours 
a the vero. ſuppoſing that-i1n the .t6ncaye one; revolution 
ſhould be confummare in rwenty:: four hours, as he muſt of nc«= 
cellity have {uppoledur,. for to: keep it. all the way ia the ſame 
vertical hne. Y 10 


S1My. Now I thorowly Perccive the miſtake :, but yet I 
would notlay it upon-him undeſervedly, for it's poſſible that I 
| may 


197 


2A ſhamefull 
erroxr in the Ar- 
g£ument taken fron 
the bullets falling 
our of the Moons 
Concave. 


——_— 


193 


An exatl com- 
pute of the time of 
the fall of the (4 
non bullet from the 
Aloons concave (0 
the Earth: centre, 


* Tine Author, 
* By theſe Wri- 


tings, he every 
where mcanes his 
[Dial 4ne, Dc mo» 


tu,which I p-omiſe 
co give you in my 
tecond Volumc. 
Acceleration of 
the natural motion 
of grave bodies ts 
made according to 


the odde numbers 


beginning 4t unit). 


The ſpaces paſt 
by the fallg 
grave body are as 
the ſquaresof their 


IMS. 


An intire and 
new Science of the 
AcademiCk cogeer» 
ning local my ions 


G. Garir=us, his Syſlme. 


may have erred in rehearſing his Argument, and to avoid running 
into the ſame miſtakes for the future, I could wiſh I had hjs 
Book; andif you had any body to ſend for it, I would take it 
for a preat favour. 

Sas k- You ſhall not want a Lacquey that will runne for je 
with all ſpeed : and he ſhall do it prelently, withour loſing any 
rime 3 in the mean time Salviatus may pleale to oblige us with his 
computation. 

Sime-. If he go, he ſhall finde it le open upon my Dexk, 
together with that of the other Author, who alſo argueth a- 
gainſt Copernicus. 

SaGr. We will make him bring that allo for the more cer- 
rainty: and in the interim Salp;atus ſhall make his calculation : 1 
have diſpatch't away a meflenger. 

S at v. Above all things it muſt be conſidered, that the motion 
ot deſcending grave bodies is not uniform, but departing from 
reſt they go continually accelerating : An efte& known and ob. 
{erved by all men, unleſle it be by the forementioned modern Au- 
thour, who not {peaking of acceleration, maketh it even and u- 
niforme. But this general notion is of no avail, if it be not known 
according to what proportion this increaſe of velocity is made; a 
concluſion that hath been until our times unknown to all Philoſo- 
phers; and was f1:{t found out & demonſtrated by the * Academick, 
our common friend, who in ſome of his * writings not yer publiſh- 
ed, but in familiarity ſhewn tome, and ſome others of his ac- 
quaintance he proveth, how that the acceleration of the right mo- 
tion of grave bodies, is made according to the numbers uneven 
beginning 4b «nate, that is, any number of equal times being aſ- 
ligned, if 1n the firlt time the moveable departing from reſt ſhall 
have paſled ftuch a certain ſpace, as for example, an ell, in the ſe- 
cond time it ſhall have paſled three ells, in the third five, in the 
fourth (even; and lo progreſſively, according to the following odd 
numbers 3 which 1n ſhort is the ſame, as ifs 1 ſhould ſay, that che 
{paces paſſed by the moveable departing from its reſt, are unto 
each other in proportion double to the proportion of the times, 
in which thoſe ſpaces are meaſured ; or we will ſay, that the 
{paces paſſed. are to cach other, as the ſquares of their tunes. 

SaGr. This1s truly admirable : and do you ſay that there is 
a Mathematical demonſtration for it ? 

SAa1v. Yes, purely Mathematical; and not oncly for this, but 
for many other very admirable paſſions, pertaining to natural mo- 
tions, and to projets allo, all invented, and demonſtrated by Onr 
Friend, and I have ſeen and conſidered them all ro my very great 
content and admiration, ſeeing a new compleat DoErine to (pring 
up touching-a lubjeQ,.upon which have been written art of 

Volumes 3 


Drartocus. IT, : 


Volumes ; and yet not {o much as one of the infinite admirable 
-onclutions that thole his writings contain, hath ever been ob- 
{erred , or underſtood by any one, before Our Friend made 
chem our- 

SaGk- You make me Jole the defire | had to underſtand 
more in our dilputes in hand, onely that I may hear ſome of 
thole demonſtrations which you ſpeak of; therefore either give 
them me prelently, or at leaſt promile me upon your word, to 
appoint a particular conference concerning them, at which Sim- 
plicins allo may be preſent, if he ſhall have a mind to hear the 
paſſions and accidents of the primary effe& in Nature. 

$1 mv. I ſhall undoubtedly be much pleaſed therewith, though 
indeed, as ro what concerneth Natural Philoſophy, I do not think 
chat it is neceſſary to deſcend unto minute particularities, a gene- 
ral knowledg of the definition of motion, and of the diſtin- 
ion of natural and violent, even and accelerate, and the like, 
ſufficing : For if this were not ſufficient, I do not think that Ari- 
ftotle would have omitted to have taught us what ever more was 
neceſlary. 

Sarv. It may beſo. But let us not loſe more time about 
this, which 1 promile to ſpend half a day apart in, for your fatis- 
facion ; nay, now I remember, I did promiſe you once before to 
ſatisfie you herein. Returning therefore ro our begun calcula- 
tion of the time, wherein the grave cadent body would pals from 
the concave of the Moon to the centre of the Earth, that we may 
not proceed arbitrarily and at randon, but with a Logical method, 
we will firſt atremprt to aſcertain our ſelves by experiments often 
repeated, in how long time a ball v. g. of Iron deſcendeth to the 
Earth from an altitude of an hundred yards. 

SaGk. Let us therefore take a ball of ſuch a determinate 
weight, and let it be the ſame wherewith we intend to make the 
compu tation of the time of deſcent from the Moon. 

Sal v. This is not material, for that a ball of one, of ten, of an 
hundred, of a thouſand pounds, will all meaſure the ſame hundred 
yards in the (ame time. 

Sine. Burthis I cannot believe, nor much leſs doth Ariſtotle 
think ſo, who writeth, that the velocities of deſcending grave 
bodies, ate in the ſame proportion to one another, as their gra- 
vities. 

| Sat v. lt you will admit this for true, Simplicizs, you muſt be- 
lieve allo, that two balls of the ſame matter, being ler fall in the 
lame moment, ene of an hundred pounds, and another of one, 
trom an altirude of an hundred yards, the great one arriveth at the 
ground, before the other is deſcended but one yard onely : Now 
bring your tancy, it you can, to imagine, that you fee the great 
ball 


199 


T he erro» of Ar\- 
ltotle #m afjirming, 
falling grave bo- 
dies to move Accor- 
ding to the propor= 
tion of their gravis 
fits, 


Gr 


© wo wel 


CC 


1 
(a) (b) Note tit 
thei: Calculiti>''s 
are made um [ral 
4A" Welw !1ts "I 
m'a% *$s.Ani 100 
pounds Haverdu- 
porſe make 131 4. 
Flirentine An 
. ? vis wat 
109 Engl i 145 
ad jp [1 b 
maxcs 5c g 0? 
F/orem, lo that the 
brace or yard Of 
our eAuth,r \S ; 
ot cur yaid, 


* The [talian rr ea- 
luce which I com- 
monly tra;.\l ce 
yards, 

t i h- [talian m le 
is [= of OLI 1:1!% 


v1 


G. GCGaritzus, bis Syſleme. 


ball got to the ground, when the little one is ſtill within lel; thas 
a yard of the top of the Tower. 

$A G k. That this propolition 15 molt falle, I make no doubt in 
the world ; bur yer that yours is ablolutcly true, I cannot wel 
aſſure my (cf : neverthelets, I believe it, (ceing that you (o re. 
ſolutely affirm ic z which | am ſuce you would not do, if you had 
not certain expericnce, or ſome clear demonſtration thereof. 

Sal V. I have both - and whea we (hall handle the buſineſs 
of motions apart, | will communicate them : in the interim, that 
we may have no more occaſions of interrupting our diſcourſe, we 
will ſuppolc, that we are to make our computation upon a ball of 
lron of an hundred ( a ) pounds, the which by reiterated exPperi- 
ment» delcendeth from the altitude of an hundred (b) yards; in 
five ſecond-minutes of an hour. And becaule, as we have aid, 
the (paces that are mcalured by the cadent moveable, increaſe in 
double proportion 3 that is, according to the {quares of the times, 
being that the time of one ficſt-minute is duodecuple to the time 
ot tive lecond>, it we multiply the hundred yards by the ſquare of 
12, that is by 144, We ſhail have 14400, which ſhall be the num- 
ber of yards that the tame moveable thall paſs in one firſt-minute 
of an hour : and following the {ame rule becauſe one hour is 60 
minutes, multiplying 1 4400, the number of yards paſt in one mi- 
nute, by the ſquare of 60, that is, by 3600, there ſhall come forth 
5 1840000, the number of yards to be paſſed in an hour, which 
make 17350 miles. Ard deliting to know the ſpace that the ſaid 
ball would pals in 4 hours, let us multiply 1 7280 by 16, (which 
is the ſquare of 4 ) and the product will be 276480 miles : which 
number is much greater than the diſtance from the Lunar concave 
to the centre of the Earth, whichis but 1 96000 miles, making the 
diſtance of the coacave 56 {emidiameters of the Earth, as that mo- 
dern Author doth; aid the {emidiameter of the Earth 3500 miles, 
of 3000 *Braces toa file, which are our Italian miles. 

Therefore, S:mplicis, that ſpace from the concave of the Moon 
to the centre of the Earth, which your Accomptant ſaid could 
not be paſſed under more than fix days, you fee that (computing 
by experience, and not upon the fingers ends) that it ſhall be pal- 
fed in much leſs than four hours ; and making the computation 
exact, it ſhall be paſſed by the moveable in 3 hours, 22 min. pri. 
and 4 {cconds. 

SaGk. I belcech you, dear Sir, do not defraud me of this cx- 
a(t calculation, for it muſt needs be very excellent. 

Sa1v. Soindced it 1s : therefore having (as I have ſaid) by 
diligent tryal obſerved, that {uch a moveable paſleth in its decent, 


the height of 100 yards in 5 ſeconds of an hour, we will ſay, it 


F 100 yards are patled in 5 ſeconds; in how many ſeconds ſhall 
j 5 88000000 


Dicibofs II, 


$$002000 yards (for {o many are in 56 diameters of the Earth) 
be paſſed ? The rule for this work is, that the third number muſt 
be multiplied by the ſquare of the ſecond , of which doth come 
147 00000000) which ought to be divided by the firſt, that is, by 
| 00, and the root ſquare of the quoticnt, that is, 12124 is the 
umber ſought, namely 12124 mn. ſcenn. of an hour, which are 
> hours, 22 min. prim-and 4 ſeconds. 
* $aGr. I have ſcen the working, bur I know nothing of the 
:caſon for ſo working, nor do I now think it a time to ask it. 

Saiv. Yet will give it, though you do not ask it, becauſe it 

is very caſte. Let us mark theſe three numbers with the Letters 
A firſt, B lecond, C 
third. Aand C are the 100. 5. &88000000. 
numbers of the ſpaces, A B C 26 
B is the number of the 4g 


time; the fourth number T "ST : _ 
is ſought , of the time © © of 

alſo. And becaule we 22 

know, that look what — 

proportion the {pace Az 241 00 Soy, 
hath to the ſpuace C,the —— » ; 
{ame proportion ſhall the 2422 

{quare of the time B © 


have to the (qarc of the 24240 | 
time, which is (ought. | 
Therefore by the , Golden Rule, let the number C be multi- 
plied by the ſquare of the number B, and let the produd be di- 
vided by the number A, and the quotient ſhall be the ſquare of 
the number,ſought, and irs ſquare root ſhall be the number ir (elf 
that is ſought... Now you ſee how ealie it is to be underſtood. 

S a6,x- Soare all truths, when once they are found out, but the 
difficulty lycth in tinding them. 1 very well apprehend it,and kindly 
thank you. And if there remain any other curioſity touching this 
point , I pray you let us heart; for if I may ſpeak my mind, I 
will with the favour of Simplicins, that from your diſcourſes I al- 
wayes learn fome ncw. motion, but from thoſe of his Philoſo- 
Phers, 1 do not remember that .1 have learn't any thing of mo- 
ment. 

Salv. There might. be much more ſaid touching theſe local 
motions ; but according to agreement , we will re(erve it to a par- 
ucular conference ; and for the preſent I will ſpeak ſomethin 
touching the Author named by. Szmplicizs , who thinketh he hath 
Bivena great advantage to the adverſe party in granting thar, that 
Canon bullet in falling from the concave of the Moon may de- 

cend with a velocity equal to the velocity wherewith it would 
C c rurn 


2O1 


a OO oor SEE aro omg oe en SET Cot Bo 


-— 


= £3 


_— — wwe oe a ta > 


Z O2 


T he fa"ins move- 
able if it move with 
a drgree of veloci- 
ty acquired in 4 
like time with an 
uniform motion, it 

all paſi a ſtare 
Ft to that p-ſ- 
ſed with the acce- 


lerated motion, 


G. Garitzus, bs Syfleme. 


ruin round , ſtaying there above , and moving along with the g;. 
urnal converſion. Now 1 tell him, that that ſame bal] falling from 
the concave unto the centre , will acquire a degree of velocit 
much more than double the velocity of the diurnal motion of the 
Lunar concave ; and this I will make out by ſolid and not mpet- 
tinent ſuppoſitions. You muſt know therefore that the grave 
body falling and acquiring all the way new velocity accordin 
to the proportion already mentioned , hath in any whatloeyer 
place of the line of its motion luch a degree of velocity, that if ix 
ſhould continue ro move therewith , uniformly without farther 
encreaſing it 3 in another time like to that of its deſcent , it would 
paſſe a {pace double to that paſſed in the line of the precedent 
morion of deſcent. And thus for example , if that ball in comin 
from the concave of the Moon to its centre hath ſpent three hours, 
22 min. prin. and 4 ſeconds , I lay, that being arrived at the cen- 
tre, it ſhall find it ſelf conſtituted in ſuch a degree of velocity, that 
if wich that, without farther encreaſing it, it ſhould continne to 
move uniformly , it would in other 3 hours, 22 min. prim. and 
4 ſeconds , pafle double that ſpace , namely as much as the whole 
diameter of the Lunar Orb; and becauſe from the Moons con- 
cave to the centre are 196000 miles, which the ball paffethin 
hours 22 prim. min. and 4 {econds, therefore (according ta what 
hath been ſaid) the ball continuing to move with the velocity 
which it is found to have in its arrival at the centre , it would 
paſſe in other 3 hours 22 min. prim. and 4 ſeconds, a ſpace doy- 
ble to that, namely 392000 miles; but the iame continuing in 
the concave of the Moon , which is in circuit 1 23/2000 miles, and 
moving therewith in a'diurnal motion , it would make im the ſame 
time , that is in 3 hours 22 min. prim. and @ ſeconds, 17390 
miles, which are fewer by many than the half of the 392000 
miles. You ce then that the motion in the concave is not as the 
moderh Author ſaith, that is, of a velocity impoſlible for the fall- 
ing ball to partake of, ec. 

SaGk. The diſcourle would paſs for current, and would give 
me full ſatisfa&hon, if that particular was but ſalyed , bf 'the mo- 
ving of che moveable by a double ſpace to that paſſed in falling 
in another time equal to that of the deſcent, in caſe it doth continue 
ro move uniformly with the greateſt degree of velocity acquired 
in deſcending. A propotition which you alſo once before ſuppo- 
{cd astrue, but never demonſtrated. | 

S atv. This1s one of the demonſtrations of Our Friexd, and 
you ſhall ſee it in due time ; but for the preſent, I will with fome 
conjecures(not teach you any thing that is new,but)remember you 
of a cerrain contrary opinion,and ſhew you,that it may haply ſo be: 
A bullet of lead hanging in a long and fine thread faſtened to the 


rook, 


D1al OGUE IT. 


oof, if w2 remove it. tar from perpendicularity, and then let it go, 
hve you not oblerved that, it declining, will pals freely, and well 
\car as far to the other {ide of the perpendicular ? 

Sa GK. [ have obſerved it very well, and tind ( elpecially if the 

plummet bc of any conſiderable weight) that it rileth lo little lets 
than it deſcended, lo that I have fomerimes thought, that the a- 
ſcendiag arch is equal to that deſcending, and thereupon made it 
a queſtion whether the vibrations might nor perpetuate themſelves; 
and | believe that they mighr, if that it were poſlible to remove 
che impediment of the Air, which reſiſting penetration, doth ſome 
(mall matter retard and impede the motion of the pendulum, 
though ;adecd that impediment 1s but {mall : in favour of which 
opinion the great number of vibrations that are made before the 
moveable wholly cea{erth to move, fcems to plead. 

$a1tv. The motion would not be perpetual, Sagredns, al- 
though the impediment of the Air were totally removed, becauſe 
there 15 anocher much more abſtrule. 

Sacx. And what 1s that? as for my part I can think of no 
viher ? | 

SaLtv. You will be pleaſed when you hear it, but I ſhall not 
tell ir you till anon : 1a che mean time, let us proceed. I have 
propoled the obſervation of this Pendulum, to'the intent, that you 
ſhould underſtand, that the impetus acquired in the deicending 
arch, where the motioa is natural, is of it- ſelf able to drive the 
ſaid ball with a violeat motion, as far on the other fide in the like 
alcendiug arch 3 if (o, I ſay, of it ſelf, all external impediments 
being removed : | believe alſo that every one takes it for granted, 
that as in the deſcending arch the velocity all che way increaſeth, 
till it come to the loweſt point, or its perpendicularity ; ſo from 
this point, by the other alcending arch, it all the way diminiſheth, 
untill it come to its extreme and higheſt point : and diminiſhing 
with the ſame proportions, wherewith it did before increaſe, fo that 
the dgrees of the velocities in the points equidiſtant from the point 
of perpendicularity, are equal to cach other. Hence it ſeemeth 
to me(arguing with all due modeſty) that 1 might eaſily be indaced 
to believe, that if the Tecreſtrial Globe were bored thorow the 
centre, a Canon bullet deſcending through that Well, would ac- 
quire by that time it came to the centre, tuch an impulſe of velo- 
city, thar, ic having patſed beyond the centre, would ſpring it up- 
wards the other way, as great a ſpace, as that was wherewith it had 
deſcended, all the way beyond the centre diminiſhing the velocity 

with decrealements like to the increaſements acquired in the de- 
(cent : and the time ſpent 1a this [ſecond motion of aſcent, I be- 
lieve, would be equal] to the time of deſcent. Now if the move- 


able by diminiſhing rhat irs greateſt degree of velocity which it 
Cc 23 had 


203 


The motion 0 f 


grave penculi 
might be pernerua- 
ted, impediments 
bring removed, 


If the Terreſtrial 
Globe were perfo= 
rated, a grave be- 
dy deſcending by 
that bore, would 
Paſs and aſcend as 
far beyond the cen- 
fre, 4s it did de- 
ſcend, 


204 


G. Garirt=us, his Sytrme. 


had in the centre, ſucceſſively until ir come to total extin&jon 
do carry the moveable in fuch a time {uch a certain pace, as jt * 
gone 1a luch a like quantity of time, by the acquilt of velocity 
from the total privation of it until it came to that its greateſt depree; 
it (eemerh very reaſonable, that if it ſhould move always with the 
(aid greateſt degree of velocity it would pals, in ſuch another 
quautity of time, both thoſe ipaces : For if we do bur in ou; 
mind \ucceflively divide thole velocities into riting and falling 
degrees, as v. g. thelce numbers 1n the margine 3 (o that the 
firſt ſort unto 10 be luppoled the increaſing velocities, and the 
others unto one 1, be the increaſing 3 and let thole of the time 
of the delcent, and the others of the time of the aſcent bein 
added all together, make as many, as it one of the two ſums of 
them had been all of the greateſt degrees, and therefore the 
whole ſpace paſled by all the degrees of the increaling veloci- 
ties, and decreaſing, (which put together 1s the whole diame- 
ter) ought to be equal to the ſpace paſled by the greateſt velo. 19 
Cities, that are in number half the aggregate of the increaſing x9 
and decreaſing velocities. I know that 1 have but obſcurely g 
exprefſied my elf, and I wiſh I may be underſtood. $ 
Sack. Ithink I underſtand you very well; and alſo thatl 7 
can in a few words ſhew, that I do underſtand you. You had 6 
5 
4 


\O OS AN þÞ V Wm 


a mind to lay, that the motion begining from reſt, and all the 
way increaſing the velocity with equal augmentations, ſuch as 
are thole of continuate numbers begining at 1, rather at o, 3 
which repreſcnteth the ſtate of reſt, dilpoſed as 1n the margine: 2 
and continued at pleaſure, ſo as that the leaſt degree may be o, 1 
and the greateſt v.g. 5, all thele degrees of velocity wherewith 
the moveable is moved, make the ſum of 15; but if the © 
moveable ſhould move with as many degrees in number as 1 
theſe are, aud each of them equal to the biggeſt, which is 5, the 2 
agpregate of all thele laſt velocities would be double to the 3 
others, namely 30. And therefore the moveable moving with 4, 
a like time, but with uniform velocity, which is that of the 5 
higheſt degree 5, ought ro pals a {pace double to that which it 
paſleth in the accelerate time, which begianeth at the ſtate of reſt, 
SaLlv. According to your quick and piercing way of appre- 
hending things, you have explained the whole buſineſs with more 
plai:inets than I my ſelf; and put me alſo in mind of adding fome- 
thing more : for in the accelerate motion, the augmentation be- 
ing continual, you cannot divide the degrees of velocity, which 
continually increaſe, into any determinate number, becauſe chan- 
ging every moment, they are evermore infinite. Therefore we 
ſhall be the berter able to exemplifie our intentions by deſcribing 
a Triangle, which ler be this ABC, | zn Fig. 8. ] taking 10 = 
ide 


Dialcouer, II. 


Ge A C, as many equal parts as we picale, AD,DE,EF.FG, 
and drawing by the points D,E,F,G, right lines parallel to the baic 
BC. Now Jet us imagine the patts marked in the line A C, to be 
equal times, aid lct the parallels drawn by the points D, E, F,G, 
repcelent unto us the degrees of velocity accclerated, and increal- 
ing equally in equal] times; and ler the point A be the ſtate of reſt, 
fom which the moveable departing, hath v. g. inthe time AÞD, 
acquired the degree of velocity D H, in the1econd time we will 
luppole; that it hath increaſed tne velocity from D H, as far as to 
E 1, and ſo ſuppoling it to have grown greater in the ſucceeding 
rimes, according to the increaſe of the lines F K, G Lz &c. but 
Decaule the acceleration is made contiaually from moment to mo- 
ment, and not disjunGly from one certain part of time to another; 
the point A being pur for the loweſt moment of velocity, that is, 
for the ſtate of reſt, and A D for the firſt inſtant of time follow- 
ing; it is manifeſt, that before the acquiſt of the degree of velocity 
1) H, made in the time A D, the moveable muſt have paſt by 
infinite other lefler and lefler degrees gained in the infinite inſtants 
chat are 1n the tune D A, an{wering the infinite points that arc in 
the line D A 3 therefore to repreſent unto us the infinite degrees 
of velocity that precede the degree D H, it 1s neceſlary to imagine 
infinite lines {ucceflively lefler and leffer, which are {uppolcd to 
be d:awn by the infinite points of the line D A, and parallels to 
DH, the which infinite lines repreſent unto us the {uperfticies of 
che Triangle A H D, and thus we may imagine any pace paſſed 
by the moveable, with a motion which begining at reſt, goeth uni- 
formly accelerating, to have ſpent and made uſe of infinite degrees 
of velocity, increaſing according to the infinite lines that begin- 
ing from the point A, are ſuppoſed to be drawn parallel to the 
line H D, and to the reſt I E,K F, L ©, the motion continuing as 
far as one will. 
Now let us complcat the whole Parallelogram AMBC, and let 
us prolong as far as to the fide thereof B M, not onely the Parallels 
marked in the Triangle, but thoſe infinite others imagined to be 


d:awn from all the points of the ſide AC; and like as B C, was. 


the preareſt of thoic intinite parallels of the Triangle, repreſent- 
Ing unto us the greateſt degree of velocity acquired by the move- 
able in the accelerate motion, and the whole ſuperficies of the ſaid 
Triangle, was the mals and ſum of the whole velocity, wherewith 
in the time A C it paſſed ſuch a certain ſpace, fo the parallelogram 
I; now a mals and aggregate of a like number of degrees of ve- 
locity, but each equal to the greateſt B C, the which maſs of ve- 
locities will be double to the maſs of the increaſing velocities in 
rhe Triangle, like as the ſaid ParalleJogram 1s double to the Tri- 
angle: and therefore if the moveable; that falling did make uſe 

of 


205 


T he acceleration 
of grave bodies na- 
twrally deſcendent, 
increaſeth from 
moment lo moment. 


2 0H 


In natural Sci- 
ences it bis not ne» 
ceſſary to ſeth, Ma- 

 thematicall evi- 
dence. 


The pendulum 
ha»ging at 4 long- 
er i! ed, maketh 
its vibrations more 
ſeldome than the 
perdulim hanging 
at a horter threed. 

The wibrati'rs 
ef the ſame pen- 
dulum are ma 
with the ſame fri- 
quency, whether 
they be ſmall or 


£reat, 


Fhe cauſe which 
impedeih the pen- 
dulum. and 186.14- 
ecth it roreſ}, 


4 arc not abſolutely equal, they are inlenfibly different, as expe- 


G. Garitzus, his Syſeme. 


of the accelerated degrees of velocity, anſwering to the 
AB C, hath paſſed in tuch a time ſuch a {pace, it is very reaſonable 
and probable, that making uſe of the uniform velocities anſ{werin 

to the parallelogram, it ſhall paſſe with an even motion in the 
ſame time a ſpace double to that paſled by the accclerate mo. 
t10n. 

Sacs. I amentuely latisfied. And it you call this a probable 
Diſcourſe, what ſhall the neceflary demonſtrations be? | Wi 
that in the whole body of common Philoſophy, I could find one 
that was but thus concludent. 


S1mp. It isnot neceſlary in natural Philoſophy to ſeck eXqui- 
ſite Mathematical evidence. 

SaG 8. But this point of motion, is it not a natural queſtion ? 
and yet I cannot find that Ariſtotle hath demonſtrated any the 
leaſt accident of it. But let us no longer divert our intended 
Theme, nor do you fail, I pray you Salwiatus, to tell me that 
which you hinted to me to be the caule of the Pendulum's qui- 
eſcence , beſides the reliſtance of the Medium ro penetration. 

Sarv. Tell me; of two pendul: hanging at unequal diſtan- 
ces, doth not that which is faſtned to the longer threed make its 
vibrations more {cldome ? 

SaGk. Yes, if they be moved to cquall diſtances from their 
perpendicularity. 

SALv. This greater or leſſe elongation importeth nothing at 
all, for the ſame pendulum alwayes maketh its reciprocations in e- 
quall rimes, be they longer or ſhorter, that is, though the pendulum 
be little or much removed from its perpendicularity, and if they 


triangle 


rience may ſhew you : and though they were very unequal, yet 
would they not diſcountenance, but fayour our cauſe. There- 
fore let us draw the perpendicular A B[ in Fig.g.] and hang from 
the point A, upon the threed A C, a plummet C, and another up- 
on the ſame threcd alſo, which let be E, and the threed A C, being 
removed from its perpendicularity, and then letting go the plum- 
mets C and E, they ſhall move by the arches CBD, EGF, and 
the plummet E, as hanging at a leſſer diſtance, and wicthall, as 
(by what you ſaid) letſe remoyed, will return back again faſter, 
end make its vibrations more frequent than the plummet C, and 
therefore ſhall hinder the laid plummet C, from running ſo much 
farther towards the term [D, as it would do, if it were free : and 
thus the plumuner E bringing unto it in every vibration contiuuall 
impediment, it ſhall finally reduce it to quieſcence. Now the 
{lame threed, (taking away the middle plummet ) is a compoſition 
of many grave pendul:, that is, each of its parts is ſuch a pendv- 
[um taſtned ncerer and neerer to the point A, and therefore _ 
e 


Diatocur LT. 


© ro make it> vibrations fucceſiively more and more frequent 3 
;od conſequently is able to bring a continual impediment to the 
plummet C 3 and for a proot that this 15 lo, 1t we do but oblerye 
11 thicad A Cy we ſhall ice it diſtended nor diredly, but in an 
arch ; and if inſtead of the thread we take a chain, we ſhall dif- 
corn the effe& more perteQly ; and eſpecially removing the gra- 
viry C, to a conſiderable diſtance from the perpendicular A B, for 
char che chain being compoled of many loole particles, and cach of 
chem of ſome weight, the arches A E C, ard A F D, will appear 
notably incurvated. By reaſon therefore, that the parts ot the 
chain, according as they are neerer to th? point A, delire to make 
their vibrations more frequent, they permit not the lower parts of 
the ſaid chain to lwing fo far as naturally they would : .and by 
coiitiaual detratting from the vibrations of the plummet C, they 
tinally make 1t ceale to move, althongh the 1unpediment of the air 
mighe be removed. 

$468. The books are now come ; here take them Simplicins, 
and find the place you are in doubt ot. 

Sie. Sce, here it is where he beginneth to argue againſt che 
diurnal motion of the Earth, he having firſt confured the annual. 
Motus terre annuns aſſerere Copernicanos cogit converſionem e. 
jaſdem quottdianam ; alias idem terre Hemiſpherinm continenter 
ad Solem eſſet converſum obumbrato ſemper averſo. | In Engliſh 
thus : ] The annual motion of the Earth doth compell the Co- 
pernicans to aſſert the daily converſion thereof ; otherwile the 
lame Hemiſphere of the Earch would be continually turncd to- 
wards the Sun, the ſhady fide being always averſe. Aad fo one 
halt of the Earth wouid never come to ice the Sun. 

Saiv. I find art the very firſt ſight, that this man hath not righely 
apprehended the Copernican Hypotbeſts, for if he had but taken 
notice how he alwayes makes the Axis of the terreſtrial Globe 
perpetually parallel co it felt, he would not have ſaid, that one 
halt of the Earth would never ſee the Sun, but that the year 
would be one entire natural day, that 1s, that thorow all parts of 
the Earth there would be fix moneths day, and fix moneths night, 
as it now befalleth to the inhabitants under the Pole , but ler 
this miſtake be torgiven him, and let us come to what remai- 
neth. 

Sine. It followeth, Hanc autem gyrationem Terre im- 
poſſrbilem eſſe fic demonſtramus. Which {peaks in Engliſh thus : 
Thar this gyration of the Earth is impoſſible we thus demonſtrate. 
That which <nſueth is the declaration of the following figure, 
wherein is delineated many deſcending grave bodies, and aſcend- 
ng hight bodies, and birds that fly co and again in the air , &c. 

Sack. Let usſee them, I pray you. Oh! what fige figures, 

| what 


The threal op 
chain to which 4 
pendulum &ﬆ faft- 
red , maberh an 
arch, and doth rar 
ftretch it [fe 
ftrerghe on? tn its 
vibrant nc. 


208 


* Peſct arma1, or 
a:inatle 


G. Garititfus, his Sylcme. 


what birds, what balls, and what other pretty things are, here » 

Si v. Thele are balls which come trom the concave of *s 
Moon. 

S,cr. And what 1s this ? 

Simpy. This 15a kind of Shell-ftiſh , which here at Venice they 
call bxowoli ; and this allo came from the Moons concave. 

Sac. Indeed, it ſeems then,that the Moon hath a great pow. 
er over theſe Oyſter-fiſhes, which we call * armed ſiſbeg. 

Simv. And this is that calculation, which I mentioned of thi. 
Journey 1n a natural day, in an hour, in a firſt minute, and jq , 
lecond, which a point of the Earth would make placed under the 
EquinoGial, and allo in the paralle] of 45 gr. And then followeth 
this, which I doubted 1 had committed lome miſtake in reciting 
thercfore let us read. it. His poſits, neceſſe e$t, terra circulariter 
mota, omnia ex atre eidem, @vc. Qnod fi bhafce pilas equales po. 
nemus pondere, magnitudine, gravitate, © in concave Spharg Ly. 
naris poſitas libero deſcenſut permittamus, ſi motum deorſum eque- 
mus celeritate motui circum, ( quod tamen ſecus eſt, cum pila A, 
&xc. ) elabentur minimum ( ut multum cedamus adwverſarits ) dies 
ſex: quo tempore ſexies circa terram, @vc. | In Engliſb thus. ] 
Thefe things being ſuppoled, it is neceflary, the Earth being cir- 
cularly moved, that all things from the air to the ſame, &c. $9 
that if we ſuppole theſe balls to be equal in magnitude and gra- 
vity, and being placed in the concave of the Lunar Sphere, we 
permit them a free deſcent, and if we make the motion down- 
wards equal in velocity to the motion about, (which nevertheleſ; 
15 otherwile, if the ball A, &c.) they ſhall be falling at leaſt (tha 
we may grant much to our adverſaries) {ix dayes ; in which time 
they ſhall be turned ſix times about the Earth, &c. 

Sa rv. You have but too faithfully cited the argument of this 
perſon. From hence you may colle& Simplicizs,: with what cau- 
tion they ought to proceed, who would give themlelves up to be: 
lieve others 1in thoſe things, which perhaps they do not believe 
themſelves. For me thinks it a thing impoſlible, but that this Au- 
thor was adviſed, that he did defign to himlelf a circle, whoſe dia- 


meter (which amongſt Mathematicians, 1s leffe than one third part 


of the circumference) 1s above 72 times bigger than it ſelf : an 
errour that affirmeth that to be conſiderably more than 200, 
which is lefſe than one. 

SaGk- It may be, that thele Mathematical proportions, which 
are true in abſtra&, being once applied in concrete to Phy ical and 
Elementary circles, do not ſo exa&ly agree: And yet, I think, 
that the Cooper, to find the ſemidiameter of the bottom, which he 
13 to fit to the Cask, doth make uſe of the rule of Mathematicians 


m abſtra&, although ſuch bottomes be things meerly _ 
| an 


Driatocus. II, 


and cacictC : therefore let Simplicius plead 1:1 excule of this 
Author 3 and whether he thinks that the Phylicts can differ (o 
wry much from the Mathematicks. 

3; yp. The ſubſtraſtions arc in my opinion inſufficient to (alve 
his difference, which is lo extreamly too great to be reconciled : 
and in this cale I have no more to lay b it that, Quandoque bonus 
Jirmiict Homerus. But {uppoſing the calculation of * Salviatus 
o be more exact, and that the time of the deicent of the ball 
were no more than three hours ; yet me thinks, that coming from 
the concave of the Moon, which 13 fo great a diſtance off, it would 
be an admirable thing, that it ſhould have an inſtin& of maintain- 
ing it (elf all the way over the {e]f-ſame point of the Earth, over 
which ic did hang in its departure thence, and not rather be left a 
very great way behind. 

SxLtv. The cffe& may be admirable, and not admirable, bur 
natural and ordiuary, according as the things precedent may fall 
out. For if the ball (according to the Authors ſuppoſitions ) 
whilſt it ſtaid 1n the concave of the Moon, had the circular motion 
of twenty four hours together with the Earth, and with the rcſt of 
the things contained within the {aid Concave ; that very vertue 
which made it turn round before its deſcent, will continue it in 
the ſame motion 11 its deſcending. And fo far it 1s from not keep- 
ing pace with the motion of the Earch, and from ſtaying behind, 
that it is more likely to out-go it; being that 1n 1ts approaches to 
the Earth, rhe morion of gyration is to be 1nade with circles con- 
tinually leſſer and leſſer ; fo that the ball retaining 1n it ſelf thar 
lelf-lame velocity which it had 1n the concave, it ought to antici- 
pate, as I have ſaid, the vert:go or converſion of the Earth. . Bur 
if the ball in the coicave did want that circulation, it is not oblj- 
ged in deſcending to.maintain it ſelf perpendicularly over that 
point of the Earth, which was juſt under 1c when the deſcent be- 
gan. Nor will. Copernicus, or any of his followers affirm the 
lame. 

S1mye. But the Author maketh an objeQtion, as you ſee, de- 
manding on what principle this circular motion of grave and light 
bodies, doth depend : that 1s, whether upon an internal or an ex- 
ternal principle. - 

Sarv. Kecping to the Probleme of which we ſpeak, I ſay, 
that that very principle which made the ball turn round, whilſt it 
was 1n the Lutar concave, is the ſame that maintainerth alſo the 
circulation in the deſcent : yet 1 leave the Author art liberty to 
make it interna] or external at his pleaſurc. 


S1H e. The Author proveth, that it can ncither be inward nor 
outward, 


SaLlv. And 1 will ſay then, that the ball in the concave did 
Dd not 


Ki 


—_— 


* Not Sarre- 
du, 15s th: Latin* 
ha \ i:. 


$$ <:.. Sax 


210 G. Gartlizus, bi Sy% ne. 


not move, and lo he ſhall nor be bound to ſhev: how that in def. 
cending it conttmucth all the way vertically over one Point, for 
that it will not do any luch thing. | 

St p. Very well; Butif grave bodies, and I1gnt can have ng 
principle, cither internal or external of moviig circularly, than 

neither can the rerrefttial Globe move with a circular motion: and 
thus you have the intent of the Author. 

S a1. v. I did not ay, that the Earth had no principle, either 
interne, or externe to the motion of gyration, bur I fay, thatl do 
not know which of the two it hathz and yer my not knowing It 
hath not a power to dc prive 1t of the 1ame; but if this Author 
can tell by what priuciple other mundane bodies are moved round, 
of whole motion there is no doubt; LI lay, that that which ma- 
keth the Earth to move, is a vertue, like ro that, by which Mars 
and 7 uptter are moved, and wherewith hc believ-s rhat the ſtarry 
Sphere it (elf allo doth move ; and it he will but aſſure me,who is 

the mover of one of thele moveables, I will undertake to be able 
ro tell him who maketh the Earth ro move. Nay more ; 1 will 
undertake to do the fame, it he can but tell me, who moveth the 
parts of the Earth downwards. 

Sine. The cauſe of this is moſt maniteſt, and every one knows 
that it 1s gravity. | 

SaLv. You arc out, Simplicius, you ſhould ſay, that every 
one knowes, that 1c is called Gravity : but 1 do not queſtion you 
about the name, but the effence of the thing, of which eflence 
you know not a tittle more than you know the eſſence of the 

| mover of the ſtars in gyration 3 ualcile it be the name that hath 
| | been pur ro this, and made familiar, and domeſtical, by the many 
| He fyow ws me Experiences which we lec thereof every hour in the day, : but not 
| ' Ph ELF asif we really underſtand any more, what principle or vertye that 
| hy "REY 15 which moveth a ſtone Cownwards, than we know who moveth 
h rw ws avs It upwards, when it 1s ſeparated from the projicient, or who mo- 
l 1j-g of rheſeca«» yeth the Moon round, except (as I have (aid) onely the name, 
il fo EE Fats which more particularly and properly we have afligned to the mo- 
chem by us. tion of de{cent, namely, Gravuy ; whereas for the caule of cir- 
| cular motion, in more general termes, we aſſign the Vertue impreſ- 
ſed, and call the ſame an Intelligence, either aſſiſting, oc informing} 

and to infinite other motions we aſcribe Nature for their caule. 
W | Sim y. It is my opinion, that this Author a:keth far lefle than 
i that, ro which you deny to make an{wer ; for he «doth not as 
an what is nominally and particularly the principle that moveth 
ih grave and light bodies circularly , bur whatſoever it be, he deti- 
$4 reth ro know, whether you think it intrinſecal, or extrinlecal : 
For howbcit, v.gr. I do not know, what kind of thing that graviiy 
wn is, by which the Earth delcendeth 3 yer L know that it 1s an intern 


princt- 


——— we 


7 $_ CAS» 


2tatocur. 11. 


principle, ſccing that if it be not hindered, it moyeth [pontane- 
ouſly : and on the contrary, I know that the principle which mo- 
verh it upwards, 15 external 3 alchough that | do not know, what 
thing that vertue 15) inprefied on it by the projicicnt. 

S atv. Into how many queſtions muſt we excurre, if we would 
decide all the ditticulties, which {ucceſlively have dependance one 
upon another! You call that an external (and you allo call it a 
precernatural and violent) principle, which moveth the grave pro- 
ject upwards ; but its poſſible that it may be no lefle interne and 
natural, than that which moveth it downwards; it may p-radven- 
tuce be called external] and violent, ſo long as the moveable is joy- 
ned to the projicient 3 but being ſeparated, what external thing 
remaineth tor a mover of the arrow, or ball ? In ſumme, ir muſt 
necefſarlty be granted, that that vertue which carrieth ſuch a move- 
able upwards, 15 no lefle interne, than that which moveth it-down- 
wards 3 and think the motion of grave bodies aſcending by the 
impetus conceived, to be altogether as natural, as the motion of 
deſcent depending on gravity. 

Simve. 1 will never grant this; for the motion of deſcent hath 
ics principle interna], natural, and perpetual, and the motion of 
aſcent hath its principle externe, violent, and finite. 

Sar v. If you retule to grant me, that the principles of the 
motions of grave bodies downwards and upwards, are equally in- 


ternal and natural ; what would you do, it I ſhould ſay, that they 
may allo be the fame in number ? 


S1ny. Lleave it to you to judge. 

SaLv. ButIdelire you your (clf to be the Judge : Therefore 
tell me, Do you believe that in the ſame natural body, there may 
refide interne principles, that are contrary to one another ? 

S1mne. I doverily believe there cannot. | 

SAaLlv. What do you think to be rhe natural inclination of 
Earth, of Lead, of Gold, and 1n ſum, of the moſt ponderous mat- 
ters; that 13, ro what motion do you believe that their interne 
principle drawerth them ? 

. S1n e. To that towards the centre of things grave, that is, to 
the centre of the Univerſe, and of the Earth, whither, if they be 
not hindered, it will carry them. 

SaLlv. So that, if the Terreſtrial Globe were bored thorow, 
and a Well made thar ſhould paſſe through the centre of it, a 
Cannon bullet being let fall into the ſame, as being moved by a 
natural and intrinfick principle, would paſſe to the centre; and it 
would make all this motion ſpontancouſly, and by intrinſick prin- 
ciple, is it not ſo ? 

diny. Sol verily believe. 

> 4A LV. But when it 1s arrived at the centre, do you think tha 

Dd 2 it 


ZI1 


T he vertae whiah 
Carrieth grave pro- 
jelly wwayds : is 
no leſſe natural to 
them, than the 
gravity which mo- 
veth them down- 
wards, 


Contrary Pprin- 
cidles Cannot na: u- 
rally reſide mn the 
ſame ſubjeft, 


2” a 


4 We 
- be 3 


_——__ - 


_= 
_—_— 


TTOTD oTT O O 


——_ 


217 G. Gali xus, his Syſeme. 


it will paſſe any further, or elſe that there it w 

ftand ſtil], and move no further ? 
S1 p. | belicve that it would coatinuc to move a great way 

further. 
S . i, v. But this motion beyord the centre, would it not be uy. 
wards, and according to your aſſertion preternatural, and violent? 
And yet on what other principle do you make it to depend, but 
only upon the (elf fame, which did carry the ball to the centre, 
and which you called intrinſecal, and natural? Finde, if you can, 
another external projicient, that overtaketh it again to drive je 
upwards. And this that hath been aid of the motion thorow 
, the centre, is allo cen by us here above ; for the interne impetus 
T he natura' mo- ; Sy . *—_ ? 

tron changeth nt of a grave body falling along a declining {uperticies, if the ſaid 


ould ummediately 


felfe ino that ſyperticies be reflected the other way , it ſhall carry it, without a 


5 called pre- . . - - 
OY 1... Jjotinterrupting the motion, alſo upwards. A ball of lead that 


olent, hangeth by a thread, being removed from its perpendicularuy, de- 
ſcendeth (} pontaneouf] y, as being drawn by its internal inclination, 
and without any interpolure of reſt, paſſeth beyond the loweſt 
point of pcerpendicularity : and without any additional mover, 
moveth upwards. I know that you will not deny, but that the 
principle of grave bodies that moveth them downwards, is no lels 
natural, and intrinlecal, than that principle of light bodies, vvhich 
moveth them upwards: fo that propolc to your confideration a 
ball of lead, vvhichdelcending through the Air from a great al- 
titude, and ſo moving by an intern principle, and comming ro 1 
depth of yvater, continueth its deſcent, and without any other ex- 
terne mover, ſubmergeth a great vvay z and yet the motion of 
deſcent in the vvater is preternatural unto it ; but yet nevertheleſs 
dependeth on a principle that is internal; and not external to the 
ball. You ſec it demonſtrated rhen, that a moveable may be 
moved by one and the {ame internal principle, with contrary mo- 
cions. 

S1me. I bclieve there are ſolutions to all theſe objeRions, 
though for the prelent I do not remember them ; but however 
be, the Author continueth to demand, on what principle this cir- 
cular motion of grave and light bodics dependerh ; that is, whe- 
ther on a principle internal, or external; and proceeding for- 
vvards, ſhewethyhat it can be neither on the one,nor on the other, 
laying; Sz ab extern ; Deuſne illum excitat per continuum mird- 
culum? an wer0 Angelus, anaer? Et hbunc quidem multi aſg- 
nant. Sed contra. | In Engliſh thus] If from an externe prin- 
ciple ; Whether God doth not excite it by a continued Miracle ? 
or an Angel, or the Air? And indeed many do aſſign this. But 


on the contrary— 


Sa1y. Trouble not your ſelf to read his argument ; for | an 
none 


Driratocus IF, 


none oi thole who aſcribe that principle to the ainbicnt air. As 
ro the Mi: aclc, or an Angel, I ſhould rather incline to this fide ; for 
that which traketh beginning irom a Divine Miracle, or from an 
Angelica] operation ; as for inſtance, the rran{portation of a Can- 
non ball or bullet 1nro the concave of the Moon, doth in all pro- 
bability d-pend on the vertue of the lame principle for perform- 
ig the rcſt- Bur, as to the Air, it lerveth my turn, that it doth 
not hinder the circular motion of the moveables, which we did 
fuppole ro move thorow it. And to prove that, it ſuſficerh (nor is 
more required) that it moveth with the {ſame motion, and hniſh- 
eth its circulations with the lame velocity, that the Terreſtrial 
Globe doth. 

S$1nre. And he likewiſe makes his oppoſition to this allo ; 
demanding who carrieth the air about, Nature, or Violence ? 
And proverh, that it cannot be Nature, alledging that that is con- 
reary to truth, experience, and to Copernicus himlelf. 

SaLiv. Its not contrary to Copernicus in the leaſt, who writeth 
no ſuch thing ; and this Author aſcribes thele rhings to him with 
two exccllive courteſie. It's true, he faith, and for my part I 
think he {faith well, that the parc of the air neer to the Earth, be- 
ing rather a terreſtrial evaporation, may have the ſame nature, 
and naturally tollow its motion; or, as being contiguous to it, 
may follow it in the fame manner , as the Peripateticks lay, that 
the ſuperio ur part of it, and the Element of fire, follow the mo: 
tion of the Lunar Concave, fo that it lyeth upon them to declare, 
whether that motion be natural, or violent. 

Sine. The Author will reply, that it Copernicxs maketh only 
the inferiour part of the Air to move, and {uppoleth the upper 
part thereof ro want the {aid motion, he cannot give a reaſon,how 
that quiet air can be able to carry thoſe grave bodies along with 
it, and make them keep pace with the motion of the Earth. 

Satv. Copernicas will fay, that this natural propenſion of the 
elementary bodies to (ollow the motion of the Earth, hath a li- 
mited Sphere, out of which ſuch a natural inclination would ceaſe; 
befides that, as I have (aid, the Air is not that which carrieth the 
movecables along with i; which being ſeparated from the Earth, 
do follow its motion ; fo that All the objettions come to nothing, 
which this Author produceth to prove , that the Air cannot cauſc 
{uch effe&s. | 

Sine. To ſhew therefore, that that cannot be;, it will be neceſ- 
lary to 1ay, that ſuch like cffe&s depend on an interne principle, 
againſt which polition, oboriuntur difficillime, immo inextricabiles 
quaſtiones ſecuude, of which tort,are theſe that follow. Princi- 
prumillud internum wel ft accidens, wel ſubſtantia. $i primum ; 
quale nam illud? nam qualitas locomotiva circum, battenus nulla 

vide- 


213 


The propenſion 
of element ary bo» 
dies to follow the 
Earth, bath a li- 
mited Sphere of 
ativitg. 


” ont wt 


Rr 2£ 


214 


GC, Garir=us, his Sy?me. 


videtur aguiia. (In Engliſh thus:) Contrary to which poſition 
there do a-ilc molt difhicuit, yea 1acxtricable lecord queſtions 
(tch as clicle ; That intern principle 15 exther an accident, Ws 
(ubltance, If the firſt; what manner of accident is ir ? For a 
locomotive quaiiry about the centre, leemerh tro be hitherto ac- 
knowicdyed by none. 

Sauv. How, is there no fuch thing acknowledged ? Is jt not 
known to us, that all thele elementary matters move round, to. 
gether wich the Earth ? You fee how this Author {uppoſeth for 
truc, that which is in queſtion. 

Sm v. He laith, that we do not fee the lame; and me thinks, 
he hath therein realon on his tide. 

Sarv. Weſceit not, becauſe we turn round together with 
them. 

Simpy. Hear his other Argument. Que etiam ft eſſet, quo- 
modo tamen invenirctur in rebus t am contraris ? in ge, ut in a- 
qui ; in aere, ut interra;, in viventibus, ut in anima carentibus ? 
[in Engliſh thus : | Which although it were, yet how could t be 
found 1n things fo contrary ? in the fare, as in the water ? in the 
air, as in the earth? in living creatures, as in things wanting 
life ? 

S aL v. Suppoſing for this time; that water and fire are contra- 
ries; as allo the air and earth; (of which yer much may be ſaid) 
the moſt rhat could follow from thence would be, that thoſe mo- 
tions cannot be common to then, that are contrary to one ano- 
ther : fo that .g. the motion upward:, which naturally agreeth 
to fire, cannot agree to water 3 but that, like as it 1s by nature con- 
trary to tire : fo to it that motion ſuiteth, which is contrary to the 
motion of fire, which ſhall. be the .motion deorſum ; but the cir- 
cular motion, which 1s not contrary either to the motion ſurſum, 
or to the motion deorſum, but may mix with both, as Ar:totle 
himlelf afttirmeth, why may ir not equally ſuit with grave bodies 
and with light ? The motions in the next place, which cannot be 
common to things alive, and dead, are thoſe which depend on the 
{oul : but thole which belong to the body, in as much as it is ele- 
mentary, and conſequently participatcth of the qualities of the e- 
lements, why may not they be corthmon as well to the dead corps, 
as to the living body ? And therctore, it the circular motion be 
proper to the elements, it ought to be common to the mixt bodies 
allo. X 

Sacr. It muſt needs be, that this Author holdeth, that a dead 
cat, falling trom a window, it is not poſlible that a live cat allo 
could tall ; it not beirg a thing convenient, that a carcaſe ſhould 


partake of the qualities which ſuit with things alive. 


SAL v. Thercfore the diſcourſe of this Author concludeth 
nothing 


Diatocus I], 


not | that X | 
calac motions of grave and light bodies is an intern accident - [ 


know not how he may prove, that it cannot be a ſubſtance. 

$1n oe. He brings many Arguments againſt this. The firſt of 

which is in theſe words : Si ſecundam (nempe, fi dicas tale princ- 
pinm eſſe jubſtantiam ) illud eſt aut malerias ant forma, aut compo- 
futunt. yed repugnant FISTING tot diverſe reram nature, quales 
[unt avs, limaces, ſaxa, ſagitte, nives, fumt, grandines, piſces, 
Oc. que tamen omnia ſpecie & genere differentia, moverentur a 
natnra ſud circulariter, ipſa naturss diverſiſſuma, &uc. | In Engliſh 
thus | If che ſecond, (that 15, if you ſhall ſay that this principle 1s 
a ſubſtance) it is either matter, or form, or a compound of both. 
But ſuch diverſe natures of things are again repugnant, ſuch as are 
birds, ſnails, ſtones, darts, ſnows, ſmoaks, hails, fiſhes, &c. all 
which notwithſtanding their differences in ſpecies and kind, are 
moved of their own nature circularly, they being of their natures 
moſt different, &c. | 

Sau v. If theſe things before named are of diverſe natures, and 
things of diverle natures cannot have a motion in common, it muſt 
follow, if you would give f{atisfaQtion to all, that you arc to think 
of, more than two motions onely of upwards and downwards : and 
if there muſt be one for the arrows, another tor the {nails, another 
for the ſtones, and another for fiſhes; then are you to betlink your 
{elf of worms, ropazes and muſhrums, which are not leſs different 
in nature from one another, than ſnow and hail. 

S1mv. It {eems that you make a jeſt of thete Arguments. 

Sarv. No indeed, Simplicins, but it hath bcen already an- 
{wered above, to wit, that if one motion, whether downwards or 
upwards, can agree with all thoſe things afore named, a circular 
motion may no le{+ agree. with them : and as you are a Peripate- 
tick , do not you put a greater difference between an elementary 
comet and a celcRial ſtar, than between a fiſhand a bird ? and 
yet both thoſe move circularly. Now propoſe your ſecond Ar- 
gument. 

S imp. Szterra ſtaret per voluntatem Dei, rotarentne cetera, an 
nou? ſt boc, falſum eſt a, natura gyrare, ſt illud, redennt priores 
queſtnes. Et ſane murum eſſet, quod Gavia piſciculo, Alauda 
madulo ſuo, &» corvus limaci, petraque, etiam volans, imminere 
non poſſet. [Which [| thus render:] If the Earth be ſuppoſed to 
ſtand ſtill by the will of God, ſhould the reſi of bodies turn round 
ornov? It not, then it's falle that they are revolved by nature; if 
the other , the former queſtions will return upon us. And 
tculy it would be ſtrange that the Sea-pie ſhould not be able to 
hover over the ſmall hiſh, the Lark over her neſt, and the Crow o- 
ver the ſnail and rock, though flying. | 


v4 againſt onc that ſhould aftirni, that the pi1nciple of the cir- 


SALY. 


_— — _— 


a . »* 
—_—_— - p 


_ ——— 


216 


G. Gartit*us, his Sym". 


Sarv. | wou'danſwer tor my ſelt in general terms, that if 
it were appointed by the will of God, that the Earth ſhould ceaſe 
from its diurnal revolution, thole bizds would do what ever ſhoulg 


-plcale the lame Divine will. Burt it this Author deſire a more 


particular antwer, | ſhould icl] him, that they would do quite con- 
trary to what they do now , 1 whilſt chey , being leparated from 
the Earth , do bear themiclves up in the air, the Terreſtrial Globe 
by the will of God, ſhould all on a ſudden be pnt upon a precipi- 
rate motion; it concerncth this Author now to alcertain vs what 
would in this calc lucceed. 

S ak. I pray you, Salv:atus, at my requeſt to grant to this 
Author, that the Earth ſtanding ſtill by the will of God, the other 
things, leparated tromit, would continue to turn round of their 
OW i natural motion, and let us hear what umpolſlibilities Or 1ncon- 
venicnces would follow : forl, as to my own particular, do not 
ſec how there can be greater dilorders, than thete produced by the 
Author himlclt, that 1s, that Larks, though they ſhould flie, could 
not be able to hover over their neſts, nor Crows over ſnails, or 
rocks : from whence would follow, that Crows muſt ſuffer for 
want of (nails, and young Larks muſt dic of hunger, and cold, not 
being able to be ted or ſheltered by the wings of the old ones. 
This 1s all the ruine that I can conceive would follow, ſuppoſing 
the Authors ſpeech to be true. Do you ſee, Simplicins, if grea- 
cer inconveniences would happen ? 

S1me. 1 know not how to diſcover greater ; but it is very cre- 
dible, that rhe Author beſides thele, dilcovered other diſorders in 
Nature, which perhaps in reverend re{pe& of her, he was not will- 
ing to inſtance in. Theretore let us proceed to the third Obye- 
ion. Inſuper qu fit, ut iSte res tam varia tantum moveantur 
ab Occaſu in Ortum, parallel.e ad Aquatorem? ut ſemper movean- 
tur, nunquam quieſcant ? | which ſpeaks to this ſenſe: ] Moreover, 
how comes 1t to pals that thele things, ſo diverſe, are onely moved 
from the Weſt rowards the Eaſt, parallel to the XquinoQial? 
chat they always move, and never reſt ? 

SA 1 v. They move trom Weſt to Eaſt parallel to the Xqui- 
noctial without ceaſing, in the ſame manner as you believe the 
tixed ſtars to move from Eaſt to Weſt, parallel to the Equinodt- 
al, without ever reſting. 

Sinp, Quare, quo ſunt altiores, celerius, quo humiliores, tar- 
dins? (i.e. ) Why are the higher the {wifter, and the lower che 
ſlower e 

S a1 V. Becaule that in a Sphere or circle, that turns about up- 
on irs own centre, the remoter parts deſcribe greater circuits, and 
the parts nearer at hand deſcribe lefler in the ſame time. 

S1mP. QuHare, que AquinoGialt propriores, in majori, qu# 

remotiores, 


Diatocus []I, 


is minori circulo feruntur ? | ſealteet: } Why are 


remot 1026s r4 carento fe | | 
thoſe ncar the AquinoGtial carried about in a grearer circle, and 


hich are remote 1n a letler ? 
3, vy. To imitate the ſtarry Sphere, in which thole neareſt 
ro the EquinoGial, move in greater circles, than the ,more re- 


chole W 


motc. | 
Sip. Quar? Pila eadem ſub Aquincfiali tota circa centrum 


terr , ambit Maximo, celeritate mncredihil: ; ſub Polo werod circa 
centrum proprium, gyro nullo, tarditate ſuprema wolwerctur ? 
[That is: ] Why is the {ame ball under the Xquinoctial wholly 
mrned round the centre of the Earth in the greateſt circumfe- 
rence, with an incredible celerity ; but under the Pole abour its 
own centre, 1n no Circuite, but with the ultimate degree of tar- 
dity ? 

Satv. To imitate the ſtars of the Firmament, that would do 
the like it they had the diurnal motion. ' _. 

S1nP. Quare eadem res, pila v.g. plumbea, ſe ſemel terram 
carcuivit, defcripto crirculo maximo, eandem' ubique non circum- 
migret ſecundum circulum maximum, ſed tranſlata extra /quino- 
Gralem i circulis minoribus agetur? | Which ſpeaketh thus : } 
\why doth not the ſame thing, as for cxample, a ball of lead 
rurn round every where according to the {ame great circle, if once 
deſcribing a great circle, tt hath incompaſled the Earth, but being 
removed from the Aquinoctial, dothy move in lefler circles ? 

Sar v. Becauſe {o.would, nay; according to the dodtrine of 
Ptolomey, io have ſome tixed ſtars done, which once were very 
near the FquinoQtial, :and deicribed very vaſt circles, and now that 
they are farther off, deſcribe lefler. 

SaGx.::[f 1 could now but keep in mind all thele fine no- 
tons, 1-ſhould think that 1 had made a grear purchale; I muſt 
needs intreat you, Szmplicins, toilend me this Book, for there can- 
not chuſc but be a lea of rare and ingenious matters contained in 
It, 

Siny. 1 will prefant you with it. 

i $aGr. Not lo, Sir; I would not deprive you of it : but are 
the Queries yet atan end? 

S1ny. No Sir 3 hearken therefore. $87 latio circularis gra- 
vibus © levibus eſt naturalis, qualis eſt ea que fit ſecundum line- 
am reciam?! Nam ſi naturals, quomodo @&s is motus qui circum et, 
naturalis eft, cum ſpecie differat a recio? Si wiolentus, qui fit, ut 
miſſcle iyn1tum ſurſum evolans ſcintilloſum caput ſurſum a terra, 
non attiem circum volvatur, Oc. | Which take in our idiom :] If 
a Circular Jation is natural to heavy and light things, what is that 
which is made according to a right line ? For if it be natural, how 
then 15 that motion which is about the centre natural, ſeeing it 


E ec differs 


nd hes es en... Bi *. 


>> 


O; the m-xt mo- 
tion we ſer rot ihe 
part that ts £!7 Cl* 
lar, becauſe we 


partake thereof. 


G. Galiitxus, hi Sy{eme. 
differs in ſpecies from a right motion? If it be violent, how ;; 
that a fiery dart flying upwards, ſparkling over oar heads at a d 
ſtance from the þ arth, bur not turning abour, &c. 

S 4 1 v. It hath been ſaid already very often, that the Circular 
motion is natural to the whole, and to its parts, whilſt they are in 
perte& dilpoſure , and the right is ro reduce to otder the part; 
dilordercd 3 though indeed it 1s better to lay, that neither the 
parts ordered or diſordered ever move with a right motion, but 
with one mixed, which might as well be averred meerly circular: 
but to us but one part onely of this motion 1s viſible and obſer. 
vable, that is, the part of the right, the other part of the circular 
being imperceptible to us, becaule we partake thereof. Ard this 
anſwers to the rays which move upwards, and round about, but we 
cannot diſtinguiſh their circular motion, for that, with that we our 
felves move allo. But I believe that this Author never thought 
of this mixture 3 for you may lee that he re(olutely (aith, that the 
rays go directly upwards, and not at all in gyration. 

Sime. Quare centrum ſphere delapſe ſub Aquatore ſpiram de- 
ſeribit in ejus plano : ſub als parallelis ſpiram deſcribit in cono? 
ſab Polo deſcendit in axe lineam gyralem, decurrens in ſuperficit 
cylindrici conſignatam? (In Engliſh to this purpoſe: ) Why doth 
the centre of a falling Globe under the XquinoGtial deſcribe 1 
ſpiral line in the plane of the Aquator ; and in other parallel 
a {piral about a Cone ; and under the Pole deſcend in the 
axis deſcribing a gyral line, running m a Cylindrical Superk: 
cie-? 

Sax v. Becaule of the lines drawn from the Centre to the ar- 
cumference of che ſphere, which are thoſe by which graves de- 
ſcend , that which terminates in the XquinoGaal defigneth a cir- 
cle, and thoſe that terminate in other parallels deicnbe conical 
ſuperficies ; now the axis deicribeth nothing at all, but continueth 
in its own being. Andif | may give you my judgment freely, 1 
will ſay, that I cannot draw from all theſe Queries, any ſenſe that 
interfereth with the motion of the Earth ; for if I demand of this 
Author, (ranting him that the Earth doth not move) what would | 
follow in all thele particulars, ſuppoſing that it do move, as C« 
pernicus will have it 3 I am very confident, that he would ſay that 
all theſe effe&s would happen, that he hath objeRed, as inconve- 
niences to diſprove its mobility : fo that in this mans opinion ne* 
cetlary conſequences are accounted abſurdities : but | beſeech 
you, if there be any more, diſpatch them, and free us ſpeedily 
from this weariſom task. 

S1 me. Inthis which follows he oppoſes Copernicus & his Seaton, 
who aftirm,that the motion of the parts ſeparated from their whole 
1s onely to unite themſelves to their whole; but that rhe moving 

circularly 


Ti 
I 


>1atLoGus, IT, 


caccularly along with the vertigenous diurnal revolution is abſc- 
Jurely natural : againſt which hc obzectcth, ſaying, that according 
-0 thele mers opinion; Sz tota terra, und cum agud in nibilum 
redigeretitry nulla grando aut pluzia e nnbe decideret, ſed natu- 
ealgter tant circumferetur , neque 1911s ull us, aut igneum aſcens 
deret, cum illorum non improbabili ſententia ignis nullus ſit ſupra. 
[Which | tran{lare to this ienſe: |] It the whole Earth, rogether 
with the Water were reduced into nothing, no hail or rain would 
fall from the clouds, but would be onely naturally carried round ; 
neither any f1:e or fiery thing would alcend,lecing to theſe that men 
it is no improbable opinion that there is no fire above. 

SaLtv. The providence of this Philoſopher is admirable, and 
worthy of great applauſe; for he is not content to provide for 
chings chat might happen, the courle of Nature continuing, bur 
will ſhew hic care in what may follow from thoſe things that he 
very well knows ſha]l never come to paſs. I will grant him there- 
fore, (that 1 may get ſom pretty paſſages out of him) that if the 
Earth and Warter ſhould be reduced to nothing, there would be no 
more hails or rains, nor would igneal matters aſcend any longer 
upwards, but would continually turn round .: what will follow ? 
what will the Philolopher ſay then ? | 

S1my. The objze@ion 15 in the words which immediately fol- 
low 3 here they are : Qurbus tamen experientia @# ratio adver- 
ſatur. Wluch neverthelels (faith hc) 1s contrary to experience and 
reaſon. 

Sa1v. Now | muſt yield, ſecing he hath fo great an advan- 
tage of me as experience, of which I am unprovided. For as yet 
[ never had the fortune co lee the Terreſtrial Globe and the ele- 
ment of Water turn'd to nothing, fo as to have been able to ob- 
ſerve what the hail and water did in that little Chaos. But he 
perhaps te]ls us for our inſtruction what they did. 

S1M yp. No, he doth not. 

Sar v. I would give any thing to change a word or two with 
this perſon, to ask him, whether when this Globe vaniſhed, it car- 
ried away with it the common centre of gravity, as I believe.it did; 
in which cale, I think that the hail and water would remain inſen- 
late and ſtupid amongſt the clouds, without knowing what to do 
with themſelves. It might be alſo, that attracted by that great 
void Vacuum, Ictt by the Earths ablenting, all the ambients would 
be rarified, and parcicularly, the air, which is extreme eaſily drawn, 
and would run thither with very great haſte to fill it up. And 
perhaps the more ſolid and material bodics, as birds, (for there 
would in all probability be many of them ſcattered up and down 
In the air) would retire more towards the centre of the great va- 
cant ſphere; (tor ir (cemeth very reaſonable, that ſubſtances that 

Ee 2 under 


219 


_ 


. 4 of * 
vis. atvuti%. wi tthes 


<4 Þ > I. < 
«5 _ 


« 


G. Gar1tzus, his Sy/eme. 


under (mall bulk contaja much matter, ſhould have narrower pla- 
ces afligned them, leaving tine more (pacious to the more rarifed 
and rhere being dead of hunger, aud refolved into Earth, would 
torm a ncw linle Globe, with that little water, which at thar time 
was among the clouds. Ir might be alio, that thole mattery as 
not bcholding the light, would not perccive the Earths departure, 
but like blind things, would Celcend according to their ulual cuſtom 
to the centre, whither they would now go, it that globe did nor 
hinder them. And laſtiy, that I may give this Philolopher a lel 
irrelolute anſwer, | do tell him, that | know as much of whar 
would follow upon the annilulation of the Terreſtrial Globe, as 
he would have done that was to have followed in and about the 
ſame, betore 1t was created. And becaule I am ccrtain he will 
ſay, that he would never have been able tro have known any of 
all thole things which experience alone hath made him knowing 
in, he ought not to deny me pardon, and to excule me if | know 
not that which he knows, touching what would enſue upon the 
annihilation of the ſaid Globe : tor that I want that experience 
which he hath. Let us hear it he have any thing clle to lay. 

S1nv. There remains this igure, which repreſents the Terre- * 
ſtrial Globe with a great cavity about irs centre, full of air ; and 
to ſhew that Graves move not downwards to unite with the Ter- 
reſtrial Globe, as Copernicus laith, he conſtituteth this ſtone 1n 
the centre 3 and demanderh, ir being left at liberty,what it would 
do; and he placcth another 1n the {pace of this great vacuum, and 
a>keth the lame queſtion. Saying, as to the tuilt : Lapis in centro 
conſtitutus, aut aſcendet ad terram in punctum aliquod, aut non. Si 
ſecundum; falſum et, partes ob ſolam ſejun&ionem a toto, ad il- 
lnud movert. St primums, omnis ratio @ experientia renititur, 
neque gravia in ſug gravitatis centro conquieſcent. Item ſe ſu- 
ſpenſus laps, liberatus decidat in cent rum, ſeparabit ſe a toto, con: 
tra Copernicum : fr pendeat, refragatur omnis experientia, cum 
videamus integros fornices corruere. ( Wherein he ſaith: ) The 
ſtone placed in the centre, either alcendeth to the Earth in ſome 
point, or no. It the lecord it 13 falle that the parts ſeparated 
from the whole, moyc unto it. It the firſt ; it contradiferh ali 
rcalon and experience, nor doth the grave body reſt in the centre 
ot its gravity. Andit the ſtone being (ulſpended in the air, be let 
go, do deicend to the centre, it will {ſeparate from its vyholc, con- 
trary to Copernzeys : if it do hang in the air, it contradiGerh all 
CXPCrience : fince we lee whole Vaults to fall dovvn. 

S a1.v. I vvill anſvver, though vvich great diladvantage to my 
(elf, {eeing | have to do vvith one vyho hath fcen by experience, 
vyhat thele ſtones do in this great Cave : a thing, vvhich for my 
part I have nor leen: and vvill ſay, that things grave have _ exl- 

ence 


Diatocus IT. 


Fence before the common centre of gravity : tv that it is not one 
centre aloacyvhich is no other than indivilible point, and therefore 


221 


Thins (rave ave 
b:f::ethe centre of 


of no ctlicacie,that can attract unto it grave matters but that thoſe 5": 


matters conlpiring naturally to unite, torm ro themliclves a com- 
mon Cccntre, which is that about which parts of equal momcat 
conliſt : lo that 1 hold, chat if the great aggregate of grave bo- 
dies yvcre gathered all into any ore placezthe (mall parts that vvere 


vvere not hindered, vvould penetrate vyherever they ſhould find 


meet vvith matters more grave, they vvould deicend no farther. 
And therctorc I hold, that in the Cave tuli of air, the vvhole Vaulr 
vvould prels, and violently reſt it felt onely upon that air, in cafc 
its hardneſs could not be overcome and broken by its gravity ; bur 
loole ſtones, 1 believe, would deſcend to the centre, and not {wim 
aboye in the air : nor may 1t be laid, that they move not to their 
whole , though they move whither all the parts of the whole 
would transfer themicIves, it all impediments were removed. 

Sinv. That which remanneth, 1s a certain Errour which he ob- 
ſerveth in a Dailciple of Copernicus, who making the Earth to 
move with an annual motion, and a diurnal, in the {ame manner 
as the Cart-wheel moveth upon the circle of the Earth, and in it 
ſelf, did conſtitute rhe Terreſtrial Globe too grear, or the great 
Orb too little ; tor that 365 revolutions of the XquinoGial, are 
leſs by far than the circumference of the great Orb. 

SaLiv. Take notice that you miſtake, and tell us the Gdirett 
contrary to what muſt needs be written in that Book ; tor you 
ſhould lay, that that ſame Copernican Author did conſtitute the 
Terreſtrial Globe too little, and the great Orb too big ; and not 
the Terreſtrial Globe too big, and the annual too little. x 

S1 me. The miſtake 15 not mine; {ee here the words of the 
Book. Non widet, quod wel circulum annuum &quo minorem, wel 
orbem terrenm juſto multd fabricet majorem. (In Engliſh thus :) 
He (ceth not, that he either maketh the annual circle equal to the 
lels, or the Ferceſtrial Orb much too big. 

Sartv. I cannot tell whether the firſt Author erred or no, ſince 
the Author of this TraCtate doth not name him ; but the error of 
this Book is certain and unpardonable, whether that follower of 
Copernicus erred or not erred ; for that your Author paſſeth by fo 
material an error, without either detecting or correGing it. But 
let him be forgiven this fault, as an error rather of inadvertencic, 
than of any thing elſe : Farthermore, were it not, that I am al- 
ready wearied and tired with talking and ſpending ſo mnch time 
with veiy lictle profit, in rhele frivolous janglings and alterca- 
©0ns, 1 could ſhew , that it1s not impollible for a circle, though 

no 


e "FH P.th 

. . . < : LA d'? bras bee 
ſeparated from their vvhole, vvould tollovy the lame;. and if they 27 
(Per Face, t 
9 LITE: 


parts [cl5 grave chan themlelves : but coming vyhere they ſhould » 


e164 C47 


part ' 
4 , 


ER ” - 2 4-4 


hs — 
FL” 


-- 


%*F 
. Fs, 


—_ 
I 


: as * 
p = 4 
- _ -_ '* oe 2-6... inet 


ne WE 


- — - ——_—_—— - 


— 


1 


222 


lt T nt 1900 | 


61: wrtth rhe cir 


tha: xy oreat car” 
cl. ws ſoever. 


. G ” (| 2, 


* The 1am” 6 
the Anthor 1s Scr- 
p'0 ( laramoritus, 


G., Garitzus, his Syicms. 


no bigger than a Cart-wheet, with making not 365, butleſie than 
20 revo'u.ions, to deſcribe and mcalure the cuicumf-rence, not 
only of the gran Orb, but of one a thouland times greater; 
and this 1 1 y to ſhew; that thete do not want far greater ſybti]. 
tics, than this wherewith your Author gocth abour to dete the 
crrour of Copernicus : but I pray you, let us breath a little, that 
lo we may proceed to the other Philolopher, that oppoleth of the 
lame Copernicus. 

SaGkr. To contellc the truth, I ſtand as much in necd of re. 
ſpire as cither of you 3 though I have onely wearied my eares : 
and were it not that | hope to hcar more ingenious things froq 
this other Author, 1 queſtion whether I ſhould not go my ways, to 
take the air in my Plcalure-boat. 

Sim vr. Ibcheve that you will hear things of greater moment ; 
for this is a moſt accompliſhed Philotopher, and a great Mathema- 
ucian, and hath confurcd Tycho in rhe bulinefle of the Comets, 
and new Stars. | : 

S a1. v. Perhaps he 1s the (ame with the Author of the Book, 
called Anti-Iycho ? 

Simy. He is the very ſame : but the confutation of the new 
Stars 15 not in his Anti-Tycho, onely fo far as he proveth, that the 
were not prejudicial to the inalterability and ingenerability of the 
Heavens, as I told you before ; but after he had publiſhed his 
Ant-Tycho, having tound.out, by help of the Parallaxes, a way to 
demonſtrate, that they allo are things elementary, and contained 
within the concave of the Moon, he hath writ this other Book, 
de tribus nowvis Stellis, &c. and therein allo inſerted the Argu- 
ments againſt Copernicus : | have already ſhewn you what he 
hach wrictcn touching theſe new Stars in his Anti-Tycho, where he 
denicd not, but that they were 1n the Heavens; bur he proved,that 
their production altered not the inalterability of the Heavens, and 
that he did,with a Dilcourle purely philoſophical,in the ſame man 
ncr as you hav already heard. And 1 then forgor to tell you, how 
that he afterwards did tinde out a way to remove them out of the 
Heavens ; tor he procceding in this contutation, by way of com- 
putations and paiallaxes, matters little or nothing at all under- 
(tood by me, I did not mention then to you, but have bent all my 
{tudics upon thele arguments againſt the motion of the Earth, 
which are purely natural. 

S atv. Lunderſtand you very well : and it will be convement 
alter we have heard what he hath to [ay againſt Copernicxs, that 
we hear, or (ee at leaſt the manner wherewith he, by way of Pa- 
rallaxcs, proveth thole new ſtars to be clementary, which lo many 
famous Aſtronomers conſtitute- to be all very high, and amonglt 
the ſtars of the Firmament ; and as this Author accompliſheth ſuch 

| an 


Diatocus IT. 


an cucprize of pulling tha new ſtars out of, hcaven, and placin 
them in the elementary Sphere, he (hall be worthy to be highly 
exalted , and transferred him(elf amongſt the ltars , or art leaſt, 
that his name be by fame crernized amongſt them. Yet betore we 
enter upon this, let us hear what he alledgeth againſt the opinion 
of Copernicus, aid do you begin to recite his Arguments. 

$1 v. It will not be neceſſary that we read them ad werbum, 
becauſc they are very prolix ; but 1, as you may lee, in reading 
them ſeveral rimes attentivety, have marked 1n the margine thole 
words, wherein the ſtrength of his arguments he, and it will 
(uffice to 1ead them. The firſt Argument beginneth here, Et 
primo, ſt opinio Copernict recipiatur , Criterium naturalis Philo- 
ſophia, m prorſus tollatur, wehementer ſaliem labefaGlart 
videtur. [In our Idiom thus] And firſt, if Copernicxs his opinion 
be imbraced, the Criterium ot natural Philolophy will be, if not 
wholly ſubverted, yet at leaſt extreamly ſhaken. 

W hich, according to the opinion of all the lets of Philoſophers 
requireth, that Senie and Experience be our guides in philolopha- 
ting : But in the Copernicen polition the Senles are greatly delu- 
ded, whi!'ſt that they viſibly diſcover neer at hand ina purc Medi- 
4m, the graveſt bodies to deicend perpendicularly downwards, ne- 
ver deviating a ſingle hairs breadth from re&itude ; and yet accor- 
ding to the opinion of Copernicus, the ſight in ſo manifeſt a thing 
is deceived , and that motion js not reall ſtraight, but mixt of 
right and circular. | 

S-a 1 v- This is the firſt argument, that Arzftotle, Prolomy, and 
all their followers do produce; to vvhich we have abundant- 
ly anſwered , and ſhewn the Paralogilme , and with ſufficient 
plainnede proved, that the motion in common to us and other mo- 
1eablcs, is, asif ctherc were no ſuch thing ; but becauſe true con- 
clulions meet with a thouſand accidents, that confirme them, 1 
vill, wich the favour of this Philoſopher, adde ſomething more ; 
and you Sieplicixs perionating him, an{wer me to vyhat { ſhall 
ak you : And firſt tell me, vvhat effe& hath that ſtone upon you, 
which falling from the top of the Tower, 1s the caule that you per- 
ceive that motion 3 for it its fall doth operate upon you neither 
more nor lefſe, than its ſtanding ſtill on the Towers top, you 
doubtlciſe could not diſcern its deicent, or diſtinguiſh irs moving 
trom its lying JUll. 

Sine. 1 comprehend its moving, in relation to the Tower, 
for that] fee it one while juſt againſt {uch a mark in the ſaid 
Tower, and another while againſt another lower, and fo ſuccel- 
lively, till chat at laſt 1 perceive it arrived at the ground. 

SaLv. Then if that ſtone were let fall from the tallons of ay 
Eagle flying, and ſhould deſcend thorow the ſimple inviſible Air, 


and 


T he opinion of 
Copernicus over- 
throws the Crites» 


tum of Philoſophy 


Common motion 


is, 45 if ut never 
Were. 


The argument 
taken from things 
falling perpendicus 
larly, another way 


corfued, 


a 2 5 a” DP 


"- 


- 
1 
/ 
: 
TY 
= 
T6 
+% 
þ 
s i 
» # 
. 
FIL 
. 


| 
( 
; 


| 


842 


1 
Miele femme 
fi-n 14 17/4 10:7 by 
, 
ay te th oth td. 


The motion of 

4 

the 92 Arkh) 

e [ , 

the m1:1on of 162 
vb eft loskrd 3n. 


»An ev DerimentT 

=; } 
that (p.weir bow 
the commun m tn 


ts impercepiible. 


G. Gar14 us, bs Syſeme. 


and you had no other objcc& vilible and ſtable, wherewith to make 
compariſons to that, you could not Perccive its motion ? 

S\i{myv. No, nor the ſtonc it let; tor it | would fee it, when 
it 15 at che higheſt, I muſt raile up my head, and as it delcendeth, 
| mult hold it lower and Jowcr, and ina word, muſt continual} 
move cither that, or my eycs, following the motion of the ſajq 
ſ{tone. 

Sa1v. You have novy rightly anlwered : you knovv then thar 
the ſtone lyeth ſtill, vvhen without mbving your eye, you alwayes 
lee it before you; and you know that it moveth, when for the 
keeping it in light, you muſt move the organ of ſight, the eye, $0. 
then vvhen ever without moving your eye, you continually be- 
hold an object in the lelt lame alpe&, you do alvvays judge it 
1mmovcable. 

Sim yp. I think it muſt necds be lo. 

Sau v. Novv fancy your iclt to be in a ſhip, and to have fixed 
your eye on the point of the Sail-yard : Do you think, that be- 
caule the ſhip moveth very faſt, you muſt move your cyec, to keep 
your {ight alvvayes upon the point of the Sail-yard, and to fol- 
low 1ts motion ? | | 

Simy. L am certain, that I ſhould need to make no change at 
all ; and that not only in the (fight; burif I had aimed a Mucket 
at it, I ſhould never have need, let the ſhip move how it vill, 
ro ſtir jr an hairs breadth to keep it full upon the ſame. 

Sarv. And this happens becaule the motion, which -rhe Ship 
conterreth on the Sail-yard, it conferreth alſo upon you, and upon 
your eye; lo that you need not ſtir it a jor to behold the top of 
che Skil-yard : and conlequently, it vvill ſeem to you immovea- 
able. Now this Dilcourle being applied ro the revolution of the 
Earth, and to the ſtone placed in the top of the Tower, in which 
you cannot dilcern any motion, becaule that you have: that mo- 
tion vyhich 1s neceſſary tor the following of it, in common with it 
from the Earth ; fo that you need not move your eye. Whena- 
gain there is conferred upon it the motion of deſcent, which is its 
particular motion, and not yours, and thar it is intermixed with-the 
circular, that part of the circular which is common to the ſtone, 
and ro the eye, continueth to be imperceprible, and the right one- 
ly 1s perceived, tor that ro the perception of it, you muſt follownt 
with your eye, looking lower and lower. I wiſh for the undecci- 
ving of this Philoſopher, that I could adviſe him, that ſome time 
or other going by water, he would carry along with hint a Veſt! 
ol realouable depth full of water, and prepare a ball' of wax) 0! 
other matter that would deſcend very (lowly to the hottome, 10 
that in a minute of an hour, it would ſcarce ſink a yard ; and that 
rowing the boat as faſt as could be, {o that in a minute of an hou! 

il 


Diztocus I I: 


- (124d run above an hundred yards, he would let the ball ſub- 
m-1-cc into the warer,& treely delcend,& diligently oblerve its mo- 
1400.1t hs would but do thus,he ſhou!d ieehirit,that it would goin a 
lice line towards that point of the botrom of the veſle],whither ic 
ould rendif the boat ſhould ſtand ſtill; & to his eye, and in rela- 
tion to the vellel, that motion would appear molt ſtraight and per- 
pendicular,and yet he could not ſay ,bur that ic would be compoſed 
of the right motion downwards, and of the Circular about the ele- 
ment of watcr.' And if thele things betall ia matters not natural, 
and in things that we may experiment 1n cheir ſtate of reſt ; & then 
again in the contrary ſtate of motion, and yet as to appearance no 
diverſity at all is dilcovered, & thar they fcem to deceive our ſenſe 
what can we diſtinguiſh touching the Earth, which hath been per- 
petual!y in the {ame conſtitution, as to motion and reſt? Andin 
what time can we experiment whether any difference is diſcernable 
amongſt thele accidents of local morion, in its diverle ſtates of mo- 
i011 and reſt, 1t it cternally indureth in but one onely of them ? 
$45 RK. Thele Diſcourtes have ſomewhat whetted my ſtomack, 
which thoſe fiſhes, and ſnails had in part nauſeated; and the former 
made me ca]l ro minde the correction of an ercour, that hath ſo 
much appearance of truth, that I know not whether one of a 
thouſand would refuſe to admit it as unqueſtionable. And it was 
this, that ſailing into Syria, and carrying with me a very good 
Teleſcope, that had been beſtowed on me by our Common Friend, 
who not many dayes before had invented, I propoled to the Ma- 
riners, that it would be of great benefit in Navigation to make ulc 
of it upon the round top of a ſhip, to dilcover and kenne Veſſels 
afar off. The benefit was approved, but there was obje&ed the 
dificulty of uſing it, by reaſon of the Ships continual fluctuation; 
and eſpecially on the roand top, where tht agitation is ſo much 
oreater, and that it would be better for any one that would make 
uſe thereof to ſtand at the Partners upon the upper Deck, where 
the roſling 15 leſſe than in any other place of the Ship. I (for I 
will not conceal my errour) concurred in the ſame opinion, and 
for that time {aid no more : nor can [ tell you by what hints I was 
moved to return to ruminate with my ſelf upon this buſineſſe, and 
in the end came to dilcover my ſimplicity (although excuſable) in 
admirring that for true, which is moſt falſe ; falle I ſay, that the 
great agitation of the basker or round top, in compariſon of the 
[mall one below, at the partners of the Maſt, ſhould render the 
ule of the Teleſcope more difficult in finding out the obje&: 
SAL v. I ſhouldhave accompanicd the Mariners, and your ſelf 
at the beginning, 
Sikr. And fo ſhould I have done, and ſtill do : nor can I be- 


eve, it | ſhould think of it an hundred years, that 1 could under- 
ſtand it otherwiſe, F f : SJaGRke 


225 


e An Ingeniomus 
conſideration a= 
bont the poſſibility 
of uſing the Telcl- 
cope with as much 
facility on the 
round top of the 
Maſt of a ſhio, 
as an the Deck. 


— —_—_u_p» x 
oY &  & 
- ar Er... 
I DK 


: —— 
FY 
CY BEE oe a ont 
” — 
- — - alt a 
mg re wo — - -- : _ 8 4 


* | deviatc here 
from the (tri Sea 
Dialle& , which 
denominatesall d1- 
ltanc:svy Leagues. 


Different moti- 
ons depending on 
the fluftuation of 
the $982, 


6 


* Greco , which 
the Latune Tran» 
{lator according to 
his utual carcl:tlte 
netle (tocall it no 
worle ) trav{lates 
Coram Verium , 
the Nonthuwelt 
Wind, for Ventum 
Libanotum. | 

T wo mutations 
made in the Tele- 
ſcope, depending on 
the agitation of the 
Ship. 

* This is a Caſtle 
fix Italian nules 
f om Venice 
Northwards, 

» Unnerod ug - 
»4 , the Llack or 
paring of a vail. 


G. Gatti. «us, bs Syfeme. 


Sa Gr I may thenzit ſeems, tor once p.ove a Maſter to you both 
And becaule the proceeding by interrogatories doth in my opinion 
much dilucidate things, belides rhe pleature which it affords of con- 
founding our companion,forcing from him that which he thought he 
knew not,l will make uſe of that artifice. And firſt,I ſuppoſe that the 
Ship,Cally,or other Veſle}, which we would diſcover, is a great wa 
off, that is, four, ſix, ten, or twenty * miles, for that to kenne thoſ« 
neer at hand there is no need of thete Glafles : & conſequently, the 
Teleſcope may at ſuch a giſtance of tour or ſix miles conveniently 
diſcover the whole Veſle], & a muchgreater bulk. Now I demand 
what for ſpecies, & how many for number are the motions that are 
made upori the round top,depending on the fluctuation of the Ship. 

S atv. We will ſuppole that the Ship goeth towards the Faſt. 
Firſt, in a calme Sea, it would have no other motion than 
this of ' progreſſion , but adding the undulation of the Waves, 
there ſhall reſult thence one, which alternately hoy ſting and low- 
cring the poop and prow, maketh the round top, to lean forwards 
and backwards ; other waves driving the veſſel lidewayes, bow the 
Maſt to the Starboard and Larboard ; others, may bring the ſhip 
ſomewhat abovt, and bear her away by the Miſne from Eaſt, one 
while towards the * Northeaſt, another while toward the South- 
caſt ; others bearing her up by the Carine may make her onely to 
riſe, and fall; and in ſum, theſe motions are for ſpecies two, one 
that changeth the direQon of the Teleſcope angularly, the other 
lineally, without changing angle, that is, alwayes keeping the 
tube of the Inſtrument parallel to its ſelf. 

SaGs. Tell me, inthe next place, if we, having firſt direed 
the Teleſcope yonder away towards the Tower of * Burano, ſix 
miles from hence, do turn it angularly to the right hand, or tothe 
left, or elſe upwards or downwards, but a*ſtraws breadth, what ef- 
te&t ſhall it have upon us touching the finding our of the ſaid tower? 

SaLv. It would make us immediately lole ſight of it, for ſuch 
a declination , though ſmall here , may import there hundreds and 
rhouſands of yards. | 

Sacn. Burif without changing the angle , keeping the tube 
alwayes parallel to it ſelf, we ſhould transfer it ten or twelve 
yards farther off to the right or left hand , upwards or downwards, 
what alteration would it make as to the Tower ? 

Sa Lv. The change would be ablolutely undiſcernable ; for 
that the ſpaces here and there being contained between parallel 
rayes, the mutations made here and there, ought to be equal, and 
becauſe the {pace which the Inſtrument diſcovers yonder, is caps- 
ble of many of thoſe Towers; therefore we ſhall not loſe ſight of it. 


Sack. Returning now to the Ship, we may undoubtedly at- 
firm, that the Teleſcope moving to the right or left, upwards, or 


down- 


Drartocue, IT, 


Yoynwards, and allo towards or backw ards tea or tifteen fathom; 
kecpiny it all che while paraile] ro 1ts (cit, rhe vitive ray caunot 
ſtray from the point oblerved 1n the objec, more than thole tit. 
cen tathom 3 and becaule ina diſtance of cight or ten miles, the 
Inſtrument takes 11 4 much greater {pace than the Gally or other 
Vetl:i kenad 3 therefore thar (mall mutation ſhall not make m- 
Jole tight of her. The impediment there torc, and the caule of 
loling the object cannot betall us, unlefle upon the mutation made 
angulacly : ; lince that Teleſcopes tran{por tation higher or lower, to 
the 11zht, or to the lefr, by the agitarion of rhe ſhip, cannot 1mport 
any vrcat number of fathomes. Now ſuppoſe that you had two 
[elejcopes fixed, one at the Partners clole by the Deck, and the 0 
ther ar the round top, nay at the main top, or main top-gallant 
rop, where you hang r forth the Pennon or ſtreamer, and that the 
be both dircced to the Veſlel that is ten miles oft, tell mc, whe- 
ther you believe that any agitation of the ſhip,& 1 taclination ot the 
Maſt, can make greater changes,as to the angle,in the higher tube, 
than in the lower ? One wave ailing, the prow witli make the main 
cop give back fifteen or twenty fathom mote thau the foot ot the 
Maſt,and it ſhall carry the upper tube aloug with it fo greata ipacc, 
& the lower it may be not a palm; but the aayle ſhail Change in one 
Inſtrument alwell as in the other ; and likewite a tide-billow ſhall 
bear the tugher tube an hundred times as far ro the Larboard or 
Starboard, as it will the other below ; bur the angles change not at 
all, or clle alter both alike. Bur the mutation to the right hand or 
Ictt, forwards or backwards, upwards or downwards, briugeth no 
lenlible impediment | in the kenning of objects remote, though the 
alceration of the angle maketh greax change therein ; Therefore it 
muſt of neceſlity be confe(l: -d, that the ule of the Teleſcope on the 
round top 15 No more difthcult ha upon the Deck at the Partners ; 
ſecing that the angular mutations are alike in both places. 

S a . v. How much circumipeCtion is there to be uſed in affirming 
or denying a propoſition? | lay again,thar hearing it reſolutely affir- 
med, that there 13 a greater motion made on the Mats top, than at 
Its partners, every one will perlwade himfelt, that the uſe of the Te- 
l?{cope is much more difficult above than below. And thus allo I w 
I excute thole Philolophers, who grow impatient and fly out into 
pailion againſt ſuch as will not grant them, that that Cannon bullet 
which they cleerly lce to fall ina right line perpendicularly, doth 
ablolurely move in that manner 3 but will have its motion to be by 
an arch, and allo very much inclined and tranſverſal : but let us 
leave them in theſe labyrinths,and let us hear the other objections; 

that our Author in hand brings againſt Copernicys. 

diny, The Author goeth on to demonſtrate that in the Do- 
Ctrine of Copernicus, it 13 requiſite to deny the Senles , and the 


Ff{ 2 oreateſt 


2.25 


I be annual 11s 
tin if ihe ſth 
Ru e448 4: per- 
Frt<n a 4 ferong 


WINE. 


T he air alwayes 
touching PT, wit!) 
L. : 
the ſame part of ut 


| 


Cannot make 1m 
| feel it, 
[ 
Y\ 
1 
1 
"1 
\f 
= 
y F 
: | ig 7 
Y I He that will f- i* 
, \Þ {i w Covrcr: eliSg 
'y1 muil deny bis ſore 
'T; 
1 ſes, 


G. Gartir*us, his Syn. 


vicateſt Senſations, as for inſtance 1t would be, it we that feel the 
reſpirations of a gentle gale, ſhould not tce] the impullc of a per- 
petual winde that beateth upon us with a velocity that runs more 
than 2529 miles an hour, tor fo much 1s the {pace that the centre 
of the Earth in its annual morion pafleth 1n an hour upon the cir. 
cumference of the giand Orb, as he diligently calculates; ang 
becauſc, as he ſaith, by the judgment of Copernicus, Cum terr., 
movetur Circumpoſitus aer, motus tamen ejus, velocior licet gc xy. 
prdior celerrimo quocunque vento, a noÞ1s non ſentiretur, ſed ſum. 
ma tum tranquilitas reput aretur, niſt alius motus accederet. (0 yid 
eſt vero decips ſenſum, miſt hc eſſet deceptio ? [Which I make to 
ſpeak to this ſenſe.) The circumpoſcd air 15 moved with the Earth, 
yct its motion, although more ipeedy and rapid than the ſwifteſt 
wind whatſocver, would not be perceived by us, but then would 
be thought a great rranquillity) unleſle ſome other motion ſhould 
happen ; what then is "the deception of the ienle , if this be 
not e 

Sar v. It muſt needs be that this Philoſopher thinketh, that 
that Earth which Copernicus maketh to turn round, together with 
the ambient air along the circumference of the greatOrb\is notrhat 
whereon we inhabit,but ſome other leparated from this; for that this 
of ours carrieth us allo along with it with the ſame velocity, as al- 
{o the circumyacent air : And what beating of the air can we fee], 
when we fly vvith cqual ({pecd trom that vvhich ſhould accoſt us? 
This Gentleman torgot, that vve no leſs than the Earth and air are 
carricd about, and that conſequently vve are alvvays touch'd by 
one and the ſame part of the air, vvhich yer doth not make ys feel 
It - 

S1me. But Irather think that he did not ſo think ; hear the 
vvords vyhich immediately follovy. Preterea nos quoque rotamur 
ex circumduCtione terre Oc. 

S a 1 v. Now I can no longer help nor excuſe him; do you 
plead for him and bring him off, Simplicins. 

S ine. I cannot thus upon the ſudden think of an excuſe that 
pleaſcth me. 

Sa1v. Co to; take this whole night to think on it, and de- 
fend him to morrow ; in the mean time let us hear ſome other of 
11s objections. 

Sine. He proſecuteth the fame ObjeQion, ſhewing, that in the 
way of Copernic#s, a man muſt deny his own ſenſes. For that 
this principle whereby we turn round with the Earth, either 1s 
intrinlick ro us, or external 3 that 15, a rapture of that Earth; and 
if it be this lecond, we not tceling any ſuch rapture, it mult be 
contetſed rhar the ſenſe of feeling, doth not feel its own objedt 


touching 1t, nor 1ts impreſſion on the ſenſible part : but if the prin- 


ciple 


Drartocus. II. 


plc be 11trinecal, We all rot perceive a Toca] motion that 15 de- 
id rom our ſelves, and we ſhall never dilcover a propention per- 
perualy annexed to Ou! {elves. EAR oa, | | 

$4 1. v. Sothat the inſtance of this Plulolopher lays its ſtrct% up- 

0: this, that whether the prtaciple by which we move round with 
che Earth be either extern, or intern, yet however we muſt PCr- 
ccive it, and not Penceving 1t, it 15 neither the one nor the other, 
id thereto: © we move not, nor conlequently the Earth. Now 1 
lay, that 1t Way be both ways, and yet we not perceive the fame. 
And that it may be external ,the experiment of the boat ſupera- 
bundantly fatishieth me 3 I lay, {uperabundantly,gbecaule it being 
in our power at all times to make ic move, and allo to make it 
ſtaid ſti]l, and with great exactnels to make oblervation, whether 
by (ome diverſity that may be comprehended by the tenſe of frel- 
tg, WC Can COME tO know whether it moveth or no, lecing that 
as CT ne (uch {cience 15 obtained : Will it then be any maccer of 
wonder, it the {ame accident 15 unknown to us on the Earth, the 
which may have carried us about perpetually, and we, without our 
being ever able to experiment irs reſt ? You, Simplicizs, as 1 be- 
lieve, have gone by boat many times to Padoxa, and if you will 
confe(s the truth, you never felt in your felt the participation of 
that motion, unlels when the boat running a-ground, or encoun- 
tring lome obſtacle, did ſtop, and that you with the other Paſlen- 
gers being taken on a ſudden, were with danger over-lct. Ir 
would be necellary that the Terrcitrial Globe ſhould mect with 
ſoine rub that might arreſt it, for I aſture you, that then you 
would diicern the unpulle reſiding in you, when it ſhould tols you 
up towards the Stars. It's true, that by the other lenſes, but yet 
aſſiſted by Realon, you may perceive the motion of the boat, that 
is, with the fight, in that you lee the trees and buildings placed on 
the ſhoar, whici being ſeparated from the boat, ſeem ro move the 
contrary way. Bur it you would by ſuch an experiment receive 
intire ſatisfaction in this buſineſs of the Terreſtrial motion, look 
on the ſtars, which upon this reaton ſeem ro move the contrary 
way. As to the wondering that we ſhould not feel fuch a prin- 
ciple, (uppoling it to be inrernal, 1s a lels realonable conceit; for 
it we do not fcel ſuch a one, that cometh to us from withour; 
and that frequently gocth away, with what reaſon can we expect 
to feel it, if it immutably and continually reſides in us? Now let 
us fee what you have farther to allege on this argument. 

Simr. Take this ſhort exclamation. Ex hac itaque opinion: 
neceſſe ct diſſidere noſtris ſenſibus, ut penitus fallacibus vel ſtupiclis 
in ſenſil;bus, ettam conjunCliſſimis, dijudicandis. Quam ergo ve- 
ritatem Norare polſumns a facaltate adeo fallaci ortum trabentem ? 
[Which 1 render thus:] From this opinion likewiſe, we muſt of 


neceſlity 


Oy J * J.1YV 
[ P 
COCUf BF Bfet CO OP 
EVITE R', 434913 Pe 
Wwe 3 PCISELIE 
( 


T he 1 IST. of 4 
Bott gnſer Tbl* [0 
tho{e that are wat» 
1” fr. ar 73 the ſenſe 


of feel. 


The boats moti- 
0718 Perceprtivie to 
the fiebs joyn'd 
wit” reaſon, 

The terreſtrial 
Uor19% C:lefted 
from thy (ters, 


_—# 


L&D 


—- ed 
"by 


Arcurents a«+ 
tf tte Earth's 
101 tak-m, OX 
13 3 acuras 


Ti yeP Ax ioOMy 
4 { j 
# /» * a 
| E FE ſunpoſed 
r1omfe/F, 


CG. Gartitf&us, his Syirme. 


neceility ſuſpeA our own lentes, as waoily taittble, or ſtupid jn 
judging of {calible things even VEry NEAT At hand. What truth 
therefore can we hope for, to be deityed tiom lo decciveable a f4- 
culty ? 

Sv. But I delice not to deduce p:recepes more profitable, os 
more ccitain, learning ro be inoce ciucumip.cc and Icls confident 
about that which at tft bluſh is repreienced to us hy the lenles, 
which may ecalily deceive us. And 1 would not have this Author 
crouble himlclf in attremping ro make us comprehend by ſenſe, 
that this motion of d-icending Graves 15 {Iimply right, and of 
no other kind 3 gor let him exclaim that a thing {o clear, manifeſt, 
and obvious ſhould be brought in queſtion; tor in fo doing, he 
maketh others believe , that he thinketh chole that deny that mo. 
tion to be ablotutcly ſtreight, bur rather circular, the ſtone did 
ſentibly (ee it to move in an arch, lecing that he 1aviecth their lenſes 
more than their Realon, to judy of that effe&t : which 1s not true, 
Simplicis, for like as |, that am indifferent 10 all thele opini- 
ons, and oncly in the manner of a Comedian, perionate Copern- 
cus 1n thele our repreſentations, have never teen, nor thought 
that | have lecn that ſtone fall otherwile than perpendicularly, 
lo I believe, that to the eyes of all others it tcemed to do the 
ſame. Better it 1s therefore, that depoling that appearance in 
which all agree, we make ule of our Realon, cirher to confirm the 
reality of char, or to ditcover its fallacy. 

SaGk. If | could any time meet with this Philoſopher, who 
yet me thinks 13 more lublime than the reſt of the tollowers ot 
the lame dottiines, | would in token of my affection put him in 
mind of an accident which he hath doubtleſs very often beheld; 
trom which, with great conformity to that which we now diſcourſe 
ot, it may be colle&ed how calily one may be deceived by the bare 
appcarance, or, if you will, repreſentation of the ſenſe. And the 
accident is, the Moons leemivg to follow thole that walk the ſtreets 
in the night, with a pace cqual to theirs, whilſt they ſce it go glt- 
ding along the Roots of houſes, upon which it ſheweth uſt like a 
car, that really runniog along the ridges of houſes, leaveth them 
behind. An appearance that, did not reaſon interpoſe, would but 
too maniteſtly delude the {ight. 

Sim v. Indeed there want nor experiments that render us Cer- 
tain of the fallacy of the meer ſenles ; therctore ſuſpending ſuch 
ſen{ations for the preſent, let us hear the Arguments that tollow 
which are taken, as he ſaith, ex rerum natura. The fiſt of which 
is, that the Earth cannot of its own nature move with three Mott 
ons very different; or otherwiſe we muſt deny many maniteſt 
Axiom. The tirſt whereof is, that Omnis eff:Stus depAdeal ab 
aliqua cauſa; [ i.e.) that every cffe& dependeth on lome —_ 

c 


Drarocus IT, 
The ſecond, that Nulla res ſeipſam producat ; [ 7. e.] that nothing 


-oduceth it ſelf : from whence ir follows, that it is not poſji- 
ble chat the mover and moved ſhould be corally the ſame thing : 
And this is maniteſt, not onely in things that are moved by an cx- 
crinſick mover 3 but it 1s gathered allo from the principlcs pro- 
pounded, that the ſame holdeth true in the natural motion depen- 
Jent on an igtrinfick principle ; otherwile, being that the mover, 
4s 2 mover, is the caule, and the thing moved, as moved, is the 
effc& , the ſame thing would totally be both the cauſc and effect. 
Therefore a bady doch not move its whole lelt, thatis, fo as 
that all moveth , and all is moved; burits neceſſary in the thing 
moved to diſtinguiſh in ſome manner the efficient principle of the 


motion , and that which with that motion is moved. The third 


Axiom is, that in rebus que ſenſui ſubjicruntur , unum, quatenus 
unum, unam ſolam rem producat; i.e. Thatin things ſubje& to 
the ſenſes , one, as it 15 one, produceth but oncly one thing : That 
iz, the ſoul in animals produceth its true divers operations , as the 
ſight, the hearing, the {mel}, generation, @c. but all thele wich 
ſeveral inſtruments. And in ſhort, in things ſenſible, the diverſi- 
ry of operations , is obſerved to derive it ſelf from the diverſity 
chat is in the cauſe. Now if we put all thele Axioms together, it 
will be a thing very manifeſt, that pne ſimple body , as is the 
Earth , cannot of its own nature move at the {ame time with 
three motions, very divers : For by the foregoing ſuppolitions, 
all moveth not its ſclf all ; ir is neceſſary therefore to diſtinguiſh 
in it three principles of its three motions ; otherwiſe one and the 
ſame principle would produce many motions ; bur if it contein in 
it three principles of natural motions , beſides the part moved, it 
ſhall not be a ſimple body , but compounded of three principle 
movers, and of the part moved. If therefore the Earth be a ſim- 
ple body , it ſhall nor move with three motions ; nay more, it will 
not move with any of thoſe which Copernics aſcribeth to it, it 
being to move but with one alone, for that it is manifeſt , by the 
reaſons of Ariſtotle, that it moveth to its centre , as its parts do 
ſhew , which deſcend at right angles ro the Earths Spherical 
Surface. 

Sarv. Many things might be ſaid, and conſidered touching 
the conneQtion of this argument; but in regard that we can re- 
lolve it in few words, I will not at this time without need inlarge 
upon it; and lo much the rathtr, becauſe the ſame Author hath 
furniſhed me with an anſwer, when he ſaith that from one fole prin- 
ple in animals , there are produced divers operations; ſo that for 
the preſent my an{wer ſhall be, that in the ſame manner the Earth 
from one onely principle deriveth ſeveral operations. 


S1me. But this an{wer will not at all ſatisfie the Author who 
makes 


A ſimple body 
as the Earth, can 
not move with 
three ſeveral moti- 
"LIP 


The Earth cane 
not move with any 
of the motions aſſi- 
gned it by Coperni- 
Cus, 


Anſwer; to the 
AYgHmMeNts Contra 
ry to the Earths 
motion, taken cx 
rerum nacura. 


2.72 


A fourth 1A x* 
forme againſt the 
motion of th:Earth 


Flexures neceſ- 
ſary in animals for 
the diverſity of 


their moriony, 


eA nother aron- 
ment apainft the 
three fold motion of 
the Earth, 


The Flexures in 
animals aye mt 
11gde for the dis 
verſity of MOoricns. 

The morions of 
animals gre of one 
ſort. 

The ends cf the 
tones are all ro- 
twnd, 


[t ts demonſtr a- 
ted, that the ends 
of tie bones are of 
neceſſity ta be 1o- 
tund. 


G. Garitzus, hs Syſleme. 


makes the objection, yea, it 1s totally overthrown by that which 
immediately after he adderh for « greater confirmation of his argu- 
ment, as you ſhall hear. He re-inforceth his argument, ] lay, with 
another Axiome, which is this; That natura in rebas neceſſaris 
nec deficiat, nec abundat : 1.e. That nature 1n things neceſſary , 
neither defe&ive, nor ſuperfluous. This is obvious to the obſer. 
vers of natural things, and chiefly of animals, in which, becauſe 
they are to move with many motions, Nature hath made man 
Acxures, and hath thereunto commodiouſly knitted the parts for 
motion , as to the knees, to the hips, tor the inabling of living 
I LIPE3 tO go, and run at their plealure. Moreover in man he 
hath framed many flexions, and joynts, in the elbow, and hand, to 
enable them to perform many motions. From theſe things the ar- 
gument 15 taken againſt the threefold. motion of the Earth. [ Ei- 
ther the Body, that is one, and continuate, without any manner 0 
knittings or flexions, can exerciſe divers motions, or cannot : IF it 
can without them, then in vain bath nature framed the flexures in 
animals ; which 1s contrary to the Axiome : but if it cannot with- 
out them, then the Earth, one body, and continuate, and deprived 
flexures, and joyms, cannot of its own nature move with plurali- 
ty of motions. You lee now how craftily he falls upon your an- 
(wer, as if he had foreſeen it, 

Sar v: Are you ferious, or do you jeſt ? , 

S1my, I {peak it with the beſt judgment I have. 

Sarv. You muſt therefore ſee that you have as fortunate an 
hand in defending the reply of this Philoſopher, againſt ſome 0- 
ther rejzoynders made to him; - therefore anſwer for him, I pray 
you, ſeeing we cannot have him here. You firſt admit it for true, 
that Nature hath made the yoynts, flexures, and knuckles of li- 
ving creatures, to the intent-that they might move with ſnndr 
and divers motions; and I deny this propoſition ; and ſay, that 
theſe flexions are made, that the animal may move one, or more 
of its parts, the reſt remaining immoved : and I ſay, that as to the 
ſpecies and difterences of motions thoſe are of one kind alone, to 
wit, all circular, and for this cauſe you ſee all the ends of the mo- 
veable bones to be convex or concave, and of theſe ſome are ſphe- 
rical, as are thoſe that are to move every way, as in the ſhoulder- 
zoynt, the arme of the Enſigne doth, in diſplay ing the Colours, 
and that of the Falconer in bringing his Hawk to the lure ; and 
luch is the flexure of the elbow, upon which the hand turns round, 
in boring with an augure : others are circular onely one way, and 
as it were cylindrical, which ſerve for the members that bend one- 
ly 1n one faſhion, as the joynts of the fingers one above another, 
&c, But without more particular inductions, one only general dil- 
courſe may make this truth underſtood ; and this is, that of a ſolid 


body 


Driarocus. II. 


body that moveth, one of its extreams ſtanding ſtill without chan- 
ching place, the morion mulſt needs be circular, and no other : and 
becaulc 18 the living creatures moving, one of its members doth 
not {eparate from the other its conterminal, therefore that motion 
:- of nece{lity circular. ; 

Sine. How can this be? For I tce the animal move with an 
hundred motions that are not circular, and very different from one 
another, as tO run, to skip, to clumbe, to deſcend, to (wim, and 
many others. 

Salv. Tis well : but theſe are ſecondary motions, depending 
on the preceding motions of the yoynts and flexures. Upon the 
plying of the legs to the knees, and the thighs to the hips, which 
are circular motions of the parts, is produced, as conlequents, the 
kip, or running, which are motions of the whole body, and theſe 
may poſlibly not be circular. Now becaule one part of the ter- 
reſtrial Globe 1s not required to move upon another part inmove- 
able, but that the motion is to be of the whole body, there is no 
need in it of flexures. 

$1me. This (will the aduerſary rezoyn ) might be, if the moti- 
on were but one alone, but they being three, and thole very dif- 
ferent from each other, it 15 not poſſible that they ſhould concur in 
an * articulate body. 

Sarv. Lverily believe that this would be the anſwer of the 
Philoſopher. Againſt which I make oppoſition another way ; and 
azk you, whether you think that by way of joynts and flexures one 
may adapt the terreſtrial Globe to the participarion of three diffe- 
rent circular motions? Do you' not anſwer me? Seeing you are 
{peechleſle, I will undertake to anſwer for the Philoſopher , who 
would abſolutely reply that they might ; for that otherwiſe it 
would bave been ſuperfluous, and beſides the purpole to bave pro+ 
poled to conſideration, that nature maketh the flexions;'to the 
end, the moveable may move with differedt motions; and that 
therefore the terreſtrial Globe having no flexures, it cannot have 
thoſe three motions. which are aſcribed to it. For if he had 
thought, that neither by help of flexures, it could be rendered apt 
for (uch motions, he would have freely affirmed, that the Globe 
could not move with three motions. Now granting this, I intreat 
you , and by you, if it were poſſible, that Philoſopher , Au- 
thor of the Argument , to be ſo courteous as to teach me in what 
manner thoſe flexures ſhould be accommodated , fo that thoſe 
three motions might commodiouſly be excerciſed ; and I grant you 
tour or (ix moneths time to think of an anſwer. As to me, it ſeem- 
eth that one principle onely may cauſe a plurality of motions in 

the Terreſtrial Globe » Juſt in the ſame manner that, as told you 
tore, one; onely principle with the help of various inſtruments 
G eg pro» 


« 


33 


The motiors of 
animals arc all 
cirtulay, 


Secondary moti- 
ons of aimmuals de- 


rerd:mt on the firſt 


The Terreltriall 
Glove harh noe 


need o f flexuret, 


* Without joynts 


It s deſired to 
krow, by means of 
what flexures and 
Joynts the Terre- 
{trial Globe mip he 
move with thre 
diverſe motions. 


One only princi- 
ple may cauſe a 
plurality of mot:- 
ns in the Earth, 


- ». 


2.34 


\\. eA profſe error 
0 of the oppoſer of 


Copernicus, 


i De ” 


$114 
' . 
, 
| if 
id 1 4L 
at 
« R [" 
05, 
[ : 

| "WF. 4 ſubtil and 

\Þ withal ſimple ar - 

gument againſt 

| Copernicus. 


G. Gar 1rt xus, hi Syſieme. 


produceth ſundry and divers motions 1n living creatures. And 2s 
co the flexures there is no need of them , the motions being of the 
whole , and not of ſome particular parts; and becauſe they are 
to be circular , the meer ſpherical tigure is the moſt perfe& articy.. 
lation or flc&ion that can be defired. 

S1 My. The moſt thar ought to be granted upor. this, would be, 
that it may hold true in one fingle motion , but in three different 
motions, in my opinion , and that of the Author , it is impoſji- 
ble; as he going on » proſecuting the objeCGtion , writes in the fol- 
lowing words. Let us ſuppoſe, with Copernicus, that the Earth 
moveth of us own faculty , and upon an 1mrinſick principle from 
Weſt to aſt in the plane of the Ecliptick; and again, that it alſo 
by an intrinſick, principle revolveth about its centre, from Eaft to 
Weſt; and for a third motion , that it of its own inclination defle. 
Geth from North to South, and ſo back again. It being a conti- 
nuate body , and not knit together with joints and fle&ions, our 
fancy and our judgment will never be able to comprehend, that 
one and the ſame natural and indiſtin& principle , that is, that 
one and the {ame propenſion , ſhould acuate ir +t the ſame inſtant 
with different , and as it were of contrary mo ti0us. I cannot be- 
lieve that any one would lay ſuch a thing , unleſſe he had under- 
took to maintain this polition right or wrong. 

Sauv. Stay alittle; and find me out this place in the Book. 
Fingamus modo cum Copernico, terram aliqua ſua vi, &+ ab indit 
principio impelli ab Occaſu ad Ortum in Ecliptice plano ; tum rr 
ſus revolvi ab indito ctiam principio , circa ſuimet centrum , ah 
Ortu in Occaſum;, tertio defle&ii 'rurſus ſuopte nutu a ſepten. 
trione in Auſtrum |, @+ wviciſſm. 1 had thought, Simplicins, 
that you might have erred in reciting the words of the Au- 
thor , but now 1 ice that he , and that very groflely , decei- 
veth himſelf; and to my grief, I tind that he hath ſet himſelf to 
oppolec a poſition , which he hath not well underſtood ; for theſe 
are not the motions which Copernicus aſſignes to the Earth. 
W here doth he find that Copernicus maketh the annual motion 
by the Ecliptick contrary to the motion abour its own centre ? It 
muſt needs be that he never read his Book , which in an hundred 
places, and inthe very firſt Chapters affirmeth thoſe motions to 
be both towards. the ſame parts, that is from Weſt to Eaſt. 
But without others telling him , ought he nor of himſelf to com- 
prehend , that attriburing to the Earth the motions that are ta 
ken, one of them from the Sun , and the other from the pre- 
mum mobile , they muſt of neceſſity both move one and the ſame 
way. 

S1mp. Take heed that you do not erre your ſelf, and Copern: 
cus alio. The Diurnal motion of the promum mobile, is it not _ 


1D ratocues I |. 


Eaſt co Veſt ? And the annua! motion of the Sun through thi 
Ecliptick > 151t nor on the contrary trom Welt to Eaſt ? How 
thn can you make thele motior's being conterred on the Earth, of 
contraries to become conliſtenrs ? 

S. gs. Certainly, Simplicins hath diicovered to us the orivinal 
cauſe of error of this Philoſopher ; and 1a all probabilicy hc 
would have laid the very lame. 

S:1yv. Now tf 1t be in our power, Jet us at leaſt recover 
Simpliceits trom this errour > who tccing the Stars in their r1{1ng 
ro appear above the Oriental Horizon , will make it no ditticulr 
thing ro underſtand , that im cate that motion ſhould not belony 
co the Stars , it would be necctlary ro confefle, that the Horizon, 
with a coatrary morion would go down ; and that conlequently 
the Earth would reoolve in it ſelf a contrary way to that where- 
with the Stars leem to move , thar 13 from Welt ro Eaſt , which 


15 according to the order of the Signes of the Zodiack. As, inthe” , 


next place . to the other motion , the Sun being tixcd in the coen- 
tre of the Zodiack , and the Earth movcablec about its circumte- 
reace , to make the Sun ſeem unto us to move about the laid Zo- 
diack , according to the order of the Signes , it is necetlary , that 
the E arth move according to the {ame order, to the end thar the 
Sun may icem to us to pollefſe alwayes that degree in the Zodiack, 
that is oppoſite to the degree in which we find the Earth ; and thus 
the Earth running » verb? gratia, through Aries , the Sun will 
appcar to run thorow Libra; and the Earth paſling thorow the 
tine Tarrys , the Sun will paile thorow Scorpio, and lo the 
Earth going thorow Gemini , the Sun leemeth to go thorow $4a- 
atttarius; but this is moving both che lame way , that is accord- 
ing to the order of the fignes 3 as allo was the revolution of the, 
Earth about its own centre. _ 

Simpy. L underſtand ygu very well , and know not what to al- 
ledge 1n excuſe of {o groffe an error. 

SaLv. And yer, Simplicius,there is one yet worle then this; and 
ti, that he makes the Earth move by the diurna] motion abour 
nw own centre from Eaſt to Weſt ; and perceives nor that it this 
were (0, the motion of twenty four hours appropriated by him 
to the Univerle , would, in our {ceming, proceed from Welt to 
Eaſt; the quire contrary to that which we behold. 

Sine, Oh ſtrange! Why 1, that have icarce {cen the firſt 
clements of the Sphere , would not, I am contident, have erred 
lo horribly. "2 

dalv. Judg now what pains this Antagonift may be thought 
tO have taken in the Books of Copernicnus , it he ablolutely invert 
the (enle of this grand and piincipal Hyporheſis, upon which is 
tOunded the whole ſumme of thoſe things wherein Copernicus 
0-479 diſſenterh 


Py ant, er Yr, 
error 1! 15 ſeen th. 
the Antagomſt had 
but liutcle [tug ed 


Comernicus, 


235 


It u autſiton''!, 


wither the «5; 9+ 
ment uxderſtood 

the third morn 
all: oned to the 
Earth by Coperni- 


CU, 


The ſame aro 
ment anſwered by 
examples of the 
like motions in 0- 


ther celeſtial bo- 


dies. 


2 


G. Gatir*us, his Sylkmo. 


difenteth from the dotine of Ariſtotle and Prolomy. A; again, 
to this third movion, which the Author afiignes to the Terreſtrial 
Globe, as the judgment of Coperncus, I know not which he would 
mean thereby : it 15 not that queſtionletie, which Copernicys af. 
cribes unto it conjunEly with the other two, annual and diurnal, 
which hath nothing to do with declining towards the South and 
North ; but onely ferveth to ke. p the ax1s of the diurnal revoluti- 
on continually parallel to ic iclt 3 to that ir mult be confeſt, that 
either the Authour did nor uaderſtand tins, or that clfc he diflem. 
bled it, Bur although this great miſtake \ufticerh to free us from 
any obligation of a tacther enquiry into his objections; yet ne- 
verthcletlc | ſhall have them 10 eſteem ; as 1adeed they deſerve to 
be valued much betore the many others of impertinent Antaoo- 
niſts. Returning therefore to his objection, | lay, that the two 
motions, annual aud diurnal, are not in the lealt COntrary,-nay are 


' towards the ſame way, and therefore may depend on one and the 


ſame principle. The third 1s of it ie]t,and voluntarily io conſequen- 
tial ro the annual, that we need nor trouble our {elves ( as I ſhall 
ſhew in its place) to ſtudy for principles cither internal or external, 
from which, as from its caule, to make it produced. 

SaGk. I ſhall allo, as being induced thereto by natural reaſon, 
lay ſomething to this Antagoniſt. He will condemn Copernicus, 
unleſle i be able ro an{wer him to all objections, and to fatizhe 
him in all queſtions he ſhall ask; as if my ignorance were a neceſ- 
ſary argument of the talſhood of his Do&rine. But if this way of 
condemning Writers be in his judgment legal, he ought not to 
think it unrealonable, if I ſhould noc approve of Ariſtotle and Ptc- 
lomy, when he cannot reſolve, better than my felt, choſe doubt; 
which I propound to him, touching their Dofrine. He asketh me, 
what are the principles by which the Ferreſtrial Globe is moved 
with the Annual motion through the Zgdiack, and with the Dyur- 
nal through the Equinoctial about its own axis. I anſwer, that 
they ate like to thoſe by which Saturn is moved about the Zodi- 
ack in thirty years, and about its own centre in a much ſhorter 
time along the Equinottal, as the collateral apparition and oc- 
cultation af its Globes doth evince. They are principles like to 
thoſe, whereby he {crupleth nor to grant, that the Sun runneth tho- 
row the Ecliptick in a year, and revolveth about its own centre 
parallel to the EquinoCtial in lefſe than a moneth, as its ſpots doth 
lenlibly demonſtrate. They are things like to thoſe whereby the 
Medicean Stars run through the Zodiack in twelve years, and 
all the while revolve in ſmall circles, and ſhort periods of time ar 
bout Jupiter. 

S1my. This Author will deny all theſe things, as deluſions of 
the ſight, cauſed by the cryſtals of the Teleſcope. 


SC a GRo 


DiarLocue. IT. 


$a Ge. But this would be to draw a further inconvenience up- 
90, himſelf, io that he holdeth, that the bare cyec cannot be decei- 
ved in judging of the right motion of delcending graves, and yet 
holds that it 1s deceived in beholding thele other motions at ſuch 
time as its vilive vertue 1s perfcCted, and augmented to thirty times 
35 much as it was before. We tell him therefore, that the Earth in 
like manner partaketh of the plurality of motions : and it is per- 
haps che lame, whereby the Loadſtone hath its motion down- 
wards, as grave, and two circular motions, one Horizontal, ard the 
other Verrical under the Meridian. Burt whar more ; tell me, Sim- 
plicins, berween which do you think this A:1thor would put a 
greater difference, rwixt right and circular motion, or 'twixt moti- 
on and reſt ? 

S nr. 'Twixt motion and reſt, certainly. And this is mani- 
fcſt, tor that circular motion 15 not contrary to the right, according 
to Ariftotle , nay, bh: grantech that they may mix with each 0- 
ther ; which it is impoſlible for motion and reſt to do. 

Sa Gr. Therefore its a propolition lefle improbable to place 

in one natural body two internal principles, one ro right motion, 
and the other to circular, than two tuch interne principles one to 
motion, and the other to reſt. Now both theſe poſitions agree to 
the natural inclination that reſideth in the parts of the Earth to re- 
turn to their whole, when by violence they are divided from it ; 
and they onely diſſent in the operation of the whole : for the lar- 
ter of them will have it by an 1interne principle to ſtand ſtill, and 
the former aſcribeth to it the circular motion. But by your con- 
ceſlion, and the confeſſion of this Philolopher, two principles, one 
tro motion, and the other to reſt, are incompatible together, like as 
their effes are incompatible : but now this evencs not in the two 
motions, right, and circular, which have no repugnance to each 
other. ? 
Sar v. Adde this more, that 1n all probability it may be that 
the motion, that the part of the Earth (cparated doth make whilſt 
it returneth towards its whole, 1s allo circular, as hath been alrea- 
dy declared ; fo that in all reſpe&ts, as far as concernes the preſent 
cale, Mobility ſeemeth more likely than Reſt. Now proceed, 
Simpliciys, to what remains. 

S1ny, The Authour backs his Argument with producing ano- 
ther abſurdity, that is, that the ſame motions agree to Natures ex- 
treamly different ; but experience ſheweth, that the operations 
and motions of different natures, are different ; and Reaſon con- 
hirmeth the ſame : for otherwiſe we ſhould have no way left to 
know and diſtinguiſh of oatures, if they ſhould not have their 
particular motions and operations, that might guide us to the 


knowledge of their ſubſtances. 


SACK, 


Aotion and reſt 
are more d:il ro 
852.149 rrght avoriod 
ard Circul ay. 


One may more 
rationally aſcrile 
ro the Earth two 
maternal principles 
to the yiphe, and 
circular motion 
thantw) to motion 


and reſt. 


The motion of 
the parts of the 
Earth returning to 


their whole may be 
circular. 


The drverſity of 
motions helpeth us 
in knowing the di- 
verſity of natures. 


2.25 


G. Gar1i#ns, bi Syſene. 


Sacks. | have twice or thrice oblerved in the dilcourſes of thi; 
Authour, that to Prove that % ehing I» lO, ony iO, ic {til alledgeth, 
that in that manner it 15 conformable with our underſtanding - Or 
that otherwile we ſhould never be able to conceive of it ; or thar 


| the Criterium of Philolophy wouid be overthrown. As if that na. 
Wee ff turc had firſt made mens brains, and then diſpoled all things in 

F 'F , ef (oC R - ” * . . @ . . 
549/27 COUOLMLY to the Capacity of their intellects. But I incline rather 


to think that Nature firſt made the rhinos themlielves, as ſhe beſt 


94 :1.5 $821.66 


Ky ETON inked, and afterwards framed the realon of men capable of con- 
of them. cciving (though not wi.hourt great pains) lome part of her (ce. 
Cicts. 


SAa1yv. I am of the {ame opinion. Bur tell me, Simplicius, 
which arc thele different natures, to which, Contrary to eXPe- 
1icence and realon, Copernicys aſlignes the lame motions and ope- 
rations. 

S1mv. They are thele. The Water, the Air, (which doubt- 
Icfle are Natures ditterent irom the Earth ) and all things that 
arc in _thole clemcnts comprited, ſhall cach of them have thoſ« 

three motions, which Copernicus Pretends to be in the Terreſtriall 
| ROT Teo Bs Globe ; and my Authour procecdeth to demonſtrate Geometri- 
yneouſly aſſiznerh CAlly, that, according to the Copernican Dottrine, a cloud that is 
the ſame opera:15%% {ulpended in the Air, and that hangeth a long time over our 
| 10 different natur:5 1, 1 &s without changing place, muſt of nccellity have all thoſe three 
| motions that belong ro the Terreſtrial Globe. The demonſin- 
| rion is this, which you may rcad your iclt, for 1 cannot repeat it 
+) without book. 

Sau v. I ſhall not ſtandreading of it, nay I think it an imper- 
tinency in him to have 1inlcrted it, tor 1 am czrtain, that no 
Copernican will deny the fame. Therctore admitting him what he 
would demonſtrate, let us lpeak to the objze&ion, which in my 
judgment hath no great ſtrength to conclude any thing contrary 


to the Copernican Hypotheſis, lecing that it derogartes nothing from 
» thole motions, and tholc operations, whereby we come to the 
il knowledge of the natures, &c. Anſwer me, I pray you, Simplict- 
"7 4s : Thole accidents wherein ſome things exactly concur , can 
'h 


they {erve to inform us of the different natures of thoſe things 


Siny. Noir : nay rather the contrary, for from the idendity 
aAccidecoits One C 4s F . | f x R . A h 
w: bow 40;rc,s ON Operations and of accidents nothing can be inferred, but an 


Frem commune 


| MAIN) C5, idcndity of natures. ; 
if Sa1v So that the difterent natures of the Water, Earth, Air, 
by and other things conteined 1n theſe Elements, is not by you argu- 


cd from thole operations, wherein all theſe Elements and their af- 
{1xes agree, but trom other operations ; is it ſo ? 

S1mp. The very ſame. 

SA rv. Sothathe who ſhould leave in the Elements all tholc 
| motions, 


Diatocus IT, 


Lotions, operations, and other accidents, by which clivir natures 
a diſtinguiſhed, would not deprive us of the power of coming 
0 the knowledge of them 3 although he ſhould remoye thole 0- 
perations, in which they uniredly COncur, and which tor that reaſon 
are of no uſe for the diſtinguiſhing of thole natures. 

Ste. I think yourditlertation to be very good. 

S x 1 v. But that the Earth, Water, Air, are of a nature equally 
conſtituted immoveable about the centre, 1s it not the opinion of 
vour ſelf, Ariſtotle, Prolomy, and all their (eCtators ? 

" S1nv. Its on all hands granted as an undeniable truth. 

Srv. Then from this common natural condition of quie(- 

cence about rhe centre, there is no argument drawn of the different 
natures of thele Elements, and things elementary , but that 
knowledge muſt be collefed from other qualities not common z 
and therefore wholo ſhould deprive the Elements of this common 
reſt only, and ſhould leave unto them all cheir other operations, 
would not in the leaſt block up the way that leadeth to the know- 
ledge of their eſſences. But Copernicus depriveth them onely of 
this common reſt, and changeth the {ame into a common motion, 
ſaving them gravity, levity, the motions upwards, downwards, 
ſlower, faſter, rarity, denſity, the qualities of hot, cold, dry, moiſt, 
and in a word, all things beſides. Therefore ſuch an ablurdity, as 
this Authour imagineth to himlclf, 15 no Copernzcaz poſition ; nor 
doth the concurrence in an identity of motion unport any more or 
leſs, than the concurrence in an identiry of reſt about the diverli- 
fying, or nor diverſifying of natures. Now tell us, if there be any 
argument to the contrary... 

S1my. There followeth a fourth objeGtion, taken from a natu- 
ral obſervation, which is, That bodies of the ſame kind, have mo- 
tons that agree in kinde, or elſe they agree in reſt. But by the Co- 
pernican Hypotheſis, bodies that agree in kinde, and are moſt ſem- 
blable to one another, would be wery diſcrepant, yea diametrically 
repugnant as to motion ; for that Stars ſo like to one another, would 
be nevertheleſſe ſo unlike in motion, as that fix Planets would perpe- 
tually turn round ; but the Sun and all the fixeed Stars would ſtand 
perpetually immowveable. | 

Saitv. The forme of the argument appeareth good ; but yet 
[ believe that the application or matter 1s defeQive: and if the 
Authour will bur perſiſt in his aſſumption, the conſequence ſhall 
make dire&ly againſt him. The Argument runs thus; Amongſt 
mundane bodies, ſix there are that do perpetually move, and they 
are the (ix Planers ; of the reſt, that is, of the Earth, Sun, and 
tixed Stars, it is diſputable which of them moveth, and which 
ſtands ſtill, ir being neceſſary, thar if the Earth ſtand till, the Sun 
and fixed Stars do move; and it being alſo poſſible, that the Sun 

and 


The CONCHYYENCE 
of the Elemers in 
4 Comm-n mon 
importe'h xo mor: 
or leſſe, th 19 their 
COLNCHYTemce 10 4 
comman reſt. 


A fourth. argu- 
ment againſt Co- 
pernicus. 

Boties of the 
ſam: hinde have 
motions that azrce 


in kinde. 


From the Earths 
#bſcurity, and the 
ſplendour of the 
Sun, and fixed 
Stars, ts arpued, 
that it ts moyea- 
bl:, axd they 115- 
moveable. 


———— . —_— * 


240 


A fifih argu- 
ment againſt Co- 
PCINICUS» 


»Anotl er diffe* 
rence between the 
Earth and th:Ca- 
leſtial bodies , ta» 
ken from purity &G 


impurity. 


G. Gartt=®us, his Syſtrme. 


and faxed Stars may ſtand immoveable, 1n cate the Earth ſhould 
move : the matter of fact in diſpute 1s, to which of them we may 
wirh moſt convenience alcribe motion, and to which reſt. Natura] 
reaſon diftates, that motion ought to be aſligned to the bodie; 

which in kind and efſence moſt agree with thoſe bodies which do 
ur-Joubtedly movezand reſt to thole which molt dillent from them: 
and in regard that an eternal reſt and perpetual motion are moſi 
different, it is manifeſt, that the nature of the body always moye. 
able ought to be moſt different from the body alwayes ſtable. 
Therefore, in regard that we are dubious of motion and reſt, 
let us enquire, whether by the help of tome other eminent affegz. 
on, we may diicover, which moſt agreeth with the bodies certain. 
ly moveable, either the Earth, or the Sun and fixed Stars. Bur (ce 
how Narure, in favour of our neceſſity and delire, preſents us 
with two eminent qualitics, and no lefs different than motion and 
reſt, and they are light and darknels, to wit, the being by nature 
moſt bright, and the being obſcure, and wholly deprived of light: 
the bodies therefore adorned with an internal and eternal {plen- 
dour, are moſt different in effence from thoſe deprived of light : 
The Earth is deprived of light, the Sun is moſt ſplendid ini (elf, 
and ſo are the fixed Stars. The {ix Planets do abſolutely 
want light , as the Earth; therefore their efſence agreeth with 
the Earth, and differeth from the Sun and fixed Stars. Thee 
fore 1s the Earth moveable, immoveable the Sunne and Starry 
Sphere. 

S1my. Butthe Authour will not grant, that the fix Planers are 
tenebrole, and by that negative will he abide. Or he will argue 
the great conformity of nature between the fix Planets, and the 
Sun, and Fixed Stars; and the diſparity between them and the 
Earth from other conditions than from tenebroſity and light; yea, 
now | remember in the fifth objeQtion, which followerh, the layerh 
down the vaſt difference between: the Earth and the Caoleſtial 
Bodies, in which he writeth, That the Copernican Hypotheſis 
would make great confuſion and perturbation in the Syſteme of the 
Univerſe, and amonght its parts : As for inſtance, amongſt Cew- 
bodies that are immutable and incorruptible, according to Arifts- 
tle, Tycho, and others; amongſt bodics, I ſay, of ſuch nobility, by 
the confeſlion of every one, and Copernicus himſelf, who aftirme 
them to be ordinate, and diſpoſed in a perfe& conſtitution, and 
removeth trom them all inconſtancy of yertue amongſt, rhete bo- 
dics, I ſay once more, fo pure,that is to ſay, amongſt Venxs, Mars, 
@Xc. to place the very ſink of all corruptible matters, to wit, the 
Earch, Water, Air, and all mixt bodies. 

But how much properer a diſtribution, and more with nature, 
yea with God himtelf, the ArchiteR, is it, to {ſequeſter the pure 


from 


Dizrtocns. IL 
tom the impure , the mortal from the immortal] , as other Schools 
ccach; which tell us that theſe impure and frail matters are con- 
:cincd within the anguſt concave of the Lunar Orb, above which 
ich uninterrupted Series the things Celeſtial diſtend themſelves. | 

Sarv. It's truce that the Copernican Syſteme introduceth di- Copernicus i" 
{ration in the univerie of AriStotle > but we ſpeak of our own png iu 
Univerſe, that is true and real. Again it this Author will infer Atiltotle. 
the diſparity of efſence between the Earth and Celeſtial bodies 
from the incorruptibility of them', and the corruptibility of- it in 
the merhod of Ariſtotle, from which diſparity he concludeth mo- 
tion to belong to the Sun and fixed Stars, and the immobility of 
the Earth , he will flacter bimtelf with a Paralogilme, ſuppoſing The Paralogiſme 

- that which is in queſtion ; for Ariftotle inferreth the incorruptibi- Ale” org of 
lity of Celeſtial bodies from motion , which is in diſpute , whe- , 5 Tt 
ther it belongeth to them or to the Earth. Of the vanity of theſe 
Rhetorical Iilations enough hath been ſpoken. And what can be 7: ſeemeth - 
more fond , than to'ſay , that the Earth and Elements are bani- pg =o Ae 
ſhed and (equeſtred from the Celeſtial Spheres , and confined ont che Heavens. 
within the Lunar Orb? Is, not then the Moons Orb one of the 
Celeſtial Spheres , and according to conſent compriſed in the 
middle of all the reſt? Its a new way to ſeparate the pure from 
the impure , and the ſick from the ſound , to afligne the infeted 
quarters in the heart of the City : I had rhought that the * Peſt- 
houſe ought to have been removed as far off as was poſlible. 
Copernicus admireth the diſpoſition of the parts of the Univerſe, 
for that God hath conſtitured the grand Lamp, which is to give 
light all over his Temple in the centre of it , and not on one 
ſide. And as to the Earths being betwixt Venxus. and Mars, 
we will but hint the ſame; and do you, in favour of this Aithor, 
trie to remove it thence. Bur let us not * mix theſe Rhetorical * Inrrecciare, rs 
Flowers with ſolid Demonſtrations z rather let us leave them to EEG _ _ 
the Orators , or if you will to the Poets , who know how in their * © 
drolling way to exalt by their prayſes things moſt ſordid , yea and ; 
lometimes moſt pernicious. And if any thing elſe remain, let us 
Gilpatch it, as we have done the reſt. 

Sip. There 1s the ſixth and laſt argument ; wherein he ma- LM prtb arge- 
keth ita very improbale thing. [ That a corruptible and diſſipable ** 4g«nmſt Co- 
body ſhould move with a perpetual and regular motion; and this x29. gas 
ve confirmeth with the example of living creatures, which moving have ned of reft; 
with a motion natural to them , yet grow weary, and have need of IRE wes: 

repoſe to reſtore their ftrength. | But what hath this motion to do 
with that of the Earth, that in compariſon to theirs is immenſe ? 
Beſides, to make it move with three motions that run and draw 
Ieveral wayes : Who would ever aſſert ſuch Paradoxes, unleſſc 
"\e had ſworn to bs their defender ? Nor doth that avail in this 


H h calc- 


* Lazeretto- 


242 G: Gar1tzus, bi Syſleme: 


caſe, which Copernicus alledgeth, that by rcaſon this motion ;s 
natural tothe Earth and not violent, it worketh contrary effea, 

to violent motions ; and that thoſe things diſſolve and cannor 

long ſubſiſt , to which impulſe is conferred , but thoſe ſo mage 

by nature do continue 1n their perfe&t dilpolture ; this anſwer ſuf. 

ficeth not, I ſay, for it is overthrown by that of ours. For the a. 

nimal is a natural body, ard not made by att, and its motion js 

yatural , deriving i (elt from the ſoul , that is, from an intrinſick 

principle ; and that morion is violent , whole beginmng is with. 

out, and on which the thing moved conferreth nothing ; how. 

ever, if the animal coutinueth its motion any long time, it grows 

weary , and allo dycth it it obſtinarely ſtrive to perſiſt therein. 

You lice then that 10+ riature we meet ou all fides with norious con- 

trary to the Copernican Hypotheſis , and none in favour of it. And 

for that I have nothing more wherein to take the part of this Op- 

porent, hear what he producerh againſt Keplerus (with whom 

he diſputeth) upon that argument, which che ſaid Kepler bringeth 

againſt thoſe who think it an incoavenienc , nay impoſlible thing, 

to augment the Starry Sphere inimenlely , as the Copernian Hy. 

pothe(ts requireth. Kepler theretore inſtanceth, 1aying : Difficili- 

An wrument 15 ©5t, accidens prater modulum ſubjeGi mtendere , quam ſub- 

n" argument . | | ; bo SN! 
from Kepler tn ſa- Jectum ſune accidente augere. Coperuicus ergo weriſemilins facit, 
_—_ of Coperni- qui auget Orbem Stellarum frxarum abſque moty , quam Ptolomey, 
qui auget motum fixarum immenſa wvelocttate. | Which makes thi 

Eugliſh. ]lrs harder to ſtretch the accident beyond the model of the 

ſubje& than to augment the ſubject without the accideat. Coperny 
(3 harh more probability on his tide , who encrealeth the Orb of 
the lixed Scars without motion , than Prolomy wizo augmenteth the 

motion of the fixed Stars to an immenſe degree of velocity. 
The Author of Which obj<&ion the Author anfwereth , wonderigg how much 
the Anti Tycho07p- Kepler deceived hiimndelf,in laying,that in the Ptolomaick Hypothe- 
Aha ha {is the motion encrealeth b d th del of the {ubje&t, tor in 
eyAnn e model OI t jet, 10r m 
his judgment.it doth not encreale, fave. onely in conformity to rhe 
mod-], and that according to its encrealement , the velocity of 
The velecity of FRE Motion 15 augmented. Which he proverth by ſuppoling a ma- 
the ciremlar moti- chine to be framed, that. inaketh one revolution in twenty four 
en * hours, which motion ſhall be called moſt flow 3 afterwards (up. 
creaſe of the dia- poling its {emidiameter to be prolonged, as far as to the diſtance 
meter of ihe encles of the Sun, its extreme will equal the velocity of the Sun; and 
it being continued out unto the Starry Sphere, it will equal che 
velocity of the fixed. Stars, though in the circumference of rhe 
machine it be very flow: Now applying this conſideration of the 
machine to the Starry Sphere , let us imagine any point in 1ts {e- 
midtameter, as neer to the centre as is the lemidiamerer of the ma- 
chine 3 the tame motion that in the Starry Sphere 1s exceedig 


{wifC, 


Diartocus. II. 


wift, ſhall in that point be exceeding flow 3 But the great mag- 
nitude of the body 15 that which maketh it of exceeding (low , to 
become excecding {witt , although it continuerh ſtill the ſame, and 
thus the velocity encrealcth , nor beyond the model of the ſub- 
jc > but rather according to ic, and to its magnirude 3 very dit- 
ferently from the 1magination of K epler. 

Sarv. 1 do not believe that this Author hath entertained to 
mcan and poor a conceit of Kepler z As to per{wade himlelt that 
he did not underſtand, that the higheſt term of a line drawn from 
the centre unto the Starry Sphere , moveth more {wittly than a 
point of the {ame line taken within a yard or two of the centre. Aid 
therefore of neceſſity he muſt have conceived and comprehend- 
cd that the mind and intention of Kepler was to have laid, that 
it is Icfle inconvenient to encreale an immoveable body ro an ex- 
traordinary magnitude , than to alcribe an extraordinary velocity 
toa body , though very bigge, having regard to the model , 
that is to the gauge , and to the example of other natural bodies; 
in which we lee, that the diſtance from the centre encreating , the 
velocity diminiſheth 3 that 15, that the periods of their circulati- 
ons take up longer times. Bur 1n reſt which is not capable of aug- 
mentation or diminution , the grandure or {malneſle of the body 
maketh no differeuce. So that if the anſwer of the Author would 
be directed againſt the argument of Kepler , it is neceſſary , that 
that Author doth hold, that to the movent principle is one and the 
ſame to move in the ſame time a body very ſmall , or very im- 
menle, in regard that the augmentation of velocity inſeparably 
attends the augmentation of the maſſe. Bur this again is contrary 
ro the Architetonical rule of nature , which doth in the lefler 
Spheres, as we ſee in the Planets , and moſt ſenſibly in the Medi- 
cean Stars , obſerve to make the leſſer Orbs to circulate in ſhorter 
times : Whence the time of Saturns revolution is longer than all 
the times of the other leſſer Spheres, it being thirty years ; now 
the pafling from this to a Sphere very much bigger , and to make 
itmove in 24. hours, may very well be ſaid to exceed the rules of 
the mode]. So that if we would but attentively conſider it, the 
Authors an{wer oppoſeth not the intent and ſenſe of the argument, 
but the expreſſing and manner of delivering of it ; where again 
the Author is injurious, and cannot deny but that he artificially 
difſembled his underſtanding of the words, that he might charge 
Kepler with grofle ignorance ; but the impoſture was {o very dull 
and obvions, that he could not with all his craft alter the opint- 
on which Kepler hath begot of his DoErine in the minds of all 
the Learned. As in the next place, to the inſtance againſt the 
perpetual motion of the Earth, taken from the impoſlibility of 
ts moving long without wearineſle , in regard that living crea- 

H h 2 cures 


24} 


An explanation 
of the true ſen{e of 
Ke. ler and hu »':- 
fence. 


The greatneſ. 
and ſmalneſſe of 
the hody make a 
differen. 
0n 4n4 not un reſt, 


The order of na- 


twre is to make the 


leſſer Orbs to cir- 


eulate in ſhorter 
rms, and the big- 
ger in longer timc's 


-& 


_ 12 


2.44 


Th- {: igned An. 
ſrer of Kepler co- 
vered with an ar- 
tyficral Trony. 


eArimals would 
mot grow wea'y of 
their motion, pro» 
ceeding as that 
which 1 aſſigned 
to the terreſtrial 
G lobe. 

The cauſe of the 
wearineſſe of ani- 
mals, 


The motion of 
an animal is rat iv 
to be called violent 
than natural, 


The ſtrength di- 
wuniſheth not, 
wicre 't 1s not 118- 
ployed, 


G. Gartit «us, his Syicmo. 


tures themſelves, which yer move naturally, and from an intery 
principle, do grow weary arid have necd of reſt to relax and "_ 
trcſh ther members —- ----— 

SaGcr Methinks | hear Kepler an{wer him to that, thar 
there are ſome kinde of animals which refreſh themſelyes after 
wearinefle, by rowling on the Earth ; and that therefore there 
15no necd to fear that the Terreſtrial Globe ſhould tire, na it 
may be reaſonably afhrmed, that it enjoyeth a perpetual & moſk 
tranquil repole, keeping it lelt in an eternal rowling. 

S aLv. You arc too tart and Satyrical, Sagredrs : but let y; 
lay aſide jeſts, whilſt we are treating ot {crious things. 

Sack Excuſe me, Salwviatus, this that I ſay 1s not fo abſo- 
lutely beſides the buſinels, as you perhaps make it; for a motion 
that (erveth inſtcad of reſt, and removeth wearinels from a body 
tircd with travail, may much more eaſily ſerve to prevent the co- 
ming of that wearinels, like as preventive remedies are more eafie 
than curative. And I hold for certain, that if the motion of anj- 
mals ſhould procced in the ſame manner as this that is aſcribed to 
the Earth, they would never grow weary ; Seeing that the weari- 
neſs of the living creature , deriveth it felt, in my opinion, from 
the imployment of bur one part alone in the moving of its (elf, 
and all the reſt of the body ; as v. g. in walking, the thighs and 
the legs onely are imployed for carrying themſelves and all the 
reſt : on the contrary, you ſee the motion of the heart to be at 
were indefatigable, becauſe it moveth it {elf alone. Beſides, 1 
know not how true it may be, that the motion of the animal js na- 
tural, and not rather violent : nay, 1 believe that one may truly 
ſay, that the ſoul naturally moveth the members of an animal with 
a motion preternatural, for if the motion upwards is preternatu- 
ral to grave bodies, the lifting up of the legs, and the thighs, 
which are grave bodics, in walking, cannot be done without vio- 
lence, and therefore not without labour to the mover. The 
climbing upwards by a ladder carrieth the grave body contrary to 
its natural inclination upwards, from whence followeth wearineſs, 
by rcalon of the bodies natural averſne(s to that motion : but in 
moving a moveable with a motion, tro which it hath no averſion, 
what laſſitude, what diminution of vertue and ſtrength need we 
tear in the mover ? and how ſhould the forces waſte, where they 
are not at all imployed ? 

S1my. They arc the contrary motions wherewith the Earth ts 
pretended to move, againſt which the Authour produceth his ar- 
gumcnt. | 

SaGs. It hath been laid already , that they are no-wile con- 
traries, and that herein the Authour is extteamly deccived , ſo 
that the whole ſircngth of the argument recoileth upon the Op- 


ponent 


Dratocuse. 11, 245 


pornent hinfelt , waulſt he wil make the Firſt Mozer to larry f 2 EO 
:long with ic all the 1nferiour Spherer, contrary to the motion 5+ 4c:h v7ont me 
which they chemlclves at the lame time exetrcile. It belongs there- / 7? 
tore to the Primum Mobile to grow weary, which belides the 
moving of its {clf 1s made to carry to many other Spheres, and 
which allo ſtrive againſt it with a contrary motion. $0 thar 

the ultimate concluſion that the Authour interred, ſaying, that 
diſcourting of the effe&s of Nature, a man alwayes meets with 
things that favour the opinion of Ariſtotle and Ptolomy, and ne- 

ver any one that doth nor interter with Copernicxs,ſtands in nced 

of great contideration z and it 15 better to ſay, that one of thele 

two Hypotheſes being true, and the other neccſlarily falſe, it 1; 
impoſlible that a man ſhould ever be able to tinde any argu- © 
ment » experience, or right reaſon, in favour of that which is 

falſe, like as to the truth none of theſe things can be repugnant. 74 Proves 
Vaſt difference, rhecefore, muſt needs be found between the rea- nn. ws. 
ſons and arguments produced by the one and other party, for and 9", /- ds nor 
againſt rhele two opinions, the force of which I leave you your co 

ſelf ro judge of, Samplicins. 

Sa1 v. But you, Sagredas, being tranſported by the vclocir 

of your wit, have taken my words out of my mouth, whilſt [ was 
about to ſay ſomething, touchingthis laſt argument of the Author; 

and although you have more then ſufficiently refuted him, yer 

nevertheleſle 1 will adde ſomewhat; which then ran in my mindce. 

He propolcth it as a thing very unlikely, that a body diſſipable 
and corruptible, as the Earth, ſhould perpetually move with a re- 
gular motion, c{pecially for that we lee living creatures in the end 
to grow weary, and to ſtand in nced of reſt : and che improbability 

is increaſed, in that rhe ſaid motion 1s required to be of velocit . A 
incomparable and immenſe, in reſpe& to that of animals. Now, 1 | 
cannot fee why the velocity of the Earth ſhould, at preſent, trou- /f 
ble it; (o long as that of the ſtarry Sphere ſo very much bigger q 
doth not occa1ion in it any diſturbance more conſiderable;than that F 
which the velocity of a machine, that in 24 hours maketh but one 
lole revolution, produceth in the ſame. If the being of the velo- 
city of the Earths converſion, according to the model of that ma- ; 
chine, inferreth things of no greater moment than that, let the Au- : 
thor ceaſe to fear the Farths gt owing weary ; for that not one of | 
the moſt feeble and flow-pac't animals,no not a Chamzleon would 

tire in moving no more than * four or five yards in 24 hours; but WB Os 0 'Cl | 
it he pleaſe to conſider the velocity to be no longer, in relation to "Rs 
the mode] of the machine, but abſolutely, and inaſmuch as the #2 fered in the | 
moveable in 24 hours is to pals a very great ſpace, he ought to ſhew aid Sa 4 5 | 
himlelf ſo much more reſerved in granting it to the ſtarry Sphere, 6!:4-. 
which with a velocity incomparably greater than that of the 


Farth 


_ _ 


24+ 


G. Gartirt=us, his Syllmr. 


Earth is to carry along with it a thouland bodies, cach much big- 
ger than the Terceſtrial Globe. | 

Here it remains for us to lec the proofs, whereby the Authour 
concludes the new ſtars Anno 1572. and Anno 1604. to be ſubly. 
nary, and not celeſtial, as the AStrouomers of thole times were 
generally perſwaded ; an cnterpriz : very great certainly ; but 1 
have conſidered, that it will be better, in regard the Book is new 
and long, by reaſon of its many calculations, that between this e- 
vening and to morrow morning I make them as plata as I can, and 
{ſo meeting you again to morrow to continue Our Wonted confe. 
rences, give you a briet of what I ſhall oblerve therein ; and if we 
have cine left, we will ſay ſomething of the Annual motion afcri- 
bed to the Earth. In the mean time, if either of you, and Simpli- 
cinus 1n particularzhath any thing to ſay more, touching what relates 
to the Diurnal motion, at large examined by me, we have a little 
rime ſtill left to treat thereof. 

Simv. I have no more to ſay,unlefle it be this, that the diſcour- 
ſes that this day have falne under our debate, have appeared to me 
fraught with very acute and ingenious notions, alledged on Coper- 
nicus his (ide, in confirmation of the mution of the Earth, but yet 
I find not my (elf Myon to believe it ; for in ſhort, the things 
that have been ſaid conclude no more but this, that the reaſons 
for the ſtability of the Earth are not neceſſary ; but all the while 
no demonſtration hath been produced on che other fide, that doth 
neceſſarily convince and prove its mobility. 

Sar v. I never undertook, Stmplicixs, to remove you from that 
your opinion 3 much leſs dare I preſume to determine definitively 
in this controverſic : it onely was, and ſtill ſhall be in the enſuin 
diſputations my intent, to make it appear to you, that thoſe who 
have thought that moſt {wift motion of 24 hours dpth belong to 
che Earth alone, and not to the Univerſe, the Earth onely exclu- 
ded, were not induced to belieye, that ſo it might and ought to do 
out of any blind perſwaſion ; but that they did very well ſee, try, 
and examine the reaſons on the contrary fide, and alſo not flight- 
ly anſwer them. With the ſame intention, if it ſtand with your 
liking, and that of Sagredzs, we may paſle to the conſideration of 
thar other motion ; farſt, by AriSarchus Samius, and afterwards 
by Nzcholanus Copernicus aſcribed to the ſaid Terreſtrial Globe, 
which 1s, as, I believe, you have heretofore heard, made under the 
Zodiack within the ſpace of a year about the Sun, immoveably 
placed 1n the centre of the ſaid Zodiack. 

S!1:4p. The diſquiſition 1s fo great, and ſo noble, that I ſhall 
£':Jly hearken to the diſcuſſion thereof, perſwading my ſelf that 
ſhall hear what ever can be ſaid of that matter. And 1 will after- 


wards 


Driaiocus IT: 


wards by my ſelf, according to my uſual cuſtome, make more de- 
liberate reflexions upon what hath been, and 1s to be ſpoken ; and 
if 1 ſhould gain no more but this, it will be no ſmall benefit 
that I ſhall be able to diſcourle more Logically. 

Sacr- Therefore, that we may no further weary Salwiatus, 
we will put a period to the diiputations of this day , and re- 
aſſume our conference to morrow in the uſual manner, with hope 
to hear very pleaſing novelties. 

Sine. | will leave wich you the Book De ſtellis nowis, and car- 
ry back this of the Concluſi>as, to ſee what is written therein a« 

gainſt the Annual motion, waich are co be the arguments of our 
diſcourſe to morrow. 


d 


2.47 


Fig:3 A 2 Trg: 4 
| As 
E 
le 
| 
D 
P 
B F 
Tug: 5: Fig: 6 Fg - 7 
C 6 $4 
—J» 
A 
Fig :8 
M A Place this Plate 
at the er d of 
H 
v the Second 
I—--{E 
D1alogue : 
7 © 
L —]6 
| 
| 
B ——  C 


GALIL AU 


Galileus Lynczus, 
HIS 


SYSTEME 


OFTHE 


VORTED-: 


The Third Dialogue. 


—_ COA rn OO CO I I ts es 


—_—— 


INTERLOCUTORS 
JALVIATUS, SAGREDUS, and S1IMPLICIUS. 


>>> He great deſire wherewith I have expe@ed 

511 your coming, that 1 might hear the novel 
conceits touching the annual converſi- 
on of this our Globe, hath made me 
think the houres of the laſt night, and 
thoſe of this morning very tedious, al- 
though I ſpent them not idly, but lying 
awake I imployed a good part thereof in 
ruminating upon our yeſterdayes dilcour- 
les, weighing the reaſons alledged by both parties, in favour of 
the two contrary Hypotheſes, that of Ariſtotle and Ptolomy , and 
This 0 Ariſtarchus, and Copernicus. Andreally methinks, that 
which ever of theſe parties have been deceived, they are worthy of 
*XcCule, {0 ipecious and valid in appearance are the reaſons that 
may have perſwaded them either way ; though neverthelef{c we 
L1 do 


5) 


Ln” = 
ee a ae ae Ho , - a 


, 
| 


_— — — ———_— . X 


i 


Z5O 


Some an arguing 
firſt fix im ther 
minds the conclu- 
fron beleeved by 
them, and then a- 
dart their neaſors 
to that. 


G, Gari1itxzus, bs S3/ceme. 


do for the moſt part clolc with cholc produced by the grave Ay. 
thours firſt above mentioned. Bur albeit that the Perpatetich Hy- 
potheſis, by realon of 1ts antiquity, hach had many followers and 
fautors, and the other very few ; tirlt, tor its obſcurity, and next, 
for its novelty, yet methinks I diſcover amongſt thoſe many, 
and particularly amongſt thc modernes {ome, who for the ſup. 
port of thc opinion by them eſteemed true , have introduced 
other reaſons \ufficiently childiſh, I could lay ridiculous, 

Saty. | have met with the like, and fo much worſe than 
yours, that I bluſh to rchearſe them, not lo much to {pare the fame 
of their Authours, the names of whom might be perpetually con- 
cealed, as becaulc I am aſhamed lo much ro ſtain the honour of 
mankinde. In oblerving of thele men, I have found that (ome 
there are who prepoſterouſly realoung, wrt ftabliſh the conc]u. 
ſion in their fancy, and (either becaule it 15 their own, or elle be- 
longs to a perſon whom they much conhide in) lo firmly imprint 
it in their opinions, that it 1s altogether impoſlible ever wholly to 
efface it : and thole rcalons which they rhemlelves ſtumble upon, 
or which they hear others to alledge in confirmation of the con- 
ceit entertained, though never {o fimple and inſipid, inſtantly find 
credit and applauſe with them : but on the contrary, thoſe which 
are brought againſt their opinion, though ingenuous and conclu- 
ding, they receive not only with nauſeating, but with diſdain and 
bitter indignation, yea, you ſhall have one of thele ſo inraged, as 
that he will not be backward to try all wayes to ſuppreſs and ſilence 
their adverſaries : and of this I my (elf have had tome experience. 

Sack. Indeed theſe men deduce not the concluſion trom the 
premiſes, nor confirme them with reaſons, but accomodate, or to 
lay better, diſcommodare and diſtort the premiſes and arguments 
to make them {peak in favour of their pre-afſumed and pertinaci- 
ous concluſions. It is not good therefore to contraGt familiarity 
with theſe men ; and the rather, for that their converſation is not 
only unpleaſant, but allo dangerous. Yet let us continue our con- 
terence with Simplecizs however, whom I have known this long 
while fora man of great ingenuity; and altogether void of malice: 
beſides he 1s well verit in the Peripatetick Dofrine ; ſo that I may 
aſſure my ſelf, that what ſhall not fall within the reach of his rea- 
{on for the ſupport of the Ariſtotelian Hypotheſis, will not cally 
be tound out by others. But ſee yonder he comes, quite out of 
winde, whole company we have lo long delired : we were juſt now 
{peal.ng againſt the ſmall haſt you made to come to us. 

Simy. You muſt not blame me, bur Neptune, for this my long 
ſtay ; which 1n the ebbe of this mornings tide hath in a manne! 
drain'd away the waters, for the Gondola that brought me, being 
entered not far from hence into a certain Channel, wanting depth, 


where 


 Drarocus. III. 


Fa: 
where | was ſtranded, and forced to ſtay tfere more than a full 


hour, in expecting the return of the tide : and there waiting in 
this manner, without being - to get out of the boar, which on a 
ſudden ran a ground, I obleFved a certain accident, which to me 
ſeemed very ſtrange 3 and it was this, that in the waters ebbing 
I ſaw it retreat very faſt by (everal ſmall rivolets, the ouze being 
in many places diſcovered, and whilſt I ſtood looking upon this ct- 
fed, 1 iaw this motion in an inſtant to ceaſe, and without a mi- 
nutes interval the ſame water to begin to return back again, and 
the ride from ebbing to become young flood, without ſtanding 
ſtill a moment : an effect that as long as I have dwelt in Venice, 
[ ncver rook notice of before. 

Sa GR- Itis very much, that you ſhould be lefr thus on ground, 
amongſt (mall Channels ; in which rivolets, as having very little 
declivity, the riſing or falling of the main ſea, the thicknels onel 
of a paper 15 ſufficient to make the water to ebbe and flow for good 
long ſpaces of time : like as in ſome crecks of the Sea, its flowing 
tour or {ix * yards onely, maketh the water to overflow the adja- 
cent Marſhes tor ſome hundreds and thouſands of * acres. 

Sime. This I know very well, but I ſhould have thought, that 
between the ultimate rerme of ebbing, and the firſt beginnng to 
flow, there ſhould have interpoſed ſome conſiderable interval of 
reſt. 

Sacs- This will appear unto you, if you caſt your eye upon 
the bank or piles, where theſe mutations are made perpendicular- 
ly, but not that there 15 any real time of ceſſation. 

Sie. I did think, that becauſe theſe two motions were con- 

trary, there ought to be in the midſt between them ſome kind of 
reſt; conformable to the Dodrine of Ariſtotle, which demonſtrates 
that in pun&to regreſſus mediat quies. 
. SaGs. I very well remember this place : but I bear in minde 
alſo, that when I read Philoſophy, I was not thorowly farisfied 
with Ar:ftotles demonſtration ; but that I had many experiments 
on the contrary, which I could ſtill rehearſe unto you, bur I am 
unwilling to (ally out into any other digrefſions, we being met 
here to diſcourſe of the propoſed mattes, if it be poſſible, without 
thele excurſions wherewith we have interrupted our diſputes in 
thole dayes that are paſt. 

Siy. And yet we may with convenience, if not-interrupt 
them, at leaſt prolong them very much, for returning yeſter- 
day home, I ſet my («lf to read the Tradate of Concluſions, where 
I find Demonſtrations againſt this annual motion aſcribed to the 
Earth, very ſolid ; and becauſe 1 would nor truſt my memory with 


the punctual relation of them, I have brought back.the Book a- 
long with me. 


FI 


The martin of 
the water in ebbing 
and lowing not in» 
terruptedby ref, 


* Pertiche vene- 
tank 


- 
© _— 


—_— — aa 


— _ 


252 


G. Gartirtzus, bs Sy/eme. 


SiGr. You have done very well; but if we would re-aſlume 
our Dilputations according to yelterdayes appointment, it is re- 
utitc that we firſt hcar what account Salviatrs hath ro vive u; 
of the Book, De ſtell:s now3s, and then without interruption we 
may procced to the Annual motion. Now what lay you, Salvia. 
tus touching thoſe ſtars ? Are they really pull d down fivm Hea- 
ven to thele lower regions, by vertue of that Authours calculati- 
ons, whom Simpliciis mentioneth ? 

Srv. Iict my lelt Jaſt night co perule his proceedings, and] 
have this morning had another view of hin, to {ce whether that 
which he {cemed over night to athrm, were really his {enſ(e, or m 
dreams and phantaſtical noGurnal imaginations; andain the cloſe 
found to my great gricf that thole things were really written and 
printed, which tor the reputation-lake of this Philolopher I was 
unwilling to believe. It 1s 1n my judgment impoliible, bur that he 
ſhould perceive the vanity of his undertaking, alwell becaule ir is 
too apert, as becaule I remember, that I have heard him mentio- 
ncd with applauſe by the Academick our Friend : it ſeemeth to 
me allo to bc a thing very unlikely, that in complacency to others, 
he ſhould be induced to let fo low a valuc upon his reputation, as 
to give conſent to the publication of a work, for which he could 
cxPcca no other than the cenlure of the Learned. 

SaGr. Yca, but you know, that thole will be much fewer 
than one tor an hundred, compared to thoſe that ſhall celebrate 
and extoll him above the greateſt wits that are, or ever have been 
in the world : He is one that hath mentioned the Peripate- 
tick inaltcrability of Heaven againſt a troop of Aſtronomers, and 
that to their greater diſgrace hath foiled them at their own wea- 
pons : and what do you think four or five in a Countrey that dil- 
cern his triflings, can do againſt the innumerable multirude, that, 
not being able ro dilcover or comprehend them, 1uffer themſelves 
to be taken with words, and {fo much more applaud him, by how 
much the Icfle they underſtand him ? You may adde alſo, that 
thole few who underſtand, (corn to give an an{wer to papers 40 
trivial and unconcludent ; and that upon very good realons, be; 
caule to the intelligent there 1s no need thereof, and to thole that © 
do not underſtand, it 15 but labour loſt. 

Sa1v. The moſt deſerved puniſhment of their demerits would 
certainly be filence, it there were not other reaſons, for which it 
5 haply no leſle than neceflary to reſent their timerity : one of 
which 1s, char we Jralians thereby incur the centure of Liliterates; 
and atrract the laughter of Forreigners;z and elpecially to {uch 
who are leparatcd trom our Religion ; aud I could ſhew you ma- 
ny of thole of no {mall eminency, who (coff at our Academick, 
and the many Mathcmaticians that are in Italic, for og 

tollies 


Driatocohes IF. 


iglics of ucha + Fabler againſt 4ſbronomers to come to the 
Iizhr, and to be openly maintained without contradiction ; bur 
this allo might be-dilpented with, in refpect of the other preater 
0:cations of laughter, wherewith we may contront them depend- 


in on the diſſinulation of the intelligent, touching the follics ot 


thele opponents of the Doctrines that they well enough under- 
ſtand. 

S$ 4G. I detirc not a greater proof of thoſe mens perulancy, 
and the intelicity of a Copernican, {ubjett to be oppoled by fuch 
1; underſtand nor lo much as the very tirſt poſitions, upon which 
he undertakes the quarrel]. 

S41v. You will beno lefle altoniſhed at their method in con- 
futing the ASt onomers, who aftirm the new Stars to be ſuperiour 
ro the Orbs of the Planets; and peradventure in the f Firmament 
it (clt. : 

SaGKk. Bur how could you in lo ſhort a time examine all this 
Book, which 1s lo great a Volume, and muſt needs contain very 
many demonſtrations ? 

S a 1. v. L have contined my {elf to thele his firſt confutarions, in 
winch with twelve demonſtrations founded upon the obſervation: 
ot twelve Aſtronomers, ( who all held, that the Star, Ano 1 5 72. 
which appeared in Caſſ.opera,was 1n the Firmament ) he proveth ir 
on the contrary, to be bencath the Moon, conferring, two by two, 
the meridian altitudes, proceeding 1n the method that you ſhall 
underſtand by and by. And becautc, I think, that in the ek&ami- 
nation of this his firſt progreſſion, I have diſcovered in this Au- 
thour a great unhikehhood of his ability ro conclude any thing a- 
gainſt the Aſtronomers, in favour of the Peripatetick Philoſophers, 
and that their opinion 15 more and more concludently confirmed, 
I could not apply my felt with the like patience in examining his 
other methods, but have given a very flight glance upon them, 
and am certain, thatthe detec that 15 19, thele firſt impugnations, 
_ likewiſe in the reſt. And as you ſhall ſee, by experience, very 
lew words will ſuffice to confute this whole Book, though compi- 
led with (o great a number of laborious calculations, as here you 
Ice. Therefore obſerve my proceedings. This Authour under- 
taketh, as | ſay, to wound hi#adverlarics with their own weapons, 
1. a great number of obſervations made by themlelves, to wit, by 
twelve or thirteen Authours in number, and upon part of them he 
wakes his (uppurtations, and concludeth thole ſtars ro have been 
below tae Moon. Now becaulc the proceeding by 1nterrogato- 
N1CS very much pleaicth me, in regard the Authour himſelf is not 
here, Ict Simplicrys anſwer me ro the queſtions that I ſhall ack 
um, as he thinks he himtelf would, if he were preſent. And pre- 
luppoling that we {peak of the forclaid Star, of Anno 1572. ap- 

pcaring 


253 


* [LoOret 7am, 


[YC enutnth 


Fimomeciutor the 
S arty Sphere, 20-! 


not as we viiznly 
receive the woryg, 


T he methed 95+ 
/erved by Char, mn 
C2”. f:;tir the eo A - 
/t Fur mers, and ov 
S11viatiis tm Conte 


j 
(140 '. bi? 


-mat” pro - 


7d. > ay re I eG 


254 


RR eocooo@£&©= cc _ _ r3SS9. 


"_ 


G. Garit=us, his Sy/cme. 


pcaring in Caſſiopeia, tell me, Simplicins, whether you believe thar 
Ir might be in the ſame time placed in divers places, that is, a. 
monegſt the Elements, aud allo amongſt the planetary Orbs, and 
alſo above thele amongſt the fixed Stars, and yet again 1finitely 
more high. 

SiMe. There is no doubt, but that it ought to be confeſſed 
that it is but in one only place , and ar one ſole and determinate 
diſtance from the Earth. 

SaLv. Thercfore if the obſervations made by the Aftrono- 
mers were exa&, and the calculations made by this Author were 
not erronebus , it were cafie from all thole and all theſe to re- 
colle& the ſame diſtances alwayes to an hair, 1s not this true ? 

S1my. My reaſon hitherto tells me that ſo it mult needs be 
nor do [ belicve that the Author would contradict it. 

Sa1v. Burt when of many and many computations that haye 
been made, there ſhould not be ſo much as two onely that prove 
true, what would you think of them ? | 

Simp. I would think that they were all falſe , either through 
the fault of the compuriſt , or through the defe& of the obſer- 
vators , andat the moſt that could be ſaid , I would ſay, thatbut 
onely one of them and no more was true ; but as yet I know not 
which to choole. | 

Sarv. Would you then from falle fundamentals deduce and 
eſtabliſh a doubtful concluſion for ttue ? Certainly no. Now the 
calculations of this Author are ſuch, that no one of them agrees 
with another , you may ſee then what credit is to be given to 
chem. 

Simy. Indeed, ifit beſo, this is a notable failing. 

SaGRk. But by the way [ have a mind to help Simplicius, and 
the Author by telling Sal/viatzs , that his arguments would hold 
good if the Author had undertook to go about to find out exad- 
ly the diſtance of the Star from the Earth , which I do not think 
to be his intention 3 but onely ro demonſtrate that from thoſe 
obſervations he collefed that the Star was ſublunary. So 
that if from thoſe obſervations, and from all the computations 
made thereon, the height of the Star be alwayes colleted to be 
lcefle than that of the Moon, it (etves the Authors turn to con- 
vince all thoſe Aſtronomers of moſt impardonable ignorance, 
that through the defe& either of Geometry or Arithmetick , have 
not known how to draw true concluſions trom their own obſerva- 
tions themſelves. 

SALV. It will be convenient therefore that I turn my lelf to 
you , Sagredus, who fo cunningly aphold the Dodrine of this 
Author. And to ice whether I can make Simplicius , though not 


very expert in calcnlations, and demonſtrations to apprehend the 
In- 


Diatocus [1T. 


*nconclutivencile at leaſt of the demonſtrations of this Author, 
rſt propoled ro conlideration, and how both he, and all the 
Aſtronomer» with whom he contenderh, do agree that the new 
Star had not any motion of its own, and onely went round with 
the diurnal motion of the primum mobile; but difſent abour the 
placing of ir , the one party putting it in the Celeſtial Region, 
chat is above the Moon , and haply above the fixed Stars, and 
the other judging ir ro be ncec to the Earth, that is, under the 
concave of the Lunar Orb. And becaule the lituation of the new 
ſtar, oi which we [peak, was towards the North, and at no very 
great diſtance from the Pole , to that to us Septentrionals, it did 
never {ct , 1t was an calle matter with Aſtronomical inſtruments 
to have taken 1ts feveral meridian altitudes, as well its {malleſt 
under the Pole , as its greateſt above the ſame 3 from the compa- 
ring of which altitudes , made in ſeveral places of the Earth, 
lizuate at different diſtances from the North , that is, ditfecent 
from one another 1n relation to polar altitudes, the ſtars diſtance 
might be inferred : For if it was in the Firmament amongſt the 
other fixed ſtars , its meridian altitudes taken in divers elevations 
of rhe pole , ought neceſſarily to differ from cach other with the 
ſame variations that are found amongſt thoſe elevarions them- 
{elves ; that 1s, for example ,. if the elevation of the ſtar above 
the horizon was 3o degrees , taken in the place where the polar 
altitude was wv. gr. 45 degrees, the elevation of the ſan.- ftar 
ought to have been encreaſed 4. or 5 degrees in thoſe moe Nor- 
thetnly places where the pole was higher by the ſaid 4 or 5 de- 
grees. But if the ſtars diſtance from the Earth was bur very lictle, 
1n compariſon of that of the Firmament ; irs meridian altitudes 
ought approaching to the North to encrea(e conſiderably more 
than the polar altitudes; and by that greater encreale , that 1s, 
by the excefle of the encreaſe of the ſtars elevation, above the 
encreale of the polar clevation (which is called the difference of 
Parallaxes) 1s readily calculated with a cleer and lure method, 
the ſtars diſtance from the centre of the Earth. Now this Author 
taketh the obſervations made by thirteen Aſtronomers in ſundry 
elcy:tions of the ple, and conferring a part of them at his plea» 
lure, he computeth by twelve collations the new ſtars height to 
| have been alwayes beneath the Moon 3 but this he adventures to 
do in hopes to tind fo grofſe 1gnorance 1n all thole, into whole 
hand: his book might come, that to ſpeak the truth, it hath rurn'd 
my ſtomack 3 and I wait to ſee how thoſe other Aſtronomers, and 
particularly Kepler , againſt whom this Author principally 1n- 
veigheth, can contein themſelves in ſilence , for he doth not uſe 
to hold his tongue on fuch occaſions z unlefſe he did poſlibly 
think the enterprize roo much below him. Now to give you to 

uns 


nd þ 


T he oretteſt and 
leaſt elevations of 
the new ſtar d:ffer 
not from each 6 
thr move thin the 
polar altitudes, the 
ſaid ftar being in 


the Firmnument, 


2.50 


G. Galllzus, hi Syſieme. 


underſtand the lame , I have upon this paper tranicribed the con« 
cluſions that he interreth frony his twelve indagations ; the tirſt of 
which is upon the rwo oblervations : 


}.2 


Of Maurolicys and Hainzeliys , from which 
the Star 15 colleed to have been diſtant from the 
centre leſſe than 3 {emidiameters of the Earth, 
the difference of Parallaxcs being 4 gr. 4.2 m. 


ZO ſec. — _ Se — — 3 ſemid. 


And 1s calculated on the ob{crvations of Hain- 


zclins, with Parall: of $. m. 3o ſec. and its di- 
ſtance trom the centre 15 computed to be more 


than ——— « _— —_ — 25 ſemid, 


. And upon the obſervations of Tycho and Hain- 


zelius , with Parall. of 10 zz. and the diſtance of 
the centre 1s colleged to be little lefle than 


9 ſemid. 
And upon the oblervations of Tycho and the 
Landgrave , with Parall. of 14 m. the diſtance 
from the centre 15 made to be about 


10 ſemid. 


. And upon the oblervations of Hainzelins and 


Gemma , with Parall. of 42 mr. 30 ſec. whereby 


the diſtance 13 gathered to be about -——— 4 ſemid. 
And upon the obſervations of the Landgrave 
and Camcrarius , with Parall. of $ »:. the di- 
ſtance 1s concluded ro be about 4 ſemid. 


And upon the oblervations of Tycho and Hage- 
cius , with Parall. of 6 zz. and the diſtance is 


made — woe es <onmnnn——— peeeeret 31 ſemid. 


And upon the oblervations of Hagecius and Ur- 


ſinus with Parall. of 43 ». and the ſtars diſtance 
from the luperticies of the Earth is rendred 


+ ſemid. 
And upon the oblcrvations of Laudgrawins and 


ÞBuſchius , with Parall. of 15 »:. and the di- 
ſtance from the {uperficies of the Earth is by 


lupputation — — — LF 5 ſemid. 


Io. And upon the obſervations of Maurolice and 


I I + 


Munocins , with Parall. of 4 m. 30 ſec. and the 
compntcd diſtance from the Farths ſurface is —— ff emid. 


And upon the obſervations of Munocius and 


Gemma , with Parall. of 55 mM. and the diſtance 
from the CERNTE 1 TOA nee eee ee ere ee 3 ſemid. 


12. And 


Driatocus [I]. 


\2. And upon the oblervations of Munoſins and 
Urſinus with Parall, of i gr. 36 m. and the di- 
{tance from the centre cometh forth lefſe than — 7 ſemid, 


Thele are twelve indagations made by the Author at his elc&i- 
on, amongſt many which, as he laich, might be made by combi- 
ning the oblervations of thele thirtcen oblervators. The which 
ewelve we may believe ro be the moſt favourable to prove his 
intention. 

Sack. I would know whether amongſt the ſo many other in- 
dagations pretermitted by the Author, there were not ſome that 
made againit him , that is, from which calculating one might tind 
the new ſtar to have been above the Moon, as at the very tirſt 
ſight [ think we may realonably queſtion; in regard I fee theſe 
already produced to be {o different trom one another , that ſome 
of them give me the diſtance of the laid ſtar from the Earth, 4, 6, 
10, 100, a thouland, and an hundred thouſand times bigger one 
than another ; ſo that I may well ſuſpe& that amongſt thole that 
he did not calculate , there was ſome one in fauour of the adverſe 
party. And 1 gueſte this to be the more probable , for that I can- 
' not conceive that thoſe Aſtronomers the obſervators could want 
the knowledg and praGtice of rheſe computations , which I think 
do not depend upon the abſtruceſt things in the World. And in- 
decdit will leem to me a thing more than miraculous , if whiiſt in 
thele twelve inveſtigations onely , there are ſome that make the 
ſtar to be diſtant from the Earth but a few miles , and orhers that 
make it to be but a very fmall matter below the Moon , there arc 
none to be found that in favour of the contrary part do make it 
{0 much as twenty yards above the Lunar Orb. And that which 
ſhall be yet again more extravagant, that all thole Aſtronomers 
ſhould have been ſo blind as not ro have diſcovered that their {o 
apparent miſtake. 

Satv. Begin now to prepare your ears to hear with infinite 
admiration to what exceſles of confidence of ones own authority 
and others folly , the deſire of contradicting and ſhewing ones 
ſelf wiſer than others, tranſports a man. Amongſt the indaga- 
tions omitted by the Author , there are luch to be Gund as make 
the new ſtar not onely above the Moon , but above the hixed 
ſtars alſo. And thele are not a few , but the greater part, as you 
ſhall ſee in this other paper , where I have ſet them down. 

SaG x. But what ſaith the Author to theſe? It may be he did 
not think of them ? 

Say. He hath thought of them but too much : but (aith,thar 
the obſervations upon which rhe calculations make the ſtar to be 
Infinitely remote, are erroneous, and that they cannot be com- 
bined to one another, K k S1MP. 


_ 


_ SUL ee br 0 OWE 


CF pI co>——eegrocinadeng oem et Ar IH 
4 _— — -# 


258 


G. Garirt=us, his Syſcme. 


S 1m y. But this ſeemeth to me a very lame evaſion ; for the aq.- 
verſe party may with as much realon reply , that thoſe are errone- 
ous wherewith he colleeth the ſtar to have been in the Elemen. 
tary Region. 

Sarv. Oh Simplicins , if I could but make you compreheng 
the craft > though no great craftineſſe of this Author , 1 ſhoulg 
make you to wonder , and allo to be angry to fee how that he 
palliating his ſagacity with the vail ot the ſimplicity of your ſelf, 
and the reſt of meer Philoſophers, would in{inuate himſelf int» 
your good opinion, by rickling your cars, and {welling your am- 
bition , pretending to have convinced and fjlenced theſe petty 

Aſtronomers, who went about to aſſault the impregnable inalte- 
rability of tlic Peripatetich Heaven , and which 1s more, to have 
toild and conquered them with their own arms, I will try with all 
my ability to do the {ame}; and in the mean time let Sagredys 
take it in good part , if Szmplicins and I try his patience, perhaps 
a little too much, whilſt that with a ſuperfluous circumlocution 
(ſuperfluous I ſay to his moſt nimble apprehenſion) 1 go about to 
make out a thing , which it is not convenient ſhould be hid and 
unknown unto him. , 

Sack. I ſhall not onely without wearineſle , but alſo with 
mach delight hearken to your dilcourſcs; and fo ought all Peripe- 
tetick Philoſophers, ro the end they may know how much they 
are oblicged to this their Protector. 

SAaLlv. Tell me, Simplicius,whether you do well comprehend, 
how, the new ſtar being placed in the meridian circle yonder to- 
wards the North , the {ame to one that from the South ſhould 
go towards the North , would ſcem to riſe higher and higher a- 
bove the Horizon, as much as the Pole, alchough it ſhould have 
been (cituate amongſt the fixed ſtars ; bur, that in caſe it were 
conſiderably lower , that is nearer to the Earth , it would appear 
to aſcend more than the {aid pole , and ſtill more by how much 
Its vicinity was greater ? 

SiMe. I think that I do very well conceive the ſame ; in to- 
ken whereof 1 will cry if I can make a mathematical Scheme of 
it, and in this great circle | in Fig. 1. of this Dialogue. I wil 
marke the pole P ; and in theſe two lower circles I will note two 
ſtars beheld from one place on the Earth , which let be A; and 
let the two ſtars be thele B and C, beheld in the ſame line A B C, 
which line I prolong till it mect with a fixed ſtarin D. And then 
walking along the Earth, till I come to the term E , the two 
ſtars will appear to me ſeparated from the fixed ſtar D, and ad- 
vanced neerer to the poleP, and the lower ſtar B more, which 
will appear tomein G, and the ſtar C lefſe , which will ap 
pear to me inF, but the fixed ſtar D will have kept the ſame 

diſtance from the Pole. SALV. 


Diatocus [I]. 


Sar v. Iſcethat you underſtand the bufineſſe very well. I be. 
lieve that you do likewiſe comprehend , that, in regard the ſtar B 
:: lower than C, the angle which is made by the rayes of the 
ſight , which departing from the two places Aand E, mcet in 6. 
towit, thisangle ACE, is more narrow , orif we will ſay more 
acute than the angle conſtituted in B , by the rayes A B and 
E B. 

Sip. This I likewile underſtand very well. 

Satv. Andallo, the Earth beine very little and almoſt inſen- 
ible, 1n relpe& of the Firmament (or Starry $ phere, ) and con- 
ſequently the ſpace AE , paced on the Earth, being very (mall in 
comparilon of the immenſe length of the lines EGand E F,, paſ- 
ſing from the Earth unto the Firmament , you therehy colle& that 
the ſtar C might riſe and aſcend fo much and ſo much above the 
Earth, that the angle therein made by the rayes which depart 
from the (aid ſtationary points A and E , might become molt a- 
cute, andas it were abfolurely null and inſenſlble. 

$1myp. And this alſo is moſt manifeſt to ſen(e. 

Sarv. Now you know Simplicius that Aſtronomers and Ma- 
chematicians have found infallible rules by way of Geometry and 
Arithmetick , to be able by help of the quantity of theſe angles 
BandC, and of their differences , with the additional knowledg 
of the diſtance of rhe two places AandE, to find to a foot the 


remoteneſſe of ſublime bodies ; provided alwayes that the afore- 


ſaid diſtance » and angles be exaGtly taken. 

Sie. Sothat if the Rules dependent on Geometry and Aftr o- 
nomy be true, all the fallacies and crrours that might be mer with 
in attempting to inveſtigate thoſe altitudes of new Stars or Co- 
mets, or other things muſt of neceſſity depend on the diſtance A E, 
and on the angles B and C, not well mealured. And thus all thoſe 
differences which arc found in theſe twelve workings depend, not 
on the dete&s of the rules of the Calculations, but on the errours 
committed in finding out thoſe angles, and thoſe diſtances,by means 
of the Inſtrumental Oblervations. 

Sartv. True; and of this there is no doubt to be made. Now 
It is neceſſary that you obſerve intenſely, how in removing the Star 
from B to C,, whereupon the angle alwayes grows more acute, the 
ray EBG goeth farther and farther off trom the ray ABD in 
the part beneath the angle , as you may lee in the line EC F, 
whoſe inferiour part E C is more remote from the part A C, than 
15 the part E B, but it can never happen, that by any whatſoever 
Inmenſe receſſion, the lines A D and E F ſhould totally ſever from 
each other, they being finally to go and conjoyn in the Star : and 
onely this may be ſaid, that they would ſeparate, and reduce them- 
{elves to parallels, if ſo be the receſſion ſhould be infinite, which 


K k 2 caſe 


59 


] 260 


G. Gartitfus, his Sykme. 


caſe is not to be ſuppoſed. But becauſe (obſerve well) the UJiſtznce 
of the Firmamentr, in relation to the {mallneile of rhe Earth, as 
hath been ſaid, 15 to be accounted, as it it were tnfinire ; therefore 
the angle conteined betwixt the two rayes, that being drawn from 
the points A and E, go to determine in a fixed Star, is eſtcemeg 
nothing, and thoſe rayes held to be two parallel lines ; and there. 
fore it is concluded, that then only may the New Star be affirmed 
ro have bcen in the Firmament, when from the collating of the 
Obſervations made ih divers places, the ſaid angle 1s, by calcyl. 
tion) garhered to be inſenſible, and the Hhnes, as 1t were, parallels. 
But if the angle be of a conſiderable quanrity, the New Star myſt 
of neccflity be lower rhan thote fixed; and alio than the Mooy, jn 
caſe the angle ABE fhonld be greater than that which would he 
made in the Moons centre. 

S 1 vr. Then the remotenefle of the Moon ts not {o great, thar 
a like angle ſhould be * iafenfible in her ? 

Satv. No Sir; nay it is ſen{ible, not onely in the Moon, but 
in the Sun allo. 

S.mr. But if this be ſo, it's poflible that the ſaid angle may 
be obſerved in the New Star, without neceffttating it to be infert- 
our to the Sui, aſwell as to the Moon. 

SAL v. This may vety well be, yea, and is1n the prefent caſe, 
as you ſhall ſce in due place; that is, when I ſhall have made plain 
the way, in ſuch manner that you alſo, though not very perteQin 
Aſtronomical calculations, may clcarly fee, and, as it were, with 
your hands feel how that this Authour had it more in his eye to 
write 11 complacency of the Peripateticks, by palliating and dil- 
ſembling ſundry chings, than to eſtabliſh the truth , by producing 
them with tiaked lincerity : therefore Jet us proceed forwards. BY 
the things hitherto {poken, I ſtppoſe that you comprehend very 
well how that the diſtance of the new Star can never be 
made fo immenſe, that the angle ſo often named ſhall wholly dil- 
appear, and thar the two rayes of che Obfervators at the places 
A and E, ſhall become altogether parallels: and you may con(e- 
quently cothprehend to the full, that it the calculations ſhould 
collect from the obfervations, that that angle was totally null, or 
that the lines were truly parallels, we ſhould be certain that the 
obſcrvations were at leaſt in ſome ſmall particular etroneous : 
But, it the calculations ſhould give us the ſaid lines to be ſepara- 
ted not only to equidiſtance, that is, fo as to be parallel, but to 
have paſt beyond that terme, and to be dilated more above than 
below, then muſt it be reſolutely concluded, that the obſervations 
were made with leſle accyrateneſfle, and in a word, to be errone- 

ous ; as Icading us: to a manifeſt impoſſibility. In the next place, 
you muſt believe me, and ſuppole it for true, that two tight _ 
which 


Driatocus. I II. 


which depart from two points marked i1pon another right line, arc 
then wider above than below, when the angles included between 
them upoa that righr line are greater than two right angles ; and 
if theſe angles ſhould be equal to two right avgles, the lines wonld 
be parallels; but if they were lefs than two right angles, the lines 
would be concurrent, and being continued out would undoubred- 
ly interlect the triangle. 

$1 ny. Wirhour raking it upon traſt from you, I know the 
ſame ; ard am not lo very naked of Geometry, as not to know x 
Propoſition, which [ have had occaſion of reading very often in 
Ariſtotle, that is, that the three ang'es of all eriangles are cquall to 
two right anglcs : fo that if [ rake in my Figure the triangle ABE, 
it being ſuppvied that the line E A is right; I very well conceive, 
that its three angles A, E, B, are equal ro two: right angles ; and 
that conlequent}y the two angles E and A are lefle than two right 
angles, lo much as 15 the angle B, Whertupon widening the lines 
ABand E B (ſtill keeping them from moving out of the points A 
and E ) untill that the angle conteined by them towards the patts 
B, diſappear , the two angles beneath ſhall be equal ro two right 
ang)cs, and thole lines ſhall be reduced to parallels : and if one 
ſhould proceed to enlarge them yer more , the angles at the points 
E and A would become greater than two right angles. 

Satv. You are an Archimedes 5 aiid have freed me from the 
expence of more words 1n declaring to you , that whenſoever the 
calculations make the two angles A and E to be greater than two 
right angles ; the obſervations without more adoe will prove erro- 
neous. This is that which | had a deſire that you ſhould perfe&- 
ly underſtand, and which I doubted that I was not able (o ro make 
out, as that a meer Peripatetick, Philolopher might attain to the 
certain knowledg thereof. Now let us go on to what remains. 
And re-afluming that which even now you granted me , namely, 
that the new ſtar could nor poſlibly be in many places, but in one 
alone , when cvcr the {upputations made upon the obſervations of 
theſe Aſtronomers do not aflign it the ſame place, its neceflary 
thatit be an errour in the oblervations, that ts, either in taking the 
altitudes of the pole , or in taking the elevations of the ſtar , or in 
the one or other working. Now fot that in the many workings 
made with the combinations two by two , there are very few of 
the obſervations that d6 agree to place the ſtar in the fame fitua- 
ton ; theretore theſe few one!y may happily be the non-errone- 
ous, but the others are all abſolutely falle. 

| Sagk. It will be neceflary then to give more credit to thele 
tew alone , than to all the reſt together » and becauſe you ay, 
that thele which accord arc very few, and I amongſt theſe 12, 
do find two that fo accord , which both make the diſtance of -42 

Ar 


Z©« 


__—_—  —_—» 


J 2602 


' 

$ ; Aſltronomgcal Ire 
itruments arevery 
ſnb jelI to errony. 


G. Garitzus, hi Syſleme. 


ſtar from the centre of the Earth 4 ſemidiameters, which are theſs 
the fifth and ſixth , therefore it is more probable that the new fac 
was elementary , than celeſtial. 

SA Lv. You miſtake the point for if you note well it was not 
written, that the diſtance was exaGly 4 ſemidiameters, but abaut 
4 ſemidiameters; and yet you ſhall {ce that thole two diſtances 
differed from- cach other many hundreds of miles. Here they are; 
you ſee that this fifth , which is 13359 Italian miles , exceeds the 
lixth, which is 13100 miles, by almoſt 30o miles. 

SaGr. Which then are thole few that agree in placing the ſtar 
10 the {ame ſituation ? 

S a Lv. They are, to the diſgrace of this Author five workings, 
which all place it in the firmament, as you ſhall lee 1n this note, 
where I have ſet down many other combinations. But I will grant 
the Author more than peradventure he would demand of me,which 
is in ſum, that in cach combination of the obſervations there is 
ſome error ; which I believe to be abſolutely neceſſary ; for the 
obſervations being four in number that ſerve for one working , 
that is, two different altitudes of the Pole , and two different eleya- 
tions of the ſtar , made by different obfervers, in different yla- 
ces, with different inſtruments , who ever hath any {mall know- 

ledg of this art, will ſay, that amongſt all the four, it is impoſſible 
but there will be ſome error; and cipecially fince we lee thatin 
taking but one onely altitude of the Pole , with the ſame inſtru. 
ment, in the ſame place , by the ſame obſerver , that hath re- 
peated the obſervation a thouſand times , there will ſtill be a titu- 
bation of one, or ſometimes of many minutes, as in this ſame 
book you may lce in ſeveral places. Theſe things preſuppoled, 
I ask you Simplicius whether you believe that this Authour held 
theſe thirteen obſervators for wiſe, underſtanding and expert men 
in uſing thoſe inſtruments, or elſe for inexpert, and bunglers? 

Sine. Ir muſt needs be that he eſteemed them very acute and 
intelligent 3 for if he had thought them unskilful in the buſjineſſe, 
he might have omitted his fixth book as inconcluſive, as being 
founded upon ſuppoſitions very erroneous ; and might take us for 
exceſſively ſimple , if he ſhould think he could with their inex- 
pertneſle periwade us to believe a falſe poſition of his for truth. 


Sarv. Therefore theſe oblervators being ſuch, and that yet 


notwithſtanding they did erre, and ſo conſequently needed cor- 
rection , that ſo one might from their oblervations infer the 
beſt hints that may be ; it 1s convenient that we apply unto them 
the leaſt and necreſt emendations and corre&ions that may be; 
ſo that they do bur ſuffice to reduce the obſervations from impol- 
ſibility to poſlibility 3 ſo as v. gr. if one may but corre& a mant- 
feſt errour, and an apparent impoſlibility of one of their obler- 


vations 


Diarocus. III, 


vations by the addition or ſubſtrattion of two or three minutes,and 
with that amendment to reduce it to poſlibility, a man ought 
ior to clay to adjuſt it by the addition or ſubſtraſtion of fifteen, 
twenty, Ol tifry. 

$1 e. I think the Authour would not deny this : for granting 
that they are expert and judicious men, it ought to be thought that 
they did rather erre little than much. 

Sar v. Oblerve again; The places where the new Star is pla- 
ced, are [ome of them manitcltly unpoſlible, and others pollible. 
Abſolutely impollible it 1s, that 1t ſhould be an infinite {pace lupe- 
riour to th: fixed Stars, tor there 1s no ſuch place jn the world ; 
and if thicre were, the Star there {cituate would have been imper- 
ceptible to us : 1t 18 alſo impollible that it ſhould go creeping along 
the ſuperticics of the Earth; and much lefle that it ſhould be 
within the {aid Terreſtrial Globe. Places poſſible are theic that 
bc in controverfie; it not int-rferring vvith our underſtanding, that 
a viſible object in the likenefle of a Star might be aſwell above the 
Moon, as below it. Now whilſt one gocth about to compute by 
the way of Obſervations and Calculations made with the utmoſt 
certainty that humane diligence can attain unto what its place was, 
tis found that the greateſt part of thoſe Calculations make it 

more than infinitely tuperiour to the Firmament, others make it 
very neer to the {urface of the Earth, and ſome alſo under the 
ſame; and of the reſt, which place it in ſituations not impoſſible, 
none of them agree with each other ; inſomuch that it muſt be 
confeſſed, rhat all thoſe obſervations are neceſſarily falſe ; ſo that 
if we would nevertheleſs colle& ſome fruit from ſo many laborious 
calculations, we muſt have recourſe to the correQions, amending 
all the obſervations. 

S1ne. But the Authour will ſay, that of the obſervations that 
aſſign to the Star impolſlible places, there ought no account to be 
made, as being extreamly erroneous and falſe ; and thoſe onely 
ought to be accepted, that conftiture it 1n places not umpoſlible : 
and amongſt theſe a man ought to ſeek, by help of the moſt pro- 
bable, and moſt numerous concurrences, not if the particular and 
exaGt ſituation, that 15, its true diſtance from the centre of the 
Earth, at leaſt, whether it was-amongſt the Elements, or elle a- 
moneſt the Celeſtial bodies. 

Sa Lv. The diſcourſe which you now make, 1s the ſelf ſame 
that the Author made, in favour of his cauſe, but with too unrea- 
lonable a diſadvantage to his adverſaries ; and this is that princi- 
Pal point that hath made me exceſſively to wonder at the too great 
conhidence that he expreſſed ro have, no leſs of his own authority, 
than of the blindneſs and inadvertency of the Aſtronomers; in 

avour of whom I will ſpeak; and you ſhall anſwer for the oor. 
An 


261 


G. Gar1rtxzus, hi Syſteme. 


And firſt, 1 ack you, whether the Aſtronomers, in obſecvino with 
their luſtruments, and lecking v.gr. how great the elevation of a 
Star i3 above the Horizon, may deviate from the truth, aſwel] ;, 
making it too great, as too litrle ; that 15, may creoneouſly com: 
pure, that it is ſometime higher than the truth, and ſometimes low. 
er; or elſe whether the errour muſt needs be alwayes of one 
kindc, to Wit, that crring they alwayes make 1t too much, and ne. 
ver too little, or alwayes too little, and never too much? 

S i mv. I doubt not, bur that it 1s as calie ro commit an ercoyr 
the one WAY» 4s the other. 

S Ly. I believethe Author would anſwer the ſame. Now of 
theſe two kinds of errours, which are contrarics, and into which the 
obſervators of the new ſtar may equally have fallen, applied to 
calculations, one {ort will make the ſtar higher,and the other lower 
than really itis. And becauſe we have already agreed, that all 
the obſervations are falſe; upon what ground would this Ay- 
thor have us to accept thole for moſt congruous with the truth, 
that ſhew the ſtar to have been near at hand, than the others that 
ſhew it exceſlively remote ? | 

Sine. By what I have, as yet, colleGted of the Authors mind, 
I (ce not that he doth refuſe thoſe oblervations, and indagations 
that might make the ſtar more remote than the Moon, and alſo 
than the Sun, but only thole that make it remote (as you your ſelf 
have ſaid) more than an infinite diſtance ; the which diſtance, be- 
cauſe you allo do refule it as impoilible, he alſo paſſeth over, as 
bcing conviged of infinite falſhood 3 as allo thoſe obſervations 
are of impollibility. Methinks, therefore, that if yuu would con: 
vince the Author, you ought to produce ſupputations, more exa, 
or more in number, or of more diligent obſervers, which conſtitute 
the ſtar in ſuch and ſuch a diſtance above the Moon, or above the 
Sun, and to be brick, in a place poſſible for it to be in, like as he 
produceth thele twelve, which all place the ſtar beneath the Moon 
1n places that have a being in the world, and where it is poſſible for 
1t to be. 

Sal v. But Simplicius yours and the Authors Equivocation 
lyethin this, yours 1n one reſpe&, and the Authors in another ; | 
dilcover by your ſpeech that you have formed a conceit to your 
{clt, that the exorbitancies that are commited in the eſtabliſhing 
the diſtance of the Star do cncreaſe ſucceſſively, according to the 
proportion of the errors that are made by the Inſtrument, 1n tak- 
ing the obſervations, and that by converſion, from the greatnels 
of the exorbitancies, may be argued the greatneſle of the error : 
and that chereforefotrc hearing 1t to be infered from ſuch an obler- 
vation, that the diſtance of the ſtar is infinite, it is neceſſary, that 
the errour in oblerving was infinitc, and therefore not to be ay” 

cu, 


__ 


L - 


a. > - 
- +. 


Diatocus [I]. 


ed, and asfſuch to be refuled ; but the bulinefle doth not ſucceed 
in that manner, my Simplicizs, and I excule you for not having 
comprehended the matter as it 13, in regard of your {mall experi- 
ence in ſuch affairs ; bur yet cannot I under thar cloak palliate the 
error of the Author,who difſembling the knowledge of this which 
he did perſwade himſelf that we in good earneſt did not under- 
ſtand, hath hoped to make ule of our ignorance, to gain the bet- 
ter credit to his Dodtrine, among the mulcicude of illiterate men. 
Therefore for an advertiſement to thole who are more credulous 
then intclligent,and to recover you from error, know that its pol- 
ſible ( and that for the moſt part it will come to patle ) thar an 
obſervation, that giveth you the ſtar v. gr. at the diſtance of 9 a- 
turn, by.the adition or {ubſtraGtion of but one lole minute trom 
the clevation taken with the inſtrument, ſhall make it to become 
infinitely diſtant ; and therefore of poſſible, impoflible, and by 
converſion, thole calculations which being grounded upon thol : 
obſervations, make the {tar infinitely remote, may poſlibly otic u- 
times with che addition or {ubduGtion of one ſole minute reduce ic 
to a poſlible {cituation : and this which I ſay of a minute, may al- 
ſo happen 'in the correction of halt a minute, a fixth part,and leſs. 
Now fix it well in your mind, -that in the higheſt diſtances, that js 
v. g. the height of Saturn, or that of the fixed Stars, very {mall 
errors made by the Obſervator, with the in{trument, render the 
(cituation determinate and poſliple,infiaite & impoſllible. This doth 
not {o evene in the ſublunary diſtances, and near the earth, where 
it may happen that the obſervation by which the Star is colle&ed to 
be remote wv g- 4+ Semidiamerers terreſtrial, may encrealce or dimi- 
niſh, not onely one minute but ten, and an hundred, and many 
more, without bcing rendred by the calculation enher iatinicely 
remote, or ſo much as ſuperior to the Moon. You may hence 
comprehend that the greatneſle of the error (to fo (peak) inſtru- 
mental, are not to be valucd by the event of the calculation, but 
by the quantity it ſelf of degrees and minutes numbred upon the 
inſtrument, and theſe obſervations are to be called more juſt or 
leſs erroneoas, which with the. addition or ſubſtraction of fewer 
minuteg,reſtore the ſtar to a poſlible ſituation; and amongſt the 
poſſible places,the true one may be belicycd ro have been that, a- 
bout which a greater number of: diſtances concurre upon calcula- 
ting the more exact obſervations. 

Sine. I do not very well apprehend this which you ſay : no1 
can 1 of my ſelf conceive how it can be, that in greater diſtances, 
greater exorbitancies:can ariſe from the errour of one minute only, 
than in the ſmaller from ten or an hundred ; and therefore would 
gladly underſtand the ſame. 

Salv. You ſhall ſec it, if not Theorically, yet ar leaſt Practi- 

L | cally, 


265 


_ 


— 7 


266 G. Gat1y* us, his Sylcme. 


cally, by this ſhort aſſumption, that I have made of all the comhj. 
vations, and of part of the workings pretermitted by the Author 
which I have calculated upon this lame paper. : 

S,aGr. You muſt then trom yeſterday, till now, which yer is 
not above cighteen hours, have done nothing bur compute, with- 
out taking either food or ſleep. 

S atv. I havereficſhed my ſelf, both thole wayes ; but truth is, 

make theſe ſupputations with great brevity; and, if I may ſpeak 
the truth, I have much admired, that this Author goeth fo farre 4. 
bout, and introduceth ſo many computations no wiſe necelsary tg 
the queſtion in diſpute. And for a full knowledge of this, and al. 
ſo to the end it may ſoon be ſeen, how that from the obſervations 
of the Aſtronomers, whereof this Author makes ule, it is more pro. 
bably gathered, that the new ſtar might have been above the 
Moon, and alſo above all the Planets, yea amongſt the fixed ſtars, 
and yet higher ſtill than they, I have tranſcribed upon this paper 
all the obſervations ſet down by the ſaid Authour , which were 
made by thirteen Aſtronomers, wherein are noted the Polar alti- 
tude, and the altitudes of the ſtar in the meridian, aſwell the 
leſſer under the Pole, as the greater and higher, and they are 


theſe. 
Tychbo. 
gr. m. 
Altitude of the Pole gs 58 


* Altitude of the Star 84 oo thegreateſt. 
27 57 the leaſt. 


And thele are, according to 
the firſt paper : but accor- 
ding to the ſecond , the 
greateſt 15 — — 27 45 


u_——— ——— m " —_—_ —  -- — — - —- —_— 
— 


Hainzelins. 


Altitude of the Pole 
Altitude of the Star 


Penceris 


Dratocus. III. 


267 
Peucerus and Sculerus. | L andgravins. 
gr. m. r. mM. 
Altitude of the pole 5x 54 Altitude of the pole 51 18 
Altitude of the Star 79 $56 | Altitude of the Star 79 3o 
23 33 
Camerarins. 
gr. m. 
Altitude of the pole 5 2 24. 
Altitude of the Star 8o 3o 
80 27 
Bo 26 
24 28 
24 20 
24 17 
Hagecins | Manrolycxs. 
| gre MM. : | gr. Mm. 
Altitude of the pole 48 22| Altitude of the pole 33 30 
Altitude of the Star 20 5| Altitude of the Star 6&2 oo 
Munocins. Urfinus. 
gr. m. gr. >». 
Altitude of the pole 39 30 Altitude of the pole 49 24 
Altitude of the ſtar 67 go | Altitude of the ſtar 7g oo 
IT 30 | 22 O09 
Reinboldus. | Buchins. 
: gr. MM. | gr- m. 
Altitude of the pole 5x 18| Altitude of the pole 5t 10 
Altitude of the ſtar 79 39 | Altitude of the ſtar 79 30 
23 02 22 40 
Gemma. 
| gr. Mm. 
Altitude of the pole 50' 50 
Altitude of the fttar 79 45 
Ll 2 Now 


. * 
ſe _— — 


2.6% 


G. Garitzus, bs Syſieme. 


Now to {ce my whole proceeding, we may' begin from theſe 
calculations, which are four, omitted by the Author, perhaps be. 
caule they make againſt him, in regard they place the ſtar aboye 
the moon by many ſemidiamerers of the Earth. The firſt of 
which is this, computed apon the oblervations of the Landerave of 
Haſſza, and Tycho ; which are, even by the. Authors conceſſion, 
two of the moſt exad oblervers : and in this firſt, I will declare 
the order that I ho'd in the warking ; Which ſhall ſerve for all the 
reſt, in that they are all. made by the {ame rule, not Varying in any 
thing, ſave 1n the quantity of, the given {unmes, that is, in the 
number of the degrees of the Poles altitude, and of the new Stars 
elevation above the Horizon, the diſtance of which from the cen- 
tre of the Earth, in proportion to the {emidiamerer of the terre. 
ſtrial Glob2 is fought, touching which It nothing imports in this 
caſe, ro know how many miles that ſemidiameter conteineth ; 
whereupon the reſolving that, and the diltance of places where 
the oblcrvations were made, as this Author doth, 1s but time and 
labour loſt ; nor do know why he hath made the ſame, and eſpe- 
cially why at the laſt he goech about to reduce the miles found,in- 
to {emidiameters of the Terreſtrial Globe. 

S1 my. Perhaps he doth this to finde with ſuch ſmall meaſures, 
and with ther trations the diſtance of theStar terminated to three 
or four inches ; for 'we that do/not underſtand your rules of Arith- 
metick, are ſtupified in hearing your concluſions z as for inſtance, 
whilſt we read ; Therefore the new Star or Comet was diſtant 
from the Earths centre three hundred ſeventy and three thouſand 
cihht bundred and ſeven miles ; and moreover, two hundred and 


deven, ;four choutand ninety ſevenths 373807.2::, and upon theſe 
preciſe punCtualities, wherein you rake notice of. ſuch ſmall mat- 
ters, weado conceive 1t to be impoſtible, chat you, who in our cal- 
culations keep an account of an inch, can at the cloſe deceive us fo 
much as an hundred miles. 

S a 1 v. This your reaſon and excuſe would paſſe for currant, 
if. 1n a diſtance oft thoulands of miles, a yard over or under were 
ot; any greaz/moment, and if the ſyppoſitions. that we take for 
true, were {a certaio,! as that they could affure us of producing an 
uwdubitable truth in the concluſion ; but here you lee in the twelve 
workings of the Author, the diſtances of the Star, which from 
them one may conclude to have been different from each other; 
(and rherctore wide of the truth) for many hundreds and thou- 


lands of miles : now whilſt that I am more than certain, that that 


which L icck muſt needs differ from the truth by hundreds of miles, 
to what purpplc isit to be ſo curious in our calculations, for fear 
of milling the quantity of an inch? But let us proceed, at laſt, 
tothe working, which I reſolve in this manner. Tycho, as may be 


ſeen 


Diatocus [1]. 


| ſen in that fame note obſerved the ſtar in the polar altitude of 56 
degrees and 58 me. pri. And the polar altitude of the Landgrave 
was 51 degrecs and 15 m7. pri. The altitude of the ſtar in the Me- 
ridian taken by Tycho was 27 degrees 45 mi. pri. The Land- 
grave found its altitude 23 degrees 3 mi. pri. The which altitudes 
are thele noted here, as you ee. 


ml. gr. mM. 


gr. 
\  Tyeho, Pole 55 58 * 27 45 
Landgr. Pole 51 1Y * 23 3 


This done,tubſtrad the lefle from the greater, and there remains 
thele differences here underneath. 


gr. m. 
4 40 
4 43 
Parall. 2 


Where the difference of the poles altitudes 4 gr. 4 mi. pr. 

3 lefſe than the difference of the altitudes of rhe Star 4 gr. 4.2 m. 
pr. and therefore we have the difference of parallaxcs , o'gr. 2 md. 
ri. Theſe things being found , take the Authours own figuce 
Fig. 2.] in which the point B is the ſtation of the Landyrave, 
D the ſtation of Tycho, C the place of the ſtar, A the centre 
of the Earth , A BE the vertical line of the Landgrave, ADP 


gr. m. | : Its chord Bxga of thoſe 
Ang. BAD 4 40 | parts, whereot the femid, 
"I BDF 92: 20 {': AB 1s an 100000. | 
BDC 154 FT 3 Fg ' 42657 
BCD © bf —m_ 58 
68 42667 S142 
$142 
85314 
170628 
42657 
RE: 2008 
59 
55] 3473113294 
$7% 
5 


of Tycho, and the angleB C D the difference of Parallaxes. And 
be. 


269 


275 G. Gaiirt=us, his Sykme. 


becauſe the angle B A D, contcined between the vertical lines, i; 
equal to the difterence of the Polar altitudes, it ſhall be Agr. 40m. 
which I note here apart; and I finde the chord of it by the Table 
of Arches and Chords, and (ct it down neer unto it, which is 8142 
parts, of which the ſcmidiameter A B is 100000. Next, I finde 
the angle B D C with eaſe; for the halt of the angle B A D, which 
is 2 gr. 20 #. added to a right angle, giveth the angleBD F g, gr. 
20 Mm. to which adding the angle C D F, which is the diſtance from 
the vertical point of the greateſt altirude of the Star, which here is 
62 gr. 15 m. it giveth us the quantity of the angle BD C, 
154 grad. 45 min. the which I ſer down together with its Sine, 
taken out of the Table, which is 4265 7, and under this [ note 
the angle of the Parallax BCD © gr. 2 *. with its Sine 58. 
And becauſe inthe Triangle B C D, the fide D B is to the fide 
BC ; as the ſine of the oppoſite angle B C D, to the fine of the 
oppolite angle BD C : therefore, if the line B D were 58. BC 
would be 42657. And becauſe the Chord D B 1s 8142. of thoſe 
parts whereof the ſemidiameter B A is 100000. and we ſeek to 
know how many of thoſe parts is B C ; therefore we will ſay, by 
the Golden Rule, if when BD 1858. BG is 42657. in cale the 
ſaid D B were 8142. bow much would B C be ? I multiply the 
ſecond term by the third, and the produ@ is 34731 3294- Which 
ought to be divided by the firſt, namely, by 53. and the quotient 
hall be the number of the pacts of the line B C, whereof the (e- 
midiameter A B is 100000. And to know how many ſemidiame- 
ters B A, the ſaid line B C doth contein, it will be neceſſary anew 
to divide the {aid quotient ſo found by 100000. and we ſhall have 
the number. of ſemidiameters conteined in BG. Now the nugy 
ber 347313294..divided by 58. giveth 5988160: as here you 
may ſee. g | : | 


8988160; 

F 53 | 347313294 

1 © $717948 
' 


$43 
L 1]00000 | 59 | 8$160. 


But we may much abbreviare the operation, dividing the firſt 
quotient found, that is, 347313294. by the produR of the multi 
vl plication of the two numbers $$. and 1 00000. that is, 


59 


Drartoous. [IL 


59 | 
55,00000 | 3473| 13294 
574 
5 


And this way allo there will come forth 5 91113344 


And {o many {emidiameters are contained in the line B C, to 
which one being added for the line A B, we ſhall have little lefle 
than 61. ſemidiameters for the two lines ABC; and therefore 
the right diſtance from the centre A, to the Star C, ſhall be more 
than 60. ſemidiameters, and therctfore it is {uperiour to the Moon, 
according to Ptoloumy, more than 27. ſemidiameters, and according 
ro Copernicus, more than 8. ſuppoſing that the diſtance of che 
Moon from the centre of the Earth by Copernicus his account is 
what the Author maketh it, 52 ſemidiameters. With this ſame 
working, I find by the obſervations of Camerarins, and of Muno- 
ſus, thar the Star was ſituate in that ſame diſtance, to wit, {ome- 
what more than 60. {emidiameters. Theſe are the obſervations, 
and theſe following next afcer them the calculations. 


gr. M.| | gr. m. 
Alcicude of cCamerar. 52 24'Altitude of 5 24, 28 
the Pole 3 Munoſ” 39 30; the Star ) 


OD —— P__—_—_—_—_— EE 


Differences of the | Differences 
Polar Altitudes C v9 0. | of the alofs31 2 54 


Difference of Parallaxes "Do 04. ang. BCD. 


— 


| —_ —— 


— — 


gr. wm. 

BAD 12 54 andits chord or ſubtenſe 22466. 
Anger 8D 161 592 vines 3 39930 

BCD oo o4\ __ RO 


Thc Golden Rule. 


22466 
116 30930 ' 22466 


_— ——————_ [WY "Y 
upp_ap= 4 


673980 _ 
. , 202194. 
6 7398 Py E- 
59 _ Diſtance B C 5g. and 
116 | 6948 | 73380 almoſt 60. ſemidiameters. 
1144 


lO 


EE 


The 


271 


<0 ow Broea. awe. 


hs ca. Rs HR. w* m_—y 
- "—_—_ Y : — —— un 


T 
( 

+1 
( 
}; 

3 


* 
: 


272 G. Gartitzus, hi Syſleme. 


"The next working 15 made upon two obſervations of Tycho,ang 
of Munoſins, from which the Star is calculated to be diſtant from 
the Centre of the Earth 478 Semidiameters and more. 


r. m. gr. m. 
Altitudes Tycho. 55 58 | Altitude 84 00 
of the So 39 30 of the Star. 2 67 3o 
| Differences of the 6 ag Differ.of the 16 Zo 
| Polar Altitudes. rf | Ate. of the*C 16 28 
Difference of Parallax. o 2 and ang,BCD 
eee eee EEG RD 
gr. mM. 
BAD. 16 38 its chord 28640 
: An _ DC. 104 14 C._. 6930 
Thy ca CDL 03 C Sines J® 2 
: 
| The Golden Rule. 
| | 55 96930 28640 
\| 28640 
55158 
i 77544 
| 475 
.55;27760| 75200 
| 4596 
” S814: 


Theſc workings following make the Star remote from the Cen- 
tre, more than 358 Semidiameters.. 


gr. m. gr. m. 
Alrtitudes ob awe 51 54 | Altitude J79 56 
of the Pole. Munofius 39 30 | of the « 47 30 
Te RR 3 = | 
" "NFY- BS =. 
IH 
8. Hl, 


Þþ 4 D. 12 a4 its chord eden 


Angles BDC. 106 16 &.. 95996 
BCD. o 3 6 Sines 3 4 


The 


Diatocus [I]. 


The Golden Rule. 


g5 —— 95996 — 21600 
21600 


57597600 
95996 
191992 


Ws 74 
68 20735 | 13600 
3339 
4.2 


”—O2 


— —— - ee el el On 
—— 


From this other working the ſtar is found to be diſtant from the 
centre more than 716. {emidiameters. 


gr. m. Fr, m. EC. 
Altitudes FLandgr. 51 18 Altitude . 79 3o oo 
of the Pole DHazinzel. 45. 22 | of the Star 3 76 33 45 
2 56 2 56 I5 
2 56 
O O00 1 q 
gr. m. ſec. 


BAD 2 56 oo its Chord 5120 
An » 


BDC 101 55 oo Fines 97845 


BCD © 00 Ig 7 


— — — _ 


The Golden Rule: FE: 
7 — 97845 -— $130 


5120 


— 


1966900 
57545 
459225 


——— 


71 


7 |5009| 65400 
4 


Theſe as you ſee are five workings which place the ſtar very 
much above the Moon. And here I defire you to conſider upon 
that particular » Which even now I told you, namely, that in great 

M m dt- 


_ —_— gp. A ro RR 


274, 


diſtances , the mutations, or if you pleaſe correQions , of 2 ye. 


G. Garir*®us, his Syſteme, 


ry few minutes , removeth the ſtar a very great way farther of 
As for example, in the firſt of theſe workings , where the calcy. 
lation made the tar 60. ſemidiameters remote from the centre 
with the Parallax of 2. minutes 3 he that would maintain that * 
was in the Firmament , 15 to corre& inthe oblervations but onely 
two minutes, nay lefle , for then the Parallax ceaſeth, or he. 
commeth ſo {mall , that it removeth the ſtar to an immenſe gi. 
ſtance, which by all is received to be the Firmament, [In the ſe. 
cond indagation y Or working, the correCtion of lefle than 4m. 
prizr. d th the ſame. In the third, and fourth, like as in the hicſt, 
two minutes onely mount the ſtar even above the Firmamenr. 
In the laſt preceding, a quarter of a minute, thatis 15. leconds, 
gives us the ſame. But it doth not {o occur in the {ublunary alti- 
tudes; for if you fancy to your leif what diſtance you moſt 
like , ahd go about to corre& the workings made by the Au- 
thour , and adjuſt them fo as that thzy all an{wer in the ſame 
determinate diſtance , you will find how much greater correQi- 
ons they do require. 

Sa Gs. Itcannot but help us in our fuller underſtanding of 
things, to ſee ſome examples of this which you ſpeak of. _ 

S a Lv. Do you aſlign any whatloever determinate ſublunar 
diſtance at pleaſure in which to conſtitute the ſtar, for with ſmall 
ado we may aflertain our {elves whether correCions like to theſe, 
which we ſee do ſuffice to reduce it amongſt the fixed ſtars, will 
reduce it to the place by you aſſigned. 

SaGk. To take a diſtance that may favour the Authour , we 
will ſuppoſe it to be that which'is the greateſt of all thoſe found 
by him in his 12 workings ; for whilſt it is in controwerſie be- 
tween him and Aftronomers, and that they affirm the ſtar to 
have been ſuperiour to the Moon, and he that it was inferiour, 
very {mall fpace that he proveth it to have been lower , givcth 
him the viGory. 

SaLyv. Let us therefore take the ſeventh working wrought 
upon the obſervations of Tycho and Thaddeus Hagecins , by 
which the Authour found the ſtar to have been diſtant from the 
centre 32. {emidiameters ht NE WO 1s moſt favourable to 
his purpoſe 3 and ro give him all advantages, let us moreover 
place it inthe diſtance moſt disfavouring the Aſtronomers, which 
15 to lituate-it above the Firmament. That therefore being ſup: 
poled,let us ſeek in the next place what corte&ions it would be ne- 
ccſlary to apply to his other 11 workings. And let us begin at the 
firſt calculated upon the obſervations of Hainzelins and Mauroice; 


in which the Authour findeth the diſtance from the centre about 


3- ſemidiameters with the Parallax of 4 gr. 42 m. 30. ſec. LK 
us 


a —_ 


Diatocutt 111: 


1s ſee whether by withdrawing 1t 20. minntes onely , it will riſc 
0 the height of 32. ſemidiameters : See the ſhort and true opera- 


ion. Multiply the fine of the angle BD C, by the line of the 


gr. Nm. gr. m. ſec. 

Hainzelins Pole 458 32 -- x 76 34 30 
Manrolicus Pole 359 SORES. M 62 00 DO: 

Rb 14 34 39 

9 $52 00 


Parallax L232. 30 


BDC 105,21 3o Sine 94910 


BAD 9 52 oo Chord 17200 
Angles ; 
BCD oO 20 oo Sine ,582 


i1$982000 : 
66437 
. 949 Þ 


28 
582 | 163324 | 52000 
688 


468 
2 


p—_—_— 


chard B D, and divide the product , the five laſt figures being cut 


off by the (inc of the Parallax , and the quotient will be 28. ſc- 
midiameters, and an half, ſo that though you make a correQion 
of 4gr. 22 min. 3o ſec. taken from 4 gr. 42 min. 30 ſec. it ſhall 
not elevate the ſtar to the altitude of 32. ſemidiameters, which 
correQtion for Simplicius his underſtanding it , is of 262. minutes, 


and an half. 


ln the ſecond operation made upon the obſervations of Hain- 


zelins, and Sculcrus , with the Parallax of o gr. $ min. 30 ſec. 
the ſtar is found in the height of 25. ſemidiameters or therea- 
bouts, as may be ſeen in the ſubſequent working, 


B D Chord 6166 
BDC 97987 
B "i D l Sines 3 247 


M m 2 97957 


G. Garirtzus, his Syftcme. 


97987 
6166 _. 
557922 * 
557922 
97987 
557922. 
” = 
247 | 6041 | 57842 
1103 
'Si 


And bringing back the Parallax o gr. 8 mr. 30 ſec. to 7gr. 
7 m. Whole ſine is 204,, the ſtar clevateth to 3o lemidiameters.or 


thereabouts; therefore the corretion of o gr. x mi. 3o ſec. doth 
not ſuffice. 


2Q.,, 
204 | 6041 | 87342 
1965 


I'2 


Now let us ſee what correQton is requiſite for the third work. 
ing made upon the obſervations of Haznzelizs and Tycho , which 
rendereth the ſtar about 19 ſemidiameters high , with the Pa- 
rallax of 10 w. pre. The uſual angles aud their fines , and chord 
found by the Authour, are theſe next following 3 and they re- 
move the ſtar (as alſo in the Authours working ) 19 ſemida- 
meters from the centre of the Earth. It is neceſſary therefore for 
the raifing of it , to diminiſh the Parallax according to the Rule 
which he likewiſe obſerveth in the ninth working. Let us there- 
fore ſuppoſe the Parallax to be 6 m. prim. whoſe ſine is 1 75 , and 
the diviſion being made , there is found likewiſe lefle than 31 
{emidiameters for the ſtars diſtance. And therefore the corre&i- 
on of 4 min. prim. 1s toolittle to ſerve the Authours purpole. 


BAD 7 36 Chord 13254 
Angles BDC tg5 52 Sine 40386 
BCD "SR Sine 291 


13254 


Driartocus. III, 


13254 
40886 


— —— 


79924 
106032 
106032 


$3016 
18 = 30 
291 [541903044 | 175 | 5419 
250 16 


181 


Letus come to the fourth working , and the'reſt with the ſame 
rule, and with the chords and fines found out by the Authour 
himſelf ; in this the Parallax is 14 m- prime. and the height found \ 
fſe than 10 ſemidiameters, and diminiſhing the Parallax from 
14 min. < 4 min. yet nevertheleſſe you ſee that the ſtar doth not 
elevate full 31 ſemidiameters. Theretore 10 mis. in 14 min. doth 
not {uffice. 


BDC Sine 43235 


BAD Chord 838142 
Angles 
£B CD Sine 407 


30 
116|3520|19370 
4 


| Inthe fifth operation of the Authour we have the fines and the 
chord as you ſee, and the Parallax is o gr. 42 m. 3o ſec. which 
rendereth the height of the ſtar about 4 ſemidiamcters , and cor- 
reQing the Parallax , with reducing it from o gr. 42 m. 30 ſec. 
toqgr. s m. onely , doth not ſuffice to raile it to ſo much as 28 ſe- 
midiameters , the correGion therefore of o gr. 37 m. 30 ſec. 1s 
too little. 


os 


0B AD Chord 4934 
Angles BDC Sine 97998 
BCD 1236 


» *Y 
5. A 


. . 
5 *. F 


2.78 G. Garlitfus, his Syſteme. . 


——  C'P— @_—O_w———  —— 


293994 
IZLE 
27 
145 ,3953| 23932 
| 1058 
| Oe 3 


——_— - 


> — — 


— 


— 


— 


In the (ixth operation the chord , the fines and Parallax are az 
followeth , and the ſtar is found to be about 4. ſemidiameters let 
us ſee whether it will be reduced, abating the Parallax from $ . 
to 1 1. onely ; Here is the operation , and the ſtar raiſed but to 


| 27. ſemidiamerers or thereabout ; therefore the correQion of 7 m. 
'* in 8 1. doth not ſuffice. . 


BD Chord 1920 
BDC Sine 40248 
| BCDVgr. Sine © © © 233 


40248 


1920 
J 804960 
| 362232 


40248 


———  —— ———— 


26 


29| 772| 76160 
I 98 
I 


—— lk. 


— — 


_—— — 


In the eighth operation the chord, the fines, and the Parallax, 
as you fee, are theſe enſuing , and hence the Authour calculates 
the height of the ſtar to be 1. ſemidiameter and an half, with the 
Parallax of 4.3. mm. which reduced to 1 min. yet notwithſtand- 


Ing giveth the ſtar lefſe remote than 24. {emidiameters, the corre- 
Cion therefore of 42. min, 1s not enough. 


B D Chord 1804 
BD C Sine 36643 
B C D Sine 29 


36643 


Driartocus. LIL 


36643 
1804 


146572 
293144 
36643 _ 

NY 
29 | 661 | 03972 
53 


2 


=> ——_—_—_—_— 


— — —> 
—— 


— 


Let us now ſee the ninth. Here is the chord , the fines and 
the Parallax which is 15 w. From whence the Authour calcu- 
lates the diſtance of the ſtar from the ſuperficies of the Earth 
to be lefſe than a * ſeven and fortieth part of a ſemidiameter , 
but this is an errour in the calcultaion , for it cometh forth truly, 
as we ſhall ſee here below , more than a ſifth : See here the quo- 
tienc 153K , whach is more than oae fifth. 


B D Chord 232 
BDC Sine 39946 
BCD Sine 4.36 


39946 
Read Li 


78092 
117138 
78092 


_ 4 


| 436 |90|58672 


——_—— 


That which the Authout preſently after ſubjoyns in way of 
amending the obſervations , that is, that it ſuſſiceth not to re= 
duce the difference of Parallax, neither to a minute, nor yet 
to the cighth part of a minute 1s true. But I ſay , that neither 
Will the tenth part of a minute reduce the height of the ſtar to 
32. ſemidiameters 3 for the ſine of the tenth part of a minute, 
that is of ſix ſeconds, is 3 3 by which if we according to our Rule 
ſhould divide 9o. or we may lay , if we ſhould divide gog8672- 
by Zooo00. the quotient will be 30; , rhat 1s little more 
than 30. ſemidiameters and an half. 


——— m 
— —— 


— — — ——— — 


— 


The tenth piveth the altitude of the ſtar one fifth of a ſemi- 
Uameter , with theſe angles, fines, and Parallax, thatis, 4 gr- 


39g 


* Here the La- 
tine verhion 15 erro- 
neous, making it 
a fortieth part of, 
&c 


250 


G. Garitzus, bi Syſleme. 


39 m. which 1 fee that being reduced from 4. gr. 30 min. to 2 win, 
yet nevertheleſle it elevates not the ſar to 29. (emidiameters, 


BD Chord 1746 
BDC Sine 92050 
BCD 4 gr. 3o m. Sine 78 46 


£52300 
36820 
64435 
| 9205 
50 
58 | 1607 | 19309 
44 
4 


S—. — HD _—T—_— >  ——_———— 


The eleventh rendererh the ſtar to the-Authour remote about 
x13. ſemidiameters, with the Parallax of 55. min. let us ee, re- 
ducing it to 20 min. whether it will exalt the ſtar : See here the 
calculation elevates it to little lefſe than 33. ſemidiameters, the 
correCtion therefore is little lefſe than 35, min. in 55. min. 


B D Chord 19749 
BDC Sine 96 166 
BCD o gr. 55 m. Sine 1600 


7% » RUNOY 
592 | 18990 | 56168 
1536 
56 


—_— — W_—_ 


Gt 


The twelfth with the Parallax of 7. gr. 36. min. 'maketh the 
ſtar letle high than 6. ſemidiameters , reducing the Parallax to 
20 mn. it carrieth the ſtar to lefle than 30. lemidiameters di- 
ſtance , therefore che correCtion of 1 gr. 16. min, ſafficeth not. 


BD 


Diatocus [I]. 


BD Chord 17258 
BDC Sine 96159) 
BCD 1 gr. 36 m. Sine 2792 


17258 
96150 
862900 
17258 
103545 
155322 
28 
16593 


4257 
29 


—_—— 


502 56700 


— —— 
Ce ———_ 


Theſe are the Corre&ions of the Parallaxes 
of the ten workings of the Author, to 
reduce the Star to the altitude of 

| 32 Semidiameters. 


| gr. Mm. ſec. gr. Mm. ſec. | 
| 04: 22. 30 —————— In 04 42 30 
'019, O4 + pa In O00 IA OO 
OK 7 © SOAR BC, .mn Oo 14 00 
OS > 8 IROORGES: Ta —— 11 O00 42 30 
00 07 O0-+_ = —1in oo 13 oo 
| 00 42 00 __ HS — 1n 00 43 00 
| 00 I 4 50 — — 1M O00 15 00 
| . 
| O4. >, : ep RU EE” 1N 04. Zo 00 
00 35 O00 .— oo In 00 55 00 
'oI 16 00 — _ in Ot 36 oo 
Ls CH 2 ——— — 
;. "ALS 296.60 | 
540 | 240. 9 
BS $36.540 


—_—_— — ———_ 
— 


From hence we ſce, that to reduce the Star to 32. Semidiame- 
T5110 altitude, it is requiſite from the ſum of the Parallaxes 836. 
{O lubrrat 756. and to reduce them to $0. nor yet doth that 


correction ſuffice. 


N n 


281 


>—_ 


282 


G. Garitzus, bs Syſmre. 


Here we ſec alſo, (as I have noted even now) that ſhould the 
Authour conic;t to aſſign the diſtance of 32. yewidiamerters for 


\ the truc height of the Star, the correction of thole his 10. workings, 


(1 lay 10. becaulc the ſecond being very Ih, 1s reduccd to the 
height of 32. Semidiamerers, with 2, minutes correGion) 10 make 
them all to reſtore the ſaid Star to that diſtance, would require {ſuch 
a reduction of Parallaxes, that amongſt the whole number of (yh. 


ſtra&ions they ſhould make more than 756 m. pr. whereas in the 


5. calculated by me, which do place the Star above the Moon, £5 
corre& them in (uch ſort, as to conſtitute It in the Firmamenr 
the correftion onely of 10. minutes, and one fourth ſufficerh, ; 

Nv adde to thele, other 5. workings, that place the Star pre- | 
cilely 11 the Firmament, without need of any correGtion at all, 
and we ſhall have ten workings or indagations that agree to place 
it in the Firmament, with the correQtion onely of 5. of them (as 
bath been ſeen) but 10. ». and 15 ſec. Whereas for the corregi.. 
on of thole 10. of the Authour, to reduce them to the altitude of 
32. ſemidiameters, there will need the emendations of 7:6 mi. 
nutes in $36. that is, there muſt from the ſumme $36 be ſubſtra- 
fed 756. if you would have the Star elevated to the altitude of 
32. {emidiameters, an1 yet that correction doth not fully ſerye. 
The workings that immediately without any correQion free the 
Star from Parallaxes, and therefore place it in the Firmament, 
and that alſo in the remoteſt parts of it, and in a word, as high 
as the Pole it (elf, are theſe 5. noted here. 


gr. mM. gr, m. 
Camerar. + ISAS : 30 26 
Snerer-Polas alcit. } 1 54 | Altit. of the Star 79 56 

> bo 7 Tl 
# gr. mM. gr. th. 
L 0 To s | 
= Koi i $Polar a!tit. ”; : . | Altit. of the Star 4 : - 
2 56 £4 2 56 
gr. MM. gr. th 
Tycho 8 . 84 00 
P...., SPolar altit. 255 54 | Altit. of the Start o6 
+ 4 4 *$ 


Reinold. 


Dr1arocus. IIL 


| gr. mM. _—— 
rp | ; Fonar 2s q | Altit. of the Star : : - 
"I 

Fo 56 Ws : by 

gr. Mm. B'S 

C © . : 2 2 : : , 

Cmerate $ Pola akit-2/g 6p | Altit. of the Star), 4 

hs n 4s HEE Sock 5 


—_ — — 


—_—_— 


Of the remaining combinations that might be made of the Ob- 
ſervations of all theſe Aſtronomers, thole that make the Stars {ub- 
lime to an infinite diſtance, are many in number, namely, about 
30. more than thole who give the Star, by calculation, to be be- 
low the Moon 3 and becaule (as it was agreed npon berween us) it 
i5 to be believed that the Obleryators have erred rather little than 
much, it 15 a manifeſt thing that the corre&ions to be applied to 
the Obſervaations, which make the ſtar of an infinite altitude, to 
reduce it lowcr, do {ooner, and with lefler amendment place it in 
the Firmament, than beneath the Moon ; fo that all thele applaud 
the opinion of thole who put'it amongſt the fixed Stars. You may 
adde, that the corrections required for thoſe emendations , are 
much leſſer than thole, by which the Star from an unlikely proxi- 
mity may be removed to the height more favourable for this Au- 
thour, as by the foregoing examples hath been ſeen ; amongſt 
which impoſſible proximinies, there arc three that ſeem to remove 
the Star from the Earths centre, a lefſe diſtance than one Semidi- 
ameter, making it, as it were, to turn round under ground, and 
theſe are thoſe combinations, wherein the Polar altitude of one 
of the Obſervators being greater than the Polar altitude of the 
other, the elevation of the Star taken by the firſt,is leſſer than the 
clation of the Star taken by the latter. 


The firſt of theſe is this of the Landgrave with Gemma, 
where the Polar altitude of the Landgrave 51 gr. 18 min. 1s 
greater than the Polar altitude of Gemma, which is 50 gr. 50 wm. 
But the altirude of the Star of the Landgrave 79 gr. 30 min. 
15 I«([er than that of the Star, of Gemma 79 gr. 45 min. 


gr. Mm. gr. mm. 
Landgrave 18 


Gemma {Polar altit. ha 50 | Altit. of the Star bs # 
Nn 2 The 


28; 


284 


G. Garirtzus, bi Syſfleme. 
The other two 5 below. 


gr. mM. gr. m. 
Buſ ne. Polar Alrudeg5' Ati, of the Starg?? 20 
Gemma. 50 50 79 4s 

Keinhboldus. 


Gemma. 


Jrolar Aldtudeg5' * oFAkir of the Seary7 30 
Safe In 7945 


— — 


_ — - —_ — —— — — — — - — 
- — <———_—— <_— 


CCCCCCCGCGC_CC T_T 


From what I have hitherto demonſtrated, you may gueſſe how 
much this firſt way of finding out the diſtance of the Star, and 
proving it {ublunary introduced by the Authour, maketh againſt 
himſclf, and how much more probably and clearly the Fifanc 
thereof is colle&ed to have been amongſt the more remote fixed 
Stars. 

Sine. Asto this particular, I think that the inefficacy of the 
Authors demonſtrations 1s very plainly diſcovered;But I fee that all 
this was compriled in but a few leaves of his Book, and it may be, 
that ſome other of his Arguments are more concluſive then theſe 
firſt. 

S a1 v. Rather they muſt needs be leſle valid, if we will take 
thoſe that lead the way for a'proof of the reſt : For (as it iscleart) 
the uncertainty and inconclufiveneſle of thoſe, is maniteſtly ob- 
terved to denve it felt from the errours comminted in the inſtru- 
mental obſervations, upon which the Polar Altitude, and height 
of the Star was thought to have been juſtly taken, all in effe& 
having eaſily erred; And yet to find the Altitude of the Pole,A- 
ſrronomers have had Ages of time to apply themſelves to it, at their 
lealure : and the Meridian Altitudes of the Star are eaſier to be 
obſerved, as being moſt terminate, and yielding the Obſervator 
lome tame to continue the {ame,in regard they change not ſenſibly, 
in a ſhort time, as tho(e do that are remote from the Meridian. And 
if this be lo,as it 13 molt certain, what credit ſhall we give to Calcu- 
lations founded upon Obſervations more numerous, more difficult 
to be wrought, more momentary in variation, and we may add, 
with Inltruments more incommodious and erroneous ? Upon a 
flight peruſal of the enſuing demonſtrations, I ſee that the Com- 
putations are made upon Altitudes of che Star taken in different 
VerticalCirclcs,which are called by theArabick name, vimuthsmn 
which obfervations moveable inſtruments are made uſe of, not on- 
ly 1n the \ ertical Circles, but in the Horizon alſo,at the ſame time 3 
inſomuch that it 15 requitite in the ſame moment that the altitude 
is taken, to have obſeryed,in the Horizon, the diſtance of the gh 

t1Ca 


Diatocus [I]. 


tical point 1 which the Star 1s , from the Meridian ; Morcover, 
ifcer a conliderable interval of time, the operation muſt b« re. 
peated, and exact account Kept of che time chat paſlled, truſtiag 
-:cher ro Dials,or to other oblcryations of the Stars. Such an V/:9 
of Obſervations doth he fer before you , comparing them with 
ſuch another made by another oblerver in another place with a- 
nother difterent inſtrument, and at another time ; and from this 
rhe Authour leeks to colle& what would have been;the Elevations 
of the Star, and Horizontal Latitudes happencd in the time and 
hour of the other firſt obſervations,and upon ſuch a coxquation he 
in the cad grounds his account. Now I reter it to you, what credit 
5 to be given to that which is deduced from tuch like workings. 
Morcover, I doubt not in the leaſt, but that it any one would tor- 
cure himſelf with ſuch tedious compurations, he would find, as in 
thole aforegoing, that there were more that would favour the ad- 
verſe party,than the Authour : But I think it not worth the while 
rotake {0 much pains in a thing,which is not, amongſt thoſe prima- 
ry ones, by us underſtood. | 

Sack. Iamoft your Opinionin this particular : But this buſj- 
nefle being environed with fo many intricacies, uncertainties,and 
crrours, upon what confidence have ſo many Aſtronomers politive- 
ly pronounced the new Star to have been io high ? 

$41 v. Upon two ſorts of obſervations molt plain, molt caſie, 
and moſt certainzone only of which is more than ſufficient to aſſure 
us, thatit was 1cituate in the Firmament, or at leaſt by a great 
diltance ſuperiour to the Moon. One of which is taken trom the 
equality, or little differing inequality of its diſtances from rhe 
Pole, aſlwell whilſt it was in the lowelt part of the Meridian, as 
when it was in the uppermoſt : The other is its having perperual- 
ly kept the ſame diltances from certain of the fixcd Stars,adjacent 
tO it, and particularly from the eleventh of Caſſzopea , no more 
remote from it than one degree and an half ; from which two par- 
aculars is undoubtedly inferred,either the ablolute want of Paral- 
lax, or ſuch a ſmalneſle thereof, that it doth afſure us with very 
expuditious Calculations of its great diſtance from the Earth. 

SaGk. But thele things, were they not known to this Author? 
andif he ſaw them, what doth he ſay unto them ? 

Sairv, Weare wont to ſay, of one that having no reply that 
15able to cover his fault, produceth frivolous excuſes, cerca di at- 
taccarſt alle funi del cielo, | He ſtrives to take hold of the Cords of 
Heaven; ] but this Authour runs,not to the Cords, but to the Spi- 
ders Web of Heaven; as you ſhall plainly ſee in our examinarion 
of theſe two particulars even now hinted. And firſt, that which 
ſheweth us the Polar diſtances of the Obſervators one by one, I 
have noted down in theſe brief Calculations ; For a full under- 


ſtand- 


205 


£4 i = - . 
» 

- > &: 
= "_ *"C. 


2.86 


G. Garirt*us, his Sy{icme. 


ſtanding of which, 1 ought firſt to advertile you, that when ever 
the new Star, or other Phxnomenon 15 near to the earth, turnin 
with a Diurnal motion about the Pole, it will ſeem to be farther 
off from the (aid Pole, whilſt it is 1n the lower part of the Merigj. 
an, then whilſt it is above, as 1n this Figure | being fig. third of 
this Dial.) may be een. In which the point T. denotes the cen. 
tre of the Earth ; O. th: place of the Oblervator ; the Arch VPC 
the Firmament ; P. the Pole. The Phenomenon, [ or appearance 
moving along the Circle F S. 1s {ecn one while under the Pole b 
the Ray O | C. and another while above, according to the Ra 
OS PD. {o that the places (een 1n the k 1r:nament are D. and C.bur 
the true places " rclpect of the Centre T, are B, and A, equidi= 
ſtant from the Pole. Where it is manifcſt that the apparent place 
of the Phenomenon S,that 1s the point 1), 15 nearcr to the Pole than 
the other apparent place C, ſeen along the Line or Ray OF Co 
which 1s the tirſt thing to be noted. In the {econd place you muſt 
notc that the cxces of the apparent inferiour diſtance from thePole, 
ovcr and above the apparent {uperiour diſtance from the ſaid Pole, 
is greater than the Interijour Parallax of the Phenomenon, that is, I 
ſay, thar the exceſle of the Arch CP, (the apparent inferior di- 
ſtance) over and above the Arch PD, (the apparent ſuperior di- 
ſtance) 1s greater then the Arch C A, (that is the inferiour Para- 
lax.) Which is cafily proved ; for the Arch C P. more exceedeth 
P D, themPB; PB, being bigger than P D, but PB. is equalto 
PA, and the cxccfſe of C P, above P A, is the arch, C A, there- 
fore the excefſe of the arch CP above the arch PD, is great- 
cr than thearch C A, whichis the parallax of the Phzxnomenon 
placedin F, which was to be. demonſtrated. Andto pive all ad- 
vantages to the Author , let us ſuppole that the parallax of the ſtar 
in F , is the whole cxcefle of the arch C P (that is of the inferiour 
diſtance from the pole ) aboye the arch P D *(the inferiour di- 
ſtance.) 1 proceed in the next place to examine that which the 
oblervations of all Altronomers cited by the Authour giveth us, 
amongſt which , there is not one that maketh not againlt himſelf 
and his purpole. And let us begin with theſe of Byſchins, who 
finderh the ſtars diſtance from the pole, when it was ſuperiour;to be 
25 gr. 10 mM. and the infcriour- to be 25 gr. 3o me. ſo that the ex- 
cefſe is o gr. 20 #m. Which let us take (in favour of the Author) as 
if it all were the parallax of the ſtar in F, that is the angle T F O- 
Then the diſtance from the Vertex | or Zenith] that 1s the arch 
CV, is67 zr. 20. Theſe two things being found, prolong the 
line CO, and from it let fall the perpendicular T I, and let us 
conſider the triangle T OI, of which the angle 1 is right angle, 
and the angle I OT known, as being vertical to the angle V OC, 
the diſtance of the ſtar from the Vertex, Moreover in the triangle 


TIF, 


Diatocus TIT. 


TiF, which allo rectangular , there 1s known the angle F, ta- 

ken by the paralla x. Then note in {ome place apart the two an- 

ls JOT and IFT, and of them rake the fines, which arc 

ere cr down to them, as you leen. Andbecaule in the triangle 

; OT. the line T 1 is 92276. of thole parts, whereof the whole 

ne TO 15 100000, and moreover in the triangle I F T,the fine T 1 

1» 592. Ol chole parts » whereof the whole fine T F i; 100000, to 

3nd how many T Þ is of thole parts, whereof T O is 100000: 

we will fay by the Rule of three: If TI be 582. TF is an 

| 00000. but if T 1 were 92276. how much would T F be. 

I.ct us multiply 92276. by 100000. and the produ@& will be 

3227600000. and this muſt be divided by 582. and the quotient 
will be 1585 4982. and fo many ſhall there be in T F of thote 

parts , of which there are in T O an 1v0000. So that it it were 

required to know how many lines T O, areinTF, we would 

divide 155 4982 by 100000. and there will come forth 158. and 

very near an halt ; and ſo many diameters ſhall be che diſtance 

of the ſtar F , from the centre F, and to abreviate the opera- 

tion , we ſecing, that the product of the multiplication of 92 276. 

by 100000 , ought to be divided firſt by 582, and then the quo- 

nent of that diviſion by 100000. we may without multiplying 
92276. by 100000. and with one onely diviſion of the ſine 
92 2 76. by the ſine 5823. ſoon obtain the ſame ſolution, as may 
be (ecn there below ; where 922 76. divided by 582. giveth us the 
ſaid 15S; , or thereabouts. Let us bear in mind therefore , thac 
the onely diviſion of the fine T I, as the fine of the angle TOI 
by the fne T1, as the fine of the angleIFT, giveth us the di- 
ſtance ſought T F , in fo many diameters T O. 


gr. Mm. 


BT 67 20E.. 92275 
Anglesd1 þ CEEED o Sines 4 FA 
Tl TF. TI T F 
TY 1 0000 92276 0 

15554982 
552 | 9227600000 

3407003746 

49297867 
DEI , 8 
100000 | 158 | 54982 

TRY 
582 | 92276 
_ 34970 
492 
3 See 


pn 


20” 


G. Gartirtxus, bi Syfeme. 


See next that which the oblervations of Pencerns giveth us , in 
which the inferiour diſtance from the Pole 1s 25 gr. 21 m. andthe 
ſuperiour 28 gr- 2 m. the diftcrence © gr. 19 m. and the diſtance 
from the vertical point 66 gr. 27 m. from which particulars is ga. 
thered the ſtars diſtance trom the centre almolit 166 (emedia. 
mcters. 


gr. m. 
TAE HO B 1672 
Angles 1 EF C ja "7 dines gy / 
165+: 


553 | 91672 
36397 


312 
4 


Here take what Tycho his obſervation holdeth forth to us, in- 
tecrpreted with greateſt favour to the adverlary 3 to wit, the uteri 
our diſtance fiom the pole is 28 gr. 13 m. and the {uperiour 28 gr, 
2 m1. omitiing the dulf. cence which is © gr. 11 #7. as if all were one 
Parallax 3 the dilrance fio.n the vertical point 62 gr. 15 #. Behold 


here beiow the opcration , and the diltance of the ſtar from the 
centre found to be 976,2 ſemidiameters. 


gr. m. 
zAC 62 157. \B88500 
Angles | E C "I C vines 320 
27673 
320 | 88500 
2418 
I 


-—_ — —— A eo — 


——— 


The obſervation of Reinboldus, which is the next enſuing,giv- 


eth us the diſtance of the Star from the Centre 793. Semidir 
meters, f 


2 gr. mM. 


IAC Y 66 5*E . 92026 
Angles] oY Sines 3 ap 
© 1 793% 
.116 | 92026 
| 10898 


33 
Fro 


DiatoGcus TIT]; 289 


From the following obſervation of the Landgrave, the diſtance 
of the Star from the Centre is made to be 1057, Semidiameters. 


r mm 


IAC 66 570. 9201s 
Anglesd| p 7 '" Sines 87 


105 7% 
$7 [92012 
5663 
5 


— 
YR _- — —— — 


Two of the moſt favourable obſervations for the Authour be- 
ing taken from Camerarins, the diſtance of the Star from the Cen- 
tre 15 found to be 3143 Semidiameters. 


gr. 
JAC 65 430g. . 91152 
Angleed E C y 30 Sines 2 29 

3143 

29| $1152 

4295 


C—_———___©'r—GCr—rW_—_—_ Doo 


The Obſervation of Manoſixs giveth no Parallax, and there- 
fore rendreth the new Star amongſt the higheſt of the fixed. That | 
of Hainzelius makes it infinitely remote, but with the correQion \4t 
of an half min. prim. placeth it amongſt the fixed Stars. Aud the 
ſame is colle&ed from UVrſin«s, with the correQtion of 12. min. prom. 
The other Aſtronomers have not given us the diſtance above and '4 
below the Pole, io that nothing can be concluded from them. By '; 
this time you ſee,that all the obſervations of all thele men conſpire uf 
againſt the Author, in placing the Star in the Heavenly and high- 
clt Regions. 

Sx 68. But what defence hath he for himſelf againſt ſo manifeſt & 
contradictions ? | a} 

Sa1lv. He bctakes himſelf to one of thoſe weak threads which | 
| (peak of;ſaying that theParallaxes come to be leiſened by means W 
of the refrations, which opperating contrarily ſublimate the Phe- | L / 
nomenon, whereas the Parallaxes abaſe it. Now of what little " 
ſtead this lainentable rctuge is,zudge by this,that in caſe that effe&of 
the refraGions were of ſuch an efficacy, as that which not long time '"'F 
ſince ſome Aſtronomers have introduced, the moſt that they could " 
work touching the elevating a Ph.exomenon above the Horizon vl 
Oo more | 


274 


G. Gartir*us, his Syſicme. 


more than truth, when it is before hand 23. or 24. Degrees bigh 
would be rhe leflſening its Parallax about 3. minutes, the which 
abatement is too {mall to pull down the Star below the Moon, agg 
in ſome caſcs 1s lefle than the advantage given him by us in admit. 
riag that the excelle of the inferiour diſtance from the Pole above 
the Superiour,is all P arallax, the which args, 
and palpable than the effe& of Retration, of the greatneſſe of 
which | ftand in doubt, and yor without realon. But beſides, | 
demand of the Author, whether he thinks that thole Aſtronomers, 
of whoſe oblcrvations he maketh uſe, had knowledye of theſe ef- 
f:.&s of RetraGions, and conſidered the lame, or no; if they did 
know and coniider them, it 1s 1calo.:able ro think that the,kept ac- 
count of them in altigning rhe rruc Elevatio: of the Star, making 
in thoſe degrees of Aititude ducovered with the Inſtruments, ſuch 
abarements as weic convenicnt on the account of the alterations 
made by the Refi ations 3 inlomuch that the diſtances by them de- 
livered, were in the end thole correGed aid exact, and not the ap- 
parent and falle ones. Burif he think that thole Authors made 
no refletion upon the ſaid Refra&ions, it muſt be conteſſcd, that 
they had in hke manner erred in determianng all thoſe things which 
cannot be pertealy adjuſted without allowance for the ReftraGti- 
ons 3 amongſt which things one 1s the preciſe inveſtigation of the 
Polar Altitudes, which are commonly taken from the two Meridi- 
an Altitudes of ſome of the fixed Stars that are conſtantly vilible, 
which Alcitudes will come to be altered by Refrcaction in the lame 
manner, uſt as thoſe of the new Star ; {o that the Polar Altuude 
that is deduced from them, will prove to be deicQive, and to par- 
rake of ' rhe telf ſame want which this Author aſſigns to the Alti- 
tudes aicrnbed to the new Star, to wit, both that and theſe will 
be with equal talſhood placed higher than really they are. But any 
fuch errour, as far as concerns our preſent buſinefſe, doth no pre- 
Jadce at all : For we not needing ro know any more, but onely 
the difference between the two diſtances of the new Star from the 
Poje ar ſuch time as it was inferiour and ſuperiour,it is evident that 
{uch diſtances would be the (ame, taking the alteration of Retra- 
G10n commonly for the Star and for the Pole, or for them when 
commonly amended. The Authors Argument would indeed have 
had tome ſtrength, though very (mall, if he had aſſured us that 
the Altitude of the Pole had been once preciſely afligned, and cor- 
rected from the errour depending on refra&tion, from which a- 
gain the Aſtronomers had not kept themſelves in afligning the al- 
titudes of the new Star ; but he hath not aſcertained us of that, 
nor perhaps could he have done, nor haply, (and rhis 15 more pro- 
bable) was that caution wanting in the Obſervarors. 


SaGr. This argument is in my judgment {ufficiently wy 
ca 5 


15 far more clear 


Diatocus [I]: 


«d; therefore tell m2 how he dil-ingageth himſelf in the next place 
f.om rhat particular of the Scars having conſtantly kept the fame 
Jſtance from the fixed Stars circumyacent to 1t. 

<1, v. He betakes himſelf, in like manner, to two threads, yer 
more unable to uphold him than the former : one of which is like- 
wiſe faſtened to refraftion, but lo much lels firmly, in that he 
{aich, that refraGion operating upon the new Star, and (ublimating 
ic higher chan its true (ituation, maketh the ſeeming diſtances un- 
tain ro be diſtinguiſhed from the rrue, when compared to the cir- 
cumpoſed fixed Stars that environ it. Nor can I lufficiently ad- 
mirc how he can difſemble his knowing how that the ſame refra- 
Gion will work alike upon the new Star, as upon the antient one 
itz neighbour, elevating both equally, ſo as that ſuch a like acci- 
dent alcereth not the {pace betwixt them. His other {ubterfuge 1 
yet more unhappy and carryeth with it much of ridicalous, it be- 
ing founded upon the errour that may ariſe 1n the inſtrumen talo- 
pzration it felt ; whilſt that che Obſervator not being able to 
conſtitute the centre of the eyes pupil in the centre of the Sex- 
tant (an Inſtrument imployed in obſerving the diſtance between 
wo Stars) but holding it elevated above that centre, as much as 
the ſaid pupil is diſtant from I know not what bone of the cheek, 
againſt which the end of the Fnſtrument reſteth, there is formed 
in the eyean angle more acute than that which is made by the {ides 
of the [nſtrument 3 which angle of rayes differeth alſo from it 
ſelf, at ſuch time as a man looketh upon Stars, not much elevated 
above the Horizon, and the ſame being afterwards placed at a 
orcat height 3 that angle, ſaith he, is made different, while the In- 
ſtrument goeth aſcending, the head ſtanding (till : but if in moun- 
ting the Inſtrument, the neck ſhould bend backwards, and the 
head go riſing, together with the Inſtrument, the angle would then 
continue the ſame. So that the Authours anſwer ({uppolſeth thar 
the Oblervators in uling the Inſtrument have not raiſed the head, 
a5 they ought to have done 3 a thing which hath nothing of likeli- 
hood 1n it. But granting that lo it had been, I leave you to judge 
what difference can be between two acute angles of two equicru- 
ral triangles, the ſides of one of which triangles are cach four 
[ Italian] Braces | i.e. about three Engliſh yards] and thoſe of the 
other, four braces within the quantity of the diameter of a Pea ; 
tor the differences cannot be abſolutely greater between the length 
of the two viſive rayes, whilſt the line is drawn perpendicularly 
trom the centre of the pupil, upon the plain of the Rule of the 
Sextant (which line is no bigger than the breath of the thumb) 
and the length of the ſame rayes, whilſt elevating the Sextant, 
without raiſing the head together with it, that {ame line no longer 
falleth perpendicularly upon the ſaid plane, but inclineth, making 
Oo 2 the 


"0 


291 


ZL92% 


4 Traguardi. 


G. Gatti = us, his Syſkeme. 


the angle towards the circumference ſomething acute. But wholly 
to free this Authour from thelc unbappy lies, let him know, (1n re- 
eard it appears that he is not very skiltul in the ule of Aſtronomi- 
call Inſtruments) that in the tides of the Sextant or Quadrane 
there are placed two * Sights, one 1n the centre, and the other at 
the other at the oppoſite end, which are railed an inch or more a- 
bove the plane of the Rule ; and through the tops of thoſe ſights 
the ray of the eyc is made to patic, which cy c likewiſe is held an 
hands breadth or two, or it may be more, from the Inſtrument; { 
that neither the pupil, nor any bone of the cheek, nor of the whole 
body toucheth or ſtayeth it {elf upon the Inſtrument, nor much 
lefſe is the Inſtrument upheld or mounted in the armes, eſpecially 
if it be one of thole great ones, as 1s uſual, which weighing tens, 
hundreds, and alſo thouſands of pounds, are placed upon very 
ſtrong feet or frames : fo that the whJle objection vaniſheth, 
Thele are the lubrerfuges of this Authour,which, though they were 
all of ſteel, would not {ecure him the hundredth part of a minute ; 
and with thele he conceits to make us believe, that he hath com- 
penlated that difference, which importeth more than an hundred 
minutes 3 I mean, that of the not oblerving a notable difference 
in the diſtances between one of the fixed ſtars, and the new ſtarin 
in any of their circulations ; which, had it been neer to the Moon, 
it ought to have been very conſpicuous to the meer ſight, without 
any Inſtrument, eſpecially comparing it with the eleventh of Cf- 
ſeopeia, uts neighbour, within 1 gr. 30 #7. which ought to have va- 
ried from it more than two diameters of the moon, as the more 
intelligent Aſtronomers of thoſe times do well note. 

Sack Methinks I ſee that unfortunate Husbandman, who af- 
ter all his expected crops, have been beaten down and deſtroyed by 
a ſtorm, gocth up and down with a languiſhing and down-caſt 
look, gleaning up every {mall ear that would not ſuffice to keep a 
chicken alive one {ole day. 

S a Lv. Truly, this Authour came out too (lenderly provided 
with armes againſt the aſſailants of the Heavens inalterability, and 
wich too brittle a chain attempted to .pull down the new ſtar of 
Caſſiopeia from the higheſt Regions, to theſe ſo low and clementa- 
ry. And for that I think that we have ſufficiently demonſtrated 
the vaſt difference that is between the arguments of thoſe Aſtro- 
nomers, and of this their Antagoniſt, it will be convenient that we 
leave this particular, and return to our principal matter ; in which 
there preſents it ſelf to our conſideration the annual motion com- 
monly aſcribed to the Sun, but by Ariftarchxs Samiws firſt of all, 
and after by Copernicus taken from the Sun, and transferred upon 
the Earth; againſt which Hypotheſis, methinks I ſee Simplicins to 
come ltrongly provided\, and particularly with the —_ 2 

uckler 


Drarocue. III. 


b:ckler of the little Treatiſe of Concluſtons, or Dilquiſitions Ma- 
chemarical, the oppugnations of which it would be good to be- 
gin tO produce. 2. 

Siu v. I will, if you fo pleale, reſerve them to the laſt, as thoſe 
that are of lareſt invention. bh 

Sa 1 v. It will therefore be neceſſary, that in conformity to the 
merhod hitherto obſerved, you do orderly, one by one, propound 
che arguments, on the contrary, aſwell of Ariſtotle, as of the 0- 
thr ancients, which ſhall be my task alſo, that ſo nothing may e- 
ſcape our ſtrict conſideration and examination ; aud likewiſe Sa- 

redus, with the vivacity of his wit, ſhall interpole his thoughts, as 
he ſhall finde himſelf inclined. | 

SaGcn. I will doit with my wonted freedome ; and your com- 
mands ſhall oblige you to excule me in lo doing. 

Sa 1. v. The favour will challenge thanks, and not an excuſe. 
But now let Simplicius begin to propole thoſe doubts which dif- 
(wade him from believing that the Earth, in like manner, as the 
other planets, may apt a7 abour a fixed centre. 

$1m v. The firſt and greateſt difliculty is the repugnance and 
incompatibility that is between being in the centre, and being fac 
tiomit; for if the Terreſtrial Globe were to move in a year by 
the circumference of a circle, that is, under the Zodiack, it is im- 
poſlible that it ſhould, at the ſame tune, be 1n the centre of the Zo- 
diack ; but that the Earth is in the ſaid centre AriStotle, Ptolomy, 
and others have many wayes proved. 

Sa1v. You very well argue, aud there is no queſtion but that 
one that would make the Earth to move in the circumference of a 
circle, muſt firſt of neceflity prove, thar it is not in the centre of 
that ſame circle 3 it now followeth, that we enquire, whether the 
Earth be, or be not 1n that centre, about which, I ſay, that it tur- 
neth, and you ſay that it 1s fixed ; and before we ſpeak of this, it 
likewiſe neceſlary that we declare our ſelves, whether you and 1 
have both the {ſame conceit of this centre, or no. Therefore tell 
me, what and where is this your intended centre ? 

Sine. When 1 ſpeak of the centre, I mean that of the Uni- 
verie, that of the World, that of the Starry Sphere. 

Salty. Although 1 might very rationally put it in diſpute, whe- 
ther there be any inch centre in nature, or no 3 being that neither 
you nor any one elſe hath ever proved, whether the World be fi- 
nite and figurate, or elſe infinite and interminate ; yet nevertheleſs 
granting you, for the preſent, thar it is finite, and of a terminate 
Spherical Figure, and that thereupon ir hath its centre; it will be 
requiite to ſee how credible it is that the Earth, and not rather 
{ome other body doth poſſeſle the ſaid centre. 


S1»y. Thar the world i; finite, terminats, and ſpherical, Ari- 


ſtotle 


It hath not bgcs 
hitherto proved by 
ary , whether the 
World be finite or 
infinite, 


24 


The Demon?» 1- 
trons of Ariltot? 
to Þ ave that the 
Unrcerſers finite, 
are all n:llificd by 
denying 1: to be 
»:cveable. 


Arnitoile makes 
that point to be the 
centre of the [nie 
verſe about which 
all the Celeſtial 
Soheres ao yevolve. 

»A queſtion 6s 
put , in caſe that 
if Ariltotle were 
forced ts receive 
ome of two propos - 
trons that make a- 
gam/t bu dottirine, 
which he would 
admit, 


G. Gatitzus, hi Syſleme. 


ſiotle proveth with an hundred demonſtrations. 


Sat v. All which in the cnd are reduced to one alone, and that 
one to none atall; for if 1 deny his aflumprion, to wit, that the 
Univerlec is moveable, all his demonſtrations come to nothing, for 
he oncly proveth the Univerle to be finite and terminate, for that 
it 15 moveable. But that we may not multiply diſputes, ler jt be 
grantcd for once, that the World is tinite, ſpherical, and hath 
ts centre. Andecing that that centre and figure is argued from 
Its mobility , it will, without doubt, b« very realonable, if from the 
circular motions of mundarc bodies we proceed to the particular 
inveſtigation of that centres proper place : Nay Ariſtotle himſelf 
hath argued and derermired in the ſame manner, making that 
{ame to be the centre of the U..iverlſe about which all the Coele- 
leſtial Spheres revolve , aud in which he belerved the Terreſtrial 
Globc to have been placed. Now tel] me Simplicins, if Ariſtotle 
ſhould be confirained by evident experience to alter in part this 
his dilpoſure and order of the Univerie , and conteſle himſelf to 
have been deceived in one of thele two propoſitions , namely, ei- 
ther in placing the Earth in the cegtre, or in laying, that the 
Ccaleſtial Spheres do move about that centre , which of the two 
confeſſions think you would he choole ? 


S1m x. 1 believe ,, that if it ſhould {o fall out, the Peripate- 
ticks. 

S aL v. I do not ask the Peripateticks, I demand of Ariſtotle, 
for as to thoſe, I know very well what they would reply 3 they, as 
obſervant and humble vaſſals of Ariſtotle , would deny all the ex- 
periments and all the obſervations in the World , nay,would allo 
ref uſe to ſee them, thar they might not be forced to acknowle 
them, and would ſay that the World ſtands as Ariſtotle writeth, 
and not as nature will have it, for depriving them of the ſhield 
of his Authoriry, wich what do you think they would appear in the 
field? Tell me therefore what you are perſwaded Ariſtotle him- 
ſelf would doin the caſe. 


Simpy. To tell you the truth , I know not how to reſolve 
which of the two inconveniences 1s to be eſteemed the leſſer. 

SaLv. Apply not I pray you this term of inconvenience to a 
thing which potlibly may of neceſſity be ſo. It was an inconvent- 
ence to place the Earth in the centre of the Celeſtial revolutions; 
but {ecing you know not to which part he would incline, le- 


ſteeming him to be a man of great judgment , let us examine 


which of the two choices is the more rational , and that we will 
hold that Ariſtotle would have received. Reaſluming therefore our 
diſcourle from the beginning , we ſuppole with the good liking of 
Ariſtotle , that the World (of the magnitude of which we have 
no {enlible notice beyond the fixed ſtars) as being of a ſpherical 


figure; 


Dratocus. I II. 


figure 3 and moveth circularly , hath neceſlarily, and in reſpedt of 
irs figure a Centre 3 and we being morcover certain , that within 
the ſtarry Sphere there are many Orbs , the one within another, 
with their ſtars , which likewiſe do move circulary , it is in diſpute 
whether it is moſt reaſonable to believe and to fay thar thele con- 
reined Orbs do move round the {aid centre of the World , or elſe 
about ſome other centre iar remote from chat ? Tell me now Sim- 
plicius what you think conceruing this particular. 

Sine. If we could ſtay upon this onely luppoſition , and that 
we were {ure that we might encoun:er norhing elle that might 6+- 
ſtub us , I would {ay that it were much more realonable to af- 
firm that the -Orb containing, and the parrs contained, do all 
move about one common centre , than abour divers. 

Sat v. Now it it were true that the centre of the World is the 
ſame about which the Orbs of mundane bodies, that is to lay, of 
the Planets, move, it is moſt certain that it 18 not the Earth , but 
the Sun rather that 1s tixed in the centre of the World. So that as 
to this firſt 1mple and general apprehenſion, the middle place 
bclongeth ro the Sun, and the Earth 1s as far remote from the 
centre, as it 15 from that {ame Sun. 

Siny. But from whence do you argue that not the Earth, but 
the Sun 1510 the centre of the Planetary revolutions ? 

Sar v. Linfer the ſame from moſt evident , and therefore ne- 
ceflarily concludent obſervations , of which the moſt palpable ro 
exclude the Earth from the ſaid centre , and to place the Sun 
therein , are, the lecing all the Planets one while neerer and ano- 
ther while farther off from the Earth with (o great differences, thar 
for example, Venxs when it is at the fartheſt, is ſix times more 
remote from us , than when it is neereſt , and Mars rileth almoſt 
eight times as high at one time as at another. See therefore whe- 
ther Ariſtotle was not ſomewhat miſtaken in thinking that it was 

at all tumes equidiſtant from us. 

Sine. Wharin the nextplace are the tokens that their moti- 
ons are about the Sun ? 

Sal v. It 18 argued in the three luperiour planets Mars, Fupi- 
ter, and Saturn , in that we find them alwayes neercſt to the 


Earth when they arc in oppolition to the Sun , and fartheſt off 


when they are towards the conjun&tion , and this approximarian 
and receſlion importeth thus much that Mars neer at hand , ap- 
peareth very neer 60 times greater than when it isremore. As to 
Venus in the next place , and to Mercury , we are certain that 
they revolve about the Sun, in that they never move far from 

im, and 1n that we lee them one while above and another while 

elow It, as the mutations of figure in Venus neceſlarily argueth. 
Tonchiug the Moon it 1s certain , that ſhe cannot in any way 


fe- 


Its MINE rat o- 
wal that :i;r Orb 
Com riwmy. 4 nol the 
par.s ronter-d, do 
1m:ve all hour one 
SELFTy 'an # on 
anvers 

If rhe contre of 
the Wawld be tic 
ſz 4” 1h t14t as 
bout which t'- ncgce 
nets move, the S:in 
and not the Earth 
T placed init, 


Obſcruations from 
w'rnce it 15 co'- 


lefF-d thut the Sun 


and not the Earth 
1s in the centre of 


the Celeſtial rews- 


lutinns, 


The mutation 
of fignre in Venus 
argneth its motion 
to be about the Sun. 


The Moon can- 
mot ſeperate from 


the Earth. 


25 


The anvual mo- 
(121 of the Earth 
mixing with the 
motions of the 0- 
ther Planets pro- 
aArce extravagant 
appearances, 


G. GaLltitzus, hi Syſime, 


ſcperate from the Earth, for the reaſons that ſhall be more diſting. 
ly alledged hereafter. 

SaGr. I expect that I fhall hear more admirable things that 
depend upon this annual motion of the Earth , than were thoſe 
dependant upon the diurnal revolution. 

S atv. Youdo not therein erre : For as to the operation of 
the diurnal motion upon the Celeſtial bodies, it neither Was, nor 
can be other, than to make the Uinverle tcem to run Precipitatel 
the contrary way ; but this annual motion 1ntermixing with the 
particular motions ot all the planets , produceth very many ex- 
travagancies , which have diſaimed and non-pluſt all the greateſi 
Scholars in the World. Bur recurving to our arſt general appre- 
henſions, 1 reply that the centre ot the Celeſtial converſions of 
the five planets Saturn, Jupiter, hiars, Venus aud Mercary , is 
the Sun ; aud ſhall be likewile the centre of the motion of the 
Earth, if we do bur ſucceed in our actempt of PiaCing it in Hea« 
ven. Ard as for the Moon, this hath a circular motion about the 
Earth , from which (as 1 ſaid before) it can by no means alienate 
it {c]t , but yet doth it not ceaſe ro go about the Sun together with 
the Ear h in an annual mocion, 

Simy. 1 do not as yetvery well apprehend this ſtructure , bur 
it may be,that with makiag a few draughts thereof , one may bet- 
cr and more calily dilcourſe concerning the lame. 

SaLyv. Tisvery true : yea for your greater {atisfaGtion and ad- 
mi:acion together , I deſire you, that you would take the pains 
to draw the {ame 3 and to lee that although you think you do not 
apprehend it , yer you very perfe&ly underſtand it ; And onely 
by aniwering to my interrogations you ſhall deſigne it punually. 


The Syſtem? of Take theretore a ſheet of paper and Compaſles ; Andlet this 


the Univerſe de- 


| T4 ned from the Ap- 


poaran Ef, 


white papcr be the immenſe expanſion of the Univerſe ; in which 
you are to diſtribute and diſpoſe its parts 1n order , according as 
realon ſhall dire& you. Aud firſt, in regard that without my in- 
ſtruction you verily believe that the Eaith is placed in this Ufi- 
verſe, thercfore note a point at pleaſure , about which you in- 
tend it to to be placed, and mark it with ſome charaQers, 

S1my. Let this mark A be the place of the Terreſtrial Globe. 

Salv. \ ery well. I know lecondly, that you underſtand per- 
kcaly that the (aid Earth is not within the body of the Sun, nor 
ſo much as contiguous to it , but diſtant for ſome ſpace from the 
lame, and therefore aſſign to the Sun what other place you belt 
like, as remote from the Earth as you pleaſe , and mark this 
like manner. | 


S1my. Here it is done : Let the place of the Solar body 
be O. 


SAaLv. Thele ewo being conſtituted, I defire that we ww 
t 


Diatocus [I]: 


of accomodating the body of Venus in ſuch a manner thar 
5 ſtare and Motion may agree with what (cnfible experiments do 
ſhew us 3 and therefore recall to mind that which either by the 
iſt diſcourſes > or your own obſervations you have learnt to be- 
F that ſtar, and afterwards aflign unto it that ſtate which you 
think agreeth with the lame. 
$11 r. Suppoling thoſe Phenomena expreſſed by you , and 
which L have likewiſe read in the little treatiſe of Concluſions, to 


thin 


F 


& 


D 
© 


$orrath 


A 
&P 


be true , namely, that that ſtar never recedes from the Sun beyond 
ſuch a determinate ſpace of 40 degrees or thereabouts , ſo as that 
It never cometh either to appoſition with the Sun , or ſo much as 
tO quadrature, or yet to the ſextile aſpe& ; and more than that, 

ſuppoſing that it ſheweth at one time almoſt 40 times greater than Mar '/ wa Tf 
at another ; namely, very great, when being retrograde, it goeth to #ive conjunition p- 
| the veſpertine conjun&ion of the Sun, and ry al when with a ©4 v5) mall te* 


. ward; the matu- 
P p motion tine, | 


2 98 


Venus neceſſas 
rily proved to move 
about the $ un« 


T be revolution of 


Mercury concluded 
to be about the Sun, 


within the Orb of 


Venus. 


Mars neceſſary 
encludeth within its 
Orb the Earth,and 
alſo the WL 


Mars at its oþpo+ 
ſition to the Sun 
ſhews to be ſixty 
times bigger than 
towards the con- 
junttion, 


J ipiter and Sa- 
turn d» likewiſe en- 
compaſſe theEarth, 
and the Sun, 


G. Gartir=®us, his Syſlcme. 


motion ſtraight forwards, it goeth to the matutine con 
and moreover it being truc , that when it appeareth bigg 
with a corniculate figure , and when it appeareth little 
perfe&ly round , thele appearances,l {ay,being true, ] 
how one can chooſe'bur affirm the laid ſtar to revolve in a cirde 1. 
bout the Sun , for that the ſaid circle cannot in any Wile be (aid 
to encompalle or to contain the Earth within it , nor to be infer;. 
our to the Sun, that is between 1t ard the Earth, nor Yet lupe- 
riour to the Sun. That circle cannot 1ncompaſle the Earth, be. 
cauſe Venus would then ſometimes come to oppolition with the 
Sun 3 it cannot be inferiour , for then Venus.in both its conjungi- 
ons with the Sun would ſeem horned ; nor can it be lup-riour , 
tor then it would alwayes appear round , and never cornicular; 
and therefore for reccit of it I will draw the circle CH, abour 
the Sun , without encompaſlling t}:c Earth. 
Sarv. Having placed Venxs, it is requiſite that you think of 
Mercury , which, as you know, alwayes keeping about the Sun, 
doth reccde lefle diſtance from it than Venus ;, therefore conſider 
with your ſelf, what place is moſt convenient to aſſign it. 
Siny. Itis notto be queſtioned, but that this Planet imitat- 
ing Venus, the moſt commodious place for it will be, a leſſer cir- 
cle within this of Venus, in like manner about the Sun, being 
that of its greateſt vicinity to the Sun, an argument, an evidence 
{ufhciently proving the vigour of its illumination, above that of 
Venus, and of the other Planets, we may therefore upon theſe 


confiderations draw its Circle, marking it with the Charafters 
B G. 


Sarv. But Mars, Where ſhall we place it ? 

S ime. Mars, Becaule it comes to an oppoſition with the Sun, 
its Circle muſt of necciiity encompaſs the Earth ; Burt I ſeethat it 
muſt neceſſarily encompals the Sun alſo, for coming to conjundi- 
on with the Sun, if it did not move over it, but were below it, it 
would appear horned, as Venxs and the Moon ; but it ſhews al- 
wayes round, and therefore it is neceſſary, that it no leſs includ- 
eth the Sun within its circle than the Earth. And becauſe I re- 
member that you did ſay, that when it is in oppoſition with the 
Sun, it leems 60 times bigger than when it is in the conjunction, 
me thinks that a Circle about the Centre of the Sun;and that tak- 
eth in the carth, will very well agree with theſe Phenomena , 
which 1 do note and mark D I, where Mars in the point D, 1s near 
to the carth, and oppoſite to the Sun ; but when it is in the point 
L, it 15at Conjution with the Sun, but very far from the Earth: 
And becaulc the ſame. appearances are obſerved in Jupiter and 
Saturn, although wich much leffer difference in Jupiter than 13 
Mers, and with yet lefle in Seturn than in Jupiter 3 me thinks L 
un- 


Junction; 
E 1t ſhews 
3 it leems 
do not lee 


, 


Diatocus [I]. 
ndeiſtand that we ſhould very commodiouſly falve all the Ph.e- 
»1nc12 of theſe two Planets, with two Circles, in like manner, 
Jrawn about the Sun, and this firſt for Jupiter,markivg it E L, and 
another above that for Saturn marked F M. 

S_.1v. You have bchaved your lelt bravely hitherto. And 
Mecauſe ( as you {ce ) the approach and receſſion of the three Su- 
periour Plancts 15 mcaſured with double the diſtance between the 
Earth and'Sun, this makcth greater diftcrence in Mars than in Tu- 
piter, the Circle D 1, of Mars, bcing lefler than the Circle E L. 
of Jupiter, and likewiſe becauſe this E Ly is lefle rhan this Circle 
F M, of Saturn, the ſaid difference is allo yet lefler in Saturn than 
in Jupiter; and that punRually an{wereth the Ph4nomena. 
It remains now that you aſſign a place to the Moon. 

$1 v. Following the ſame Method (which leems to me very 
concluſive) in regard we ſee that the Moon cometh to conjunGtion 
and oppoſition with the Sun, it 1s neceſlary to lay, that its circle 
encompaſſeth the Earth, but yct doth it not follow, that it muſt 
environ the Sun, for then at that time towards its conjunction, it 
would not ſeem horned, but alwayes round and full of Light. 
Moreover it could never make, as it often doth, the Eclipſe of the 
Sun, by interpoſing betwixt it and us It 1s neceſſary therefore 
to aſlign it a circle about the Earth, which ſhould be this NP, 6 
that being conſtituted in P, it will appear from the Earth A, to be 
in conjun&tion with theS un, and placed in Niit appeareth-oppoſite 
to the Sun, and in that poſition it may fall under the Earths ſha- 
dow, and be oblcured. 

Satv. Now, Simplicinus, what ſhall we do with the fixed 
ſtars ? Shall we ſuppolc them ſcattered through the immenſe abi(- 
ſes of the Univerſe, at different diſtances, from any one determi- 
nate point ; orelſe placed in a {uperticies ſpherically diſtended a- 
bout a centre of its own , fo that each of them may be equi- 
diſtant from the ſaid centre ? 

S1e. 1 would rather take a middle way 3 and would aſſign 
them an Orb deſcribed about a determinate centre and comprized 
within two {pherical ſuperficies, to wit, one very high, and con- 
cave, and the other lower , and convex , betwixt which I would 
conſtitute the innumerable multitude of ſtars, but yet at divers al- 
titudes,and this might be called the Sphere of the Univerſe,contein- 
Ing within it theOrbs of che planets already by us deſcribed. 

Salv. But now we have all this while; Simplicius,diſpoſed the 
mundane bodies exactly, according to the order of Copernicus, 
and we haye done it with your hand ; and moreover to each of 
them you have aſligned peculiar motions of their own, except to 
the Sun, the Earth , and ſtarry Sphere 3 and to Mercury with 
Venus , you have afcribed the circular morion about the Sun, 


Pp 2 with- 


299 


The approxima- 
trox and receſſion of 
the three ſuperionr 
Planets, importeth 
donble the Sun dis 
ſtance. 

The difference of 
the apparent mag- 
nitude leſſe in Ya 
turn, chan in Jupt» 

ter, a» 4 » Jupiter 
than in Mats, and 
why. 

The Moons Orb 
invironeth the 
Earth, but not the 
Jun. 


The probable 
ſituation of the 


fixed Rtars. 


Which ought to 
be accounted the 
ſphere of the VUnr 


verſe, 


3-9 


Ref the annual 
1210n and the di- 
ur nal ought to be 
a1 tributed be- 
:twixt the Sun, 
Earth, and Fir- 


mAanrxti- 


In @ moveable 
[phere , it ſeemeth 
more reaſonable 
that its centre be 
ſtable , than any 0+ 
ther of its ports: 


Granting to the 
Earth the annual, 
u muſt of neceſſity 
alſo bave the ditcy 
nal motion aſſigne 
ed to it« 


G. Carilt®us, his Sylme. 


without encompatiing the Earth ; about the ſame Sun you make 
the three [upcriour Planets Mars, Jupiter, and 9 aturn, to move 
comprehending the Earth within. their circles. 'The Moon in "Wh 
next place can move 11 no other Manner than about the Earth, 
without taking in the Sun , and inall thele motions you agree alſy 
with the ſame Copernicus. There remains now thrice things to he 
decided between the Sun , the Earth, and tixcd ſtars, namely 
Reſt, which ſeemeth to b-long to the Earth 3 the aunual motion 
under the Zodiack, which appeareth to pertain to the Sun ; and the 
diurnal motion , which ſcems to belong ro the Starry Sphere, and 
to be by that imparted to all the reſt of the Univerſe, the Earth 
except-d, Andit being true that all the Obs of the Planets -J 
mean of Mercury, Venus, Mars , fupiter , and Saturn, do move 
about the Sun as their centre ; reſt {eemerh with io much more 
reaſon to bclong to the {aid Sun , thanto the Earth, nas much 
as In a moveable Sphere, ut 1s more realonable that the centre 
ſtand ſtill, than any other place remote irom the [aid Centre; to 
the Earth therefore , which is conſtituted in the widſt of moye- 
able parts of the Univerle , I mean between Venus and Mars, one 
of which maketh its revolution 1n nine moneths , and the other in 
two years, may the motion of a year very commadiouſly be af. 
ſigned , leaving reſt to the Sun. Andit that be fo , it followeth 
of neccllary conlequence , that likewite the diurnal motion be- 
longeth to the Earth; for, if the Sun ſtanding ſtill , the Earth 
ſhould not revolve about irs ſelf , but have onely the annual mo- 
tion about the Sun, our year would be no other than one day and 
one night , that is ſix moneths of day , and ſix moneths of night, 
as hath already been ſaid. You may conſider withal how commo- 
diouſly the precipitate motion of 24 hours is taken away from 
the Univerle , and the ixed ſtars that are {o many Suns, are made 
1n conformity to our Sun to enyoy a perpetual reſt. You ſce more- 
over what facility one mcets with in this rough draught to render 
the realon of {o great appearances in the Celeſtial bodies. 

SaGs. I very well perceive that facility , but as you from this 
{1mplicity colle& great probabilities for the truth of that Syſtem, 
others haply could make thence contrary deduQions ; doubting, 
not without reaſon , why that ſame being the ancient Syſteme ot 
Pythagoreans , and fo well accommodated to the Phenomens, 
hath in the ſucceſſion of ſo many thouſand years had fo few fol- 
lowers , and hath been even by Ariſtotle himſelf refured, and 
fince that Copernicus himſelf hath had no better fortune. 

SALV. It you had at any, time been aſſaulted, as I have been, 
many and many a time, with the relation of ſuch kind of frivolous 
reaſons, as ſerve to make the vulgar contumacious, and difficult to 
be periwaded to hearken, (1 will gor ſay to conſent) to this novel- 


ty, 


Diatocue, I IL. 


ty, | bcueve that you wonder at the paucity of tholc who are fo]- 
iowers of char opiaion would be much diminiſhed. Bur ftmall re- 
ard in my Judgement, ought ro be had of ſuch thick ſculs,as rhink 
* 2 moſt convincing proot to confirm, and ſteadiaſtly lertle chem 
inthe belict of the carths immobility, ro tee that if this day they 
cannot Dinc at Conſtantinople, nor Sup in Tappan, that then the 
Farch as being a moſt grave body cannot clamber above the Sun, 
and then flide headlong down again 3 Of ſuch as theſe 1 ſay, 
whote numbcr'is infinite, we need not make any reckoning, nor 
aced we to record their foohieries, or ro ſtrive to gain to our fide 
as our partakers 1n fubul and lublime opinions, men in whole de 
finicion che kind onelyv 1+ concerned, and the difference 1s wanting. 
Morcover, what ground do you think you could be able to gain, 
withall the demonſtrarions of the World upon brains fo ſtupid , 
as are not able of rhemiclves ro know their down right follics ? But 
ny admiration, Sagredrs , 1s very difterent from yours, you won- 
der that o few are followers of the Pythagorean Opinion ; and I 
aw amazed how rhere could be any yet letr till now that do em- 
brace and tollow it: Nor can I {ufticiently admire the eminencie of 
thoſe mens wats that'have received and held it to be true, and with 
the ſprightliacfle of their judgements offered {uch violence to ther 
own f{cnces, as that they have been able ro prefer that which their 
reaſon dictated to them, to that which ſenſible experiments re- 
preſeared moſt maniteſtly on the contrary.That the reaſons againſt 
the Diurnal virtiginous revolution of the Earth by you already ex- 
amined, do Carry great probability with them , we have alread 
leen 3 as allo that the Prolomaicks, and Ariftotelicks, with all their 
Searors did reccive them for true, is indeed a very great argument 
of their etficacie ; dur thole experiments which apertly contradi& 
the annual motion, are of yet ſo much more manifeſtly repugnant, 
that (1 fay it again) I cannot find any bounds for my admiration, 
w that reaſon was able in Ariſtarch#s and Copernicus, to com- 
mit ſuch a rape upon their Sences, as in deſpight thereof, to make 
her ſelf miſtrels of cheir creduhity. 


SaGk. Are we then to have ſtil] more of theſe ſtrong oppoſiti- 
ons againſt this annual motion ? 


Sarv. \Weare, and they be ſo cvident and ſenſible, that it a 
{ence more {ſublime and excellent than thoſe common and vulgar, 
did not take part with reaſon, I much fear, that I alſo ſhould have 
been much more averſe to the Copernican Syſteem than I have been 
lince the time that a clearer Jamp than ordinary hath enlightned 
me. 

Sacx. Now therefore Salwviatus , let us come to joyn battail 
= every word that 13 ſpent on any thing elſe, I take ro be caft a- 

ay. 


SALY- 


Ya 
O 
Wo 


Di ſcomr ſes more 
than childiſh, ſerve 
ro kerp fools in the 
oranion of the 


E arihs frability. 


sA declaration 
of the 1mprobab:- 
lity of Copernicus 


his 0pin40n, 


Reaſons and di - 
conrſe in Ariftar- 
cus and Coperni- 
cus prevailed over 


manifeſt ſence. 


T Y "Ss 


% 


-_ 


be <> 
- 
OT OOs.,. V 


_ ® +. 
-£L ._—_ 
"7 i oGieow cc F 


——_— 


_— a. WS 


* 


_ 


bb” —_ 


«, 


| 
| 
| 


Mars mabes an 
TL 4 aul: pou the 
Coperrycaln Sy- 


fterre. 


The Phz:om2- 
na of Venus appear 
Comtrary (0 the S y- 
fleme of Coperni- 
GUS, 


»Annother are 
culty raiſed by Ve- 
nus agamſt Coper- 


ncus. 


V enSgarcording 
go Copernicus, e- 
rhey [ncid mm it 
{elf , or elſe of 4 
tranſparent ſub» 
H ance- 


Copernicusſpeak- 
eth nothing of the 
{mall variation of 
bigneſs in Venus 
and in Mars. 


The moon much 
dift urbeth the or- 
der of the oth:y 
Planets. 


G. Gait zus , ba Syſicme. 


SAi1v. I am ready toſcrve you. You have already ſeen me 
draw the form of the Copernican Syſteme 3 againſt the truth of 
which Mars himlclt,in the firſt place, makes an hot charge ; who,in 
ca(c it werc true, that its diſtances from the carth ſhould fo much 
vary, as that from the Jeaſt diſtance to the greateſt, there were 
twice as much differcncezas from the earth to the Sun ; it would be 
neceſſary, that when it 15 neareſt unto us, its diſcus would ſhew 
mote than 60. times bigger than it {cems, when 1t is fartheſt from 
us 3 neverthelcls that diverlity of apparcnt magnitude is not to be 
ſeen, nay in its oppoſition with the Sun, when its neareſt to the 
Earth, it doth not ſhew ſo much as quadruple and quintuple in 
bigneſs, to what it is, when rowards the conjundtion it cometh to 
be occulted under tlic Suns rayes. Another and greater difficulty 
doth Vens exhibit; For if revolving about the Sun, as Copernicus 
affirmeth,it were once whileabove,& another while below the ſame, 
reccding and approaching to us ſo much as the Diameter of the cir- 
cle deſcribed would bc, at luch tune as it ſhould be below the Sun, 
and neareſt to us,its diſcs would ſhew little leſs than 4o times big- 
ger than when it is above the Sun, near to its other conjunQion;yet 
nevertheleſſc,the difference is almoſt imperceptible Let us add an- 
other difficulty,that in caſe the body of Yenzs be of it (elf dark,and 
onely ſhincth as the Moon, by the illumination of the Sun, which 
ſeemeth moſt realonable; it would ſhew forked or horned at ſuch 
time as 1t 15 under the Sun, as the Moon doth when ſhe is in like 
maimer near the Sun ; an accident that is not to be diſcovered in 
her. Whereupon Copernicus affirmeth, that cither ſhe is light of 
her (elf, or elſe that her ſubſtance is of ſuch a nature, thar ir can 
imbue the Solar light , and tranſmit the ſame through all irs whole 
depth, ſo asto beable to appear to us alwayes ſhining; and in this 
manner Copernicxs exculeth the not changing figure in Venys : but 
of her {mall variation of Magnitude, he maketh no mention at all ; 
and much leſs of Mars than was needful ; I believe as being una« 
ble ſo well as he deſircd to ſalve a Phenomenon ſo contrary to his 
Hypotheſis,and yet being convinced by ſo many other occurrences 
and reaſons he maintained,and held the ſame Hypotheſis to be true. 
Beſides theſe things, to make the Planets, together with the Earth, 
to move above the Sun as the Centre of their converſions, and the 
Moon onely to break that order, and to have a motion by it ſelf 
about the earth; and to make both her,the Earth, and the whole 
Elementary Sphere,to move all together about the Sun in a year, 
this ſeemeth to pervert the order of this Syſteme, which rendreth 
It unlikely and falſe. Theſe are thoſe difficulties that make me 
wonder how Ariftarchus and Copernicus, who muſt needs have ob- 
ſerved them, not having been able for all that to ſalve them, have 
yet notwithſtanding by other admirable occurrences been induced 

to 


Drarocue. LIL. 


'o coafide ſo much in that which reaſon diftatedto them, as that 
they have confidently attirmed that che ſtructure of the Univerſe 
could have no other figure than that which they deſigned to them- 
(elves. There are allo {cveral other very {crious and curious doubts, 
ot fo calie to be relolved by the middle tort ot wits, but yet pe- 
netratcd and declared by Coperninas, which we thall defer till bz 
and by, after we have an{wered to other objegions that ſeem ro 
make againſt this opinion. Now coming to the declarations and 
xn{wers to thole three before named grand Obje&ions, I ſay, that 
the two firſt not onely contradict not the Copernican Syſteme, but 
greatly and ablolutely favour it ; For both Mars and Venxs ſeems 
unequal to themiclves,according to the proportions aſſigned 3 and 
Venss under the Sun {eemeth horned, and gocth changing figures 
in it (elf exattly hike the Moon. 


$aGR. But how came this to be concealed from Copernicus, 
and revealed to you ? 

Sa 1 v- Thele things cannot be comprehended, ſave onely by 
the ſenſe of ſeeing, the which by nature was not granted to man 
ſo perfe&, as that 1t was able to attain to the diſcovery of (uch dif- 
ferences 3 nay even the very inſtrument of ſight is an impediment 
to it (elk : But ſince that ic hath pleaſed God in our age to vouch- 
ſafe to humane ingenuity, ſo admirable an invention of perfe&ing 
our ſight, by multiplying it four, fix, ten, twenty, thirty, and four- 
ty times, infinite objects, that cither by reaſon of their diſtance, or 
for their extream {mallneſle were inviſible unto us, have by help 
of the Teleſcope been rendered viſible. 

Sacs. ButVenus and Mars are none of the objeRs inviſible 
for their diſtance or {mallneſle, yea, we do difcern them with our 
bare natural fight; why then do we not diſtinguiſh the differences 
of their magnitudes and figures ? 

Sa1 v. In this, the impediment of our very eye it ſelf hath a 
great ſhare, as but even now I hinted, by which the reſplendent and 
remote objects are not repreſented to us ſimple and pure ; but gives 
them us fringed with ſtrange and adventitious rayes, ſo long and 
denle, that their naked body ſheweth to us agrandized ten, twen- 
ty, an hundred, yea a thouſand times more than it would appear, if 
the capillitious rayes were taken away. 

SAGr Now I remember that I have read ſomething on this 
lubjeRt, | know not whether in the Solar Letters, or in the Sag- 
gratore of our common Friend, but it would be very good, aſwell 
tor recalling it into my memory, as for the information of Simpl;- 
£145, Who it may be never ſaw thoſe writings, that you would de- 
Clare unto us more diftinaly how this buſineſſe ſtands, the know- 


ledge whereof I think to be very neceſlary for the afliſting of us to 
underſtand that of which we now ſpeak, 


S1MP- 


303 


eAnſwers te the 
three firft objefti- 
ont againſt the C1. 
pernican Sygere, 


T he reaſon whenc: 
it happens tharVe- 
nus and Mats do 
net appear to vary 
magnitude ſo much 
as 1s requifite. 


2-2 Ge 4 HIT. oe» > 


3"4 


The operat ors of 
the Teleſcope ac- 
c1nnted fallgtits by 


the Poriwaccticks, 


Shining objetts 
ſeem exvironed 
with adventitions 
rAyer. 


T he reaſon why 
{1mimnons bodies a _ 
pear enlarged 
much the move , by 
how much they are 


leſſer. 


Superficial fir 
(Cures C3.CYrEA 14ng 
proportion double ro 
t heir lines. 


G, CGartirtzus, bis Syſleme. 


S;my. 1 muſt confeſle that all that which Salviatus hath ſpo- 
ken 1s new unto me, for truth 15, I never have had the curioſity to 
read thoſe Books, nor have I hitherto given any great credit to 
the Teleſcope newly introduced ; rather treading in the ſteps of 9- 
ther Pcripatetick, Philoſophers my companions, I have thought 
thole things to be fallacics and dclufions of the Chryſtals, which 
others have {o much admired for ſtupendious operations : and 
therefore if 1 have hitherto been in an errour; I ſhall be glad to be 
freed from it, and allured by theſe nove]ties already heard from 
you, I ſhall che more attentively hearken to the reſt. 

Sa rv. The confidence that theſe men have in their own ap. 
prehenſivencile, 15 no leſs unreaſonable than the (mall efteem the 
have of the judgment of others : yet its much that they ſhould e- 
ſteem themlclves able to judge better of {uch an inſtrument, with- 
out ever having made trial of it, than thole who have made, and 
daily do make a thouſand experiments of the ſame : But I pray 
you, let us leave this kind of pertinacious men, whom we can- 
not ſo much as tax without doing them too great honour. And re- 
turning to our purpoſe, I ſay, that reſplendent objects, whether 
It 15 that their light doth refract on the humidity that is upon the 
pupils, or that it doth refle& on the edges of the eye-browes, dit- 
tuling its reflex raycs upon the ſaid pupils, or whether it is for ſome 
other reaſon, they do appear to our eye, as if they were environd 
with new rayes, and therefore much bigger than their bodies 
would repreſent themſelves to us, were they .diveſted of thoſe ir- 
radiations. And this aggrandizement is made with a greater and 
greater proportion, by how much thoſc lucid objects are leſſer and 
leſſer ; in the ſame manner for all the world, as if we ſhould ſup- 
poſe that the augmentation of ſhining locks were v.g. four inches, 
which addition being made about a circle that hath tour inches di- 
ameter would increalc its appearance to nine times its former big- 
nefle : but ——— 

S1my. I believe you would have ſaid three times; for adding 
tour inches to this ſide, and tour inches to that fide of the diame- 
rer of a circle, which is likewiſe four inches, its quantity is there- 
by tripled, and not made nive times bigger. 

Sar v. A little more Geometry would do well, Simplicins. 
Trae it 1s, that the diameter 1s tripled, but the ſuperficies, which 15 
that of which we {peak, increalcth nine times : for you myſt know, 
Simplicius, that the ſuperficies of circles are to one another, As 
the ſquares of their diameters 3 and a circle that hath four inches 
diameter is to another that hath twelve, as the ſquare of four to 
the [quare of twelve ; that is, as 16. is to 144. and therefore it ſhall 
be increaſed nine times, and not three ; this, by way of advertiſc- 
ment to S7mplicins. And proceeding forwards, if we ſhould 

the 


Diatocus [I]. 


the ſaid :rradiation of four inches to a Circle chat hath but two in- 
hes of diameter onely, the diameter of rhe irradiation or Gar- 
12nd would bc ten inches, and the (uperficial content of the circle 
would be to the area of the naked body, as 100. tO 4. for thoſe 
ire the {quares of 10. and of 2. the agrandizement would there- 
fore be 25- times ſo much 3 and laſtly, the four inches of hair or 
fringe, added to a (mall circle of an inch in diameter, the ſame 
would be increaſed B51. times 3 and lo continually the augmenta- 
tions are made with a proportion greater and greater, according 
as the rcal obje&s that. increale, are lefler and lefler. 

$aGs- The doubt which puzzled Simplicins-never troubled 
me, but certain other things indeed there are, of which I deſire 
a more diſtin& underſtanding; and in particular, I would know up- 
on what ground you affirm thar the laid agrandizement is alwayes 
equal in all viſible objeQts. 

Sar v. I havealready declared the ſame in part, when I (aid, 
that onely lucid objeRts ſo increaled, and not the obſcure ; now I 
adde what remaines, that of the re{plendent objects thole that are 
of a more bright light, make the refletion greater and more re- 
ſplendent upon our pupi] ; whereupon they ſeem to augment 
much more than the lefle lucid : and that I may no more inlarge 
my (el) upon this particular, come we to that which the true Mi- 
ſtris of A5tronomy, Experience, teacheth us. . Let us this evening, 
when the air is very obſcure, obſerve the ſtar of Jupiter ; we 
ſhall ſee it very glittering, and very great 3 let us afterwards look 
through a tube, or elle through a {mall crunk, which clutching the 
hand cloſe, and accoſting it to the eye, we lean between the palm 
of the hands and the fingers, or elle by an bole made with a {mall 
needle in a paper; and we ſhall ice the ſaid ſtar diveſted of its 
beams, but to (mall, that we ſhall judge ir lefſe, even than a ſixti- 
eh part of its great glittering light ſeen with the eye at liberty : 
we may afterwards behold the Dog-ſtars beautiful and bigger than 
any of the other fixed ſtars, which ſeemeth to the bare eye no 
great matter leſſe than Jupiter ; but taking from it, as before, the 
radiation, its Diſcus will ſhew 1o little, that it will not be 
though: the twenticth part of that of 7 wpiter, nay, he that hath not 
very good eyes, will very hardly dilcern it; from whence it may 
be rationally inferred, that the (aid ſtar, as having a much more 
lively light than Jupiter, maketh its irradiation greater than Tupi- 
ter doth his. In the next place, as to the irradiation of the Sun 
and Moon, it 15 as nothing, by mcans of their magnitude, which 
Polleſſerh of it ſelf alone ſo great a ſpace in our eye, that it lea- 
veth no place for the adventitious rayes3 fo that their faces ſeem 
cloſe clipt, and terminate. We may aſſure our ſelves of the ſame 
truth by another experiment which 1 have often made triall of ; 


Q.q we 


ObjeHs the more 
vicoroms they are 
i" light, the more 
they de ſeem to in+ 
creaſe. 


eAneaſic expe- 
riment that ſhew- 
eth the increaſe in 
the ſtars, by means 
of the adventitions 
rays, 


Jupicer augments 
leſſe than the Dogs 


{tar. 


The Sun and 
Moan increaſe lit- 
ile, 


PR vt.” =” w 


a ” 
4 ” 


—, _ — 


"1-487 252% 


= -- —_ 


OTE SB + 


=" - =e_ 


—_— - <->» # _ 4 _m_ 
; | = pu - _ 


306 


It ws ſeen by m4- 
nijeſt experience, 
that the more 
ſplendid bodies do 
mach more 177 ads- 
ate than the leſſe 
lacid. 


The Teleſcope 
L the beſt meany to 
take away the iy» 
radiations © of the 
Stars, 

eAnother ſecond 
reaſon of the ſmall 
apparent mcreaſe 


of Venus, 


Copernicus per - 
ſwaded by reaſor:s 
Contr ary to ſenſible 
experiments. 


G. Garit=®us, his Syſicme, 


we may aſſure our ſelves, I lay, that bodies ſhining with moſtzliye. 

ly light do irradiate, or beam forth rayes more by far than thoſe 

that are of a more Janguiſhing lighr. I have many times ſeen J,. 

piter and Venus together twenty or thirty degrees diſtant from the 

Sun, and the air being very dark, Venus appeared eight or ten 

times bigger than Jupiter, being both beheld by the eye at liber. 

ty 3 but being bcheld afterwards with the Teleſcope, the Diſcu; 

of Fupiter dilcovered it {elf ro be four or more times greater than 

thar of Venus, but the vivacity of the {plendour of Venus was in- 

comparably bigger than the languiſhing light of Jupiter ; which 
was only becaule of Japiters being far from the Sun, and from us; 
and Venus ncer to us, and to the Sun. Theſe things premiſed, it 
will not be difficult to comprehend, how Mars,when it isin oppo- 
ſition to the Sun, and therefore neerer to the Earth by [even times, 
and more, than it is towards the conjunction, cometh to appear 
ſcarce four or five times bigger in that ſtate than in this, when as it 
ſhould appear more than fifty times ſo much 3 of which the only 
irradiation is the caule ; for if we diveſt it of the adventitious 
rayes, we ſhall find it exadaly augmented with the due proportion: 
but to take away the capillitious border, the Telelicope is the beſt 
and only means, which inlarging its D:ſc#s nine hundred or a 
thouſand times, makes it to be ſeen naked and terminate, as that 
of the Moon, and different from it ſelf in the two poſitions, ac- 
cording tO its duc proportions to an hair. Again, as to Venus, 
that in its veſpertine conjunction, when it is below the Sun, ought 
to ſhew almoſt fourty times bigger than in the other matutine con- 
jun&ion, and yet doth not appear ſo much as doubled ; it happen- 
eth, beſides the effeR of the irradiation, that it is horned; and its 
creſcents, beſides that they are ſharp, they do receive the Suns light 
obliquely, and therefore emit but a faint ſplendour ; ſo that as 
being lictle and weak, its irradiation becometh the leſſe ample 
and vivacious,than when it appeareth to us with its Hemiſphere all 
ſhining : but now the Teleſcope maniteſtly ſhews its hornes to 
have been as terminate and diſtin& as thoſe of the Moon, and 
appear, as it were, with a great circle, and in a proportion thoſc 
well neer fourty rimes greater than its ſame Diſcus, at ſuch time 
as it i;{uperiour to the Sun inits ultimate matutine apparition. 

Sack Oh, Nicholas Copernicus, how great would have been 
thy joy to have ſeen this part of thy Syſteme, confirmed with ſo 
manifeſt experiments ! 

Satv. Tistruc. But how much lefle the fame of his ſublime 
wit amongſt the intelligent ? when as it is ſeen, as I allo {aid before, 
that he did conſtantly continue to affirm (being perſwaded thereto 
by reaſon) that which ſenſible experiments ſeemed to contradid 
for I cannot ceaſe to wonder that he ſhould conſtantly perfiſt in 
ſaying, that Venus revolveth about the Sun, and is more than (ix 


Diatocur [1]. 


times farcher from us at one time,than at another 3 and al(s ſeen 
th to be alwayes of an equal bignels, alchough it ought to ſhew 
forty rimes bigger when neareſt ro us, than when fartheſt off. 

SAG But in Fuptter, Saturn and Mercury, I believe that 
the differences of their apparent magnitudes,ſhould ſeem punRu- 
ally co anſwer to their different diſtances. 

Sar v. In the two Superiour ones, I have made preciſe ob- 
ſeryations yearly for this twenty two years laſt paſt : In Mercury 
there can be no obſervation of moment made, by reaſon it (uf- 
fers not it {elf ro be ſeen, ſave onely in its greateſt digrſſicons 
from the Sun, in which its diſtances from the earth are inſenſibly 
unequal, and thoſe differences conlequently not to be obſerved , 
as allo its mutations of figures which muſt abſolutely happen in 
it, asin Venus. Andif we do ſee it, it mult of neceflity appear 
in form of a Semicircle, as Venus likewiſe doth in her greateſt 
digreſſions 3 but its diſcns is ſo very (ſma[l, and its ſplendor fo 
very great, by reaſon of its vicinity to the Sun, that the vitue 
of the Teleſcope doth not ſuffice to clip its trefles or adventitious 
rayes, ſo as to make them appear ſhaved round about. It re- 
mains,that we remove that which ſeemed a great inconvenience 
inthe motion of the Earth , namely that all the Planets moving 
about the Sun, it alone, nor folitary as the reſt, but in company 
with the Moon, and the whole Elementary Sphear,ſhould move 
round about the Sun ina year ; and that the ſaid Moon withal 
ſhould move every moneth about the earth. Here it is neceſſary 
once again to exclaim and extol the admirable perſpicacity of Co- 
pernicus, and withal to condole his misfortune, in that he 1s nor 
now alive in our dayes , when for removing of the ſceming ab- 
lurdity of the Earth and Moons motion in conſort we ke Fupr- 
ter, as if it were another Earth, not in conlort with the Moon, 
but accompamied by four Moons to rovolve about the Sun in 1 2. 
years together, with what ever things the Orbs of the four Medi- 
czan Stars can Contain within them. 

Sar v. Why do you call the four jovial Planets, Moans ? 

SaGR. Such they would {cem to be to one that ſtanding in 
Jupiter ſhould behold them ; for they are of themſelves dark,and 
receive their lighe from the Sufi, which is manifeſt from their be- 
ing eclipſed, when they entet-into the cone of Fupiters ſhadow : 
and becauſe onely thoſe their Hemiſpheres, that look towards the 
dun are illuminated, te us that are without their Orbs,and near- 
er to the Sun, they ſeem alwayes lucid, butto one that ſhould be 
n Jupiter, they would ſhew all illuminated, at ſuch time as they 
Were in the upper parts of rheir circles ; but in the parts inferi- 
our, that is between Jupiter and the Sun, they would from Fu- 
Prter be obſerved to be horned; and in a word they would, to 


Qq 32 the 


230 


Mercary admit- 
teth not of clear 
obſervaggions. 


© The difficulties 
removed that ariſe 
from the Earths 
moving about the 
Sunzet ſolitarily, 


but wn conſort wit b 
the Moon. 


The Medicean 
Stars areas it were 
four Moons about 
Jupiter, 


The Principal 
ſeope of «Aft eno- 
mers, 11 to give 4 
reaſon of appear* 


ances, 


Copernicus re- 
fored «Aftronomy 
upon the ſuppoſuti- 
ons of Ptolomy. 


| What movedCo* 
pernicus to eſt a- 


bliſh hi; Syſtem. 


CG. Gartirt=us, his Syſleme. 


the obſervators ſtanding in Jupiter, make the (elf ſame changes 
of Figure, that to us upon the Earth, the Moon doth make. You 
ſce now how theſe three things, which at firſt ſeemed difſonan 
do admirably accord with the Copernican Syſteme. Here alſo by 
the way may Stmplicins ſee, with what probability one may con- 
clude, that the Sun and not the Earth, 1s 1n the Centre of the 
Planetary converſions. And fince the Earth is now placed a- 
mongſt mundane Bodies,that undoubtedly move about the Sun 
to wit, above Mercury and Venxs, and below Saturn, Jupiter, 
and Mars ; ſhall it not be in like manner probable, and perhaps 
neceſſary to grant, thatit alſo moverh round ? 

$1 my. Theſe accidents are 1o notable and conſpicuous, that 
it is not poſſible, but that Ptolomy and o: hers his Sectators,ſhould 
have had knowledge of them, aud having {o,it 15 Iikewile nece(- 
ſary, that they have found a way to render reatons of ſuch, and 
{o ſenſible appearances that were iufficient, and allo congruous 
and probable, ſeeing that they have for ſo long a time been re- 
ceived by ſuch numbers of learned men. 

Sarv. You argue very well ; but you know that the principal 
ſcope of Aſtronomers,is to render only rca{on for the appearances 
1n the Czleſtial Bodies, and to them, and to the motions of the 
Stars,to accomodate ſuch ſtruures and compoſitions of Cucles, 
that the motions following thoſe calculations, anſwer to the {aid 
appearances, little ſcrupling to admit of {ome exorbitances, that 
indeed upon other accounts they would much ſtick at. And Co 
pernicus himſelt writes, that he had in his firſt ſtudies reſtored the 
Science of Aſtronomy upon the very ſuppolitions of Ptolomy, and 
in ſuch manner corre&ted the motions of the Planets , that the 
computations did very exaGly agree with the Phenomena, and 
the Phenomena with the ſuppurations, in caſe that he took the 
Planets-ſeverally one by one. But he addeth, that in going a- 
bout to put together all the ſtructures of the particular Fabricks, 
there reſulted thence a Monſter and Chimera,co mpoſed of mem- 
bers moſt diſproportionate to one another, and altogether incom- 
patible ; So that although it latisfied an 4ſtronomer meerly A- 
rithmetical, yet did it not afford fatisfaQion or content to the 
Aſtronomer Phylaſophical. And becauſe he very well under- 
ſtood, that if one might ſalve the Czleſtial appearances with falle 
aſlumptions in nature, it might with much more cafe be done by 
true {uppoſitions, he ſet himſelf diligently to ſearch whether a- 
ny amongſt the antient men of fame, had aſcribed to the World 
any other ſtruure, than that. commonly. received by Ptolomy 3 
and finding that ſome Pythagoreans had in particular aſſigned 
the Diurnal converſion to the Earth, and others the annual mo; 


tion alſo, he began to compare the appearances, and par ticulariy 
ties 


Diatoous. [IL 


ies of the Planets motions, wich theſe two new {uppolitions, all 
which things yumpt exaQtly with his purpoſe;and ſeeing the whole 
correſpond, with admirable facility to its parts, he imbraced this 
new Syſteme, and it took up his reſt. 

©1My. But what great exorbitancies are there in the Ptolo- 
maick, Syſteme,for which there are not greater to be found in this 
of Copernicus ? 

Sa1iv. In the Ptolomaick, Hypotheſis there are dileaſes,and in 
the Copernican their cures. And firſt will not all the Sets of 
Phyloſophers, account it a great inconvenience, that a body na- 
turally moveable in circumgyration,ſhould move irregularly upon 
irs own Centre, and regularly upon another point ? And yet 
there are ſuch deformed motions as theſe in the Ptolomean Hypo- 
theſis, but in the Copernicen all move evenly about their own 
Centres. In the Ptolomaick,, it is neceſlary to aſſign to the Cz- 
leſtial bodies, contrary motions, and to make them all to move, 
from Eaſt to Weſt, and at the ſame time, from Welt to Eaſt ; 
But in the Copernican , all the Czleſtial revolutions are towards 
one onely way, from Welt to Eaſt. But what ſhall we ſay of 
the apparent motion of the Planets,ſo irregular, that they not on- 
ly go one while ſwift, and another while (low , but ſometimes 
wholly ſeace to move 3 and then after a long time return backa - 
gain?To ſalve which appearances Prolomie introduceth very great 
Epicicles, accommodating them one by one to cach Planet, with 
ſome rules of incongruous motions, which are all with one ſin- 
gle motion of the Earth taken away. And would not you, Sim- 
plicins, call it a great abſurditie, if in the Ptolomaick Hypothe- 
ſis, in which the particular Planets, have their peculiar Orbs aſ- 
ſigned them one above another, one muſt be frequently forced 
tolay, that Mars, conſtituted above the Sphzre of the Sun,doth 
ſo deicend, that breaking the Solar Orb, it goeth under it, and 
zpproacheth nearer to the Earth , than to the Body of the Sun, 
and by and by immeaſurably aſcendeth above the ſame ? And 
yet this, and other exorbitancies are remedied by the ſole and 
lingle annual motion of the Earth. 

Sacr. I would gladly be bettter informed how thefe ſtations, 
andretrograde. and dire& mortions,- which did ever ſeem to me 
great improbalities, - dd accord in'this Copernirau Syſteme. 

SALV.: [You ſhall ſee them ſo to accord, Sagredns, that 
this onely conzeRure ought to be fufficieht to make one that 
15n0t more than pertinacious or ſtupid , yield, afſent to all the 
reſt of this DoAtine. I tell you therefore , rhat nothing being 
altered in the'tmotion of Satur® , which is 3o years y it that 


of Jupiter, which is 12 , in that of Mars, which is 2 , in that of 


Vens , which is 9. moneths 4 in that of Mercyry, which is 50. 


dayes J 


 Inconvemiencies 
that are in the $y- 


feme of Protomy, 


Its a great Ar- 
gument in favour 
of Copernicus,tht 
he obviatesthe ff a- 
tions retrograda- 
$ions of the motions 
of che Planers, 


— — 
poo. 


- 


SC - -— 
n- P * 


= 
- — _ þ 
_— A * 


bay con. -M _m_.v > "> w__ . wrt >a _ 4 « *, 
yz 4 . 20s = 


319 G. Garitzus, hi Syſleme. 


dayes, or thereabouts , the ſole annua] motion of the Earth he. 

tween Mars and Venus , cauleth the apparent inequalities in a1) 

or ye rape" the five ſtars before named. And for a facile and full under. 
Sack eaſed ſanding of the whole , 1 will deſcribe this figure of it. There. 
great O_ of fore ſuppoſe the Sun to be placed in the centre O, about which 
0108-6 we will draw the Orb deſcribed by the Earth , with the an. 
nual motion BGM, and let the circle deſcribed , 9. gr. by 


Jupiter about the Sun in 12. years, be thisz Gm, and in the 


4 BX- 


- \\ 


\ \ \ 
\ \ 


"a 


AdemenSrationef ſtarry ſphere let ns imagine the Zodiack Y VS. Again, in the | 
ny gg non annual Orb of the Earth let us take certain equal arches, BC, 


Plaxets depends CD, EF, FC,GH, HI, IK, KL, LM, and in theSpkere 
on the anal won of Jupiter let us make certain other arches, paſſed in the ſame 
t60n of the Earth, 


times in which the Earth paſſeth hers, which let be »c, c », 
DE, EF, FGy GHy HI, I Ky KL, L My Which ſhall cach be 
proportionally lefſe than theſe marked in the Earths Orb, like 
as the motion of Jupiter under the Zodiack is :{lower than the 
annual. Suppoſing now , that when the Earth is in B, Jupiter is 
ns » It ſhall appear tous in the Zodiack to be in P , deſcribing 


che 


Diatocuse. III. 


he right line B ys P. Next ſuppoſe the Earth to be moved from 
Bro C, and Jupiter from BOG, the ſame time ; Iupiter 
hall appear to have paſſed in the Zodiack to), and to have 
moved ſtraight forwards , according to the order of the lignes 
PQ. In the next place, the Earth paſſing to D , and Iupitey 
to v > it ſhall beſeenin the Zodiack inR, and from E, Inpi- 
ter being come tot 3 will appear in the Zodiack in $, having 
| all this while moved right forwards. But the Earth afterward: 
| beginning to interpoſe more diretly between Inpiter and the 
Sun, ſhe being come ro F, and Jupiterto x , he will appear in 
T, to have already begun to return apparently back again un- 
der the Zodiack , andin thar time thar the Earth ſhall have paſ- 
ed thearchE F, Inpiter ſhall have entertained himielt between 
the points ST , and ſhall have appeared to us almoſt motion- 
lefſe and ſtationary. The Earth being afterwards come to G, 
and Inpiter to G, in oppolition to the Sun, it ſhall be viſible in 
the Zodiack at V , and much returned backwards by all the arch 
ofthe Zodiack T V ; howbeit that all the way purſuing its even 
courſe 1t hath really gone forwards nor onely in its own circle, 
but in the Zodiack alſo in reſpe& to the centre of the ſaid Zodi- 
ack , and to the Sun placed in the ſame. The Earth and Izpiter 
again continuing their motions, when the Earth is come to H, 
and [upiterto n , it ſhall ſeem very much gone backward in the 
Lodiack by all the arch V X. The Earth being cometol, and 
Tupiter to 13it ſhall be apparently moved in the Zodiack by the lit- 
tle ſpaceX Y, and there it will ſeem ſtationary. When atter- 
wards the Earth ſhall be come to K, and Irpiter to x ; in the 
Zodiack he ſhall have paſled the arch YN ina dire& motion ; 
and the Earth purſuing its courſe to L , ſhall lee IupiterinL, in 
the point Z. And laſtly Izpiter in » ſhall be ſeen from the Earth 
M, to have paſſed to A, with a motion ſtill right forwards; and 
ts whole apparent retrogadation in the Zodiack ſhall anſwer to 
thearch SY , made by Ipiter , whilſt that he in his own circle 
paſſeth the arch = 1, and the Earth in hers the arch E f. And 
this which hath been ſaid, is intended of Saturn and of Mars F*rogradations 
allo ; and in Saturn thoſe retrogradations are ſomewhat more 15D 4 Iiſein "a 
frequentthan in Jupiter, by reaſon that its motion is a little piter, nd yer leſs 
ſlower than that of Fupiter , ſo that the Earth overtaketh it " ys TO 
it 10 a ſhorter ſpace of time; in Mars again they are more 
rare, for that its motion is more {wift than that of Fupiter. 
Wherenpon the Earth conſumerh more time in recovering it.Next 
as to Venus and Mercury, whole Circles are comprehended by that NO RO THE I AgaR 
of the Farth, their ſtations and regreſſions appear to be occaſi- riowef "3g 
oned, not by their motions that really are ſuch, but by the anual Mercury dewor- 


; | : rated by A - 
motion of the ſaid Earth, as Copernicus cxellently demonſtrateth, #4 pay rn.oeerl 


tos. CuSy, 


Gil 


* 


The annual mo- 
tion of the E arth 
moſt apt to render 
a reaſon of the ex- 
orbitances of the 
five Plaxetr. 

The Sun it ſelf 
reſtifieth the ann<- 
al motion to belong 


te) the Earth. 


The Lyncean 
»Academick the 
firſt diſcoverer of 
the Dolar ſpots,and 
all the other cel:- 
ſtial novelties. 

The hiſtory of 
the proceedings of 
tbe «Acad: mian 
for a long time a- 
bout the obſervati- 
on of the Solar 
ſpots- 


Duumvyito, 


G. Garitzus, biSyſ{me. 


together with Appollonius Pergeus in lib. 5. of his Revolutions, 
Chap. 35. 

You ſee,Gentlemen, with what facility and ſimplicity the anny. 
al motion, were it appertaining to the Earth, js accommodated 
to render a reaſon of the apparent exorbitances, that are obſerved 
in the motions of the five Planets, Saturn, Tupiter, Mars, Ve. 
nus and Mercury, taking them all away, and reCucing them to 
equal and regular motions. And of this admirable effe&, N;. 
cholas Copernicus, hath bcen the firſt that hath made the reaſon 
plain unto us. But of another efte&, no lefſe admirable than 
this, and that witha knot , perhaps more difficult to unknit, 
bindeth the wit of man, to admit this annual converſion, and to 
leave it to our Terreſtrial Globe 3 a new and unthought of con- 
zeure ariſeth from the Sun it ſelf, which ſheweth that itis unwil. 
ling to be ſingular mn ſhifting, of this atteſtation of ſo eminent a 
concluſion, rather as a teſtimony beyond all exception, it hath 
deſired to be heard apart. Hearken then to this great and new 
wonder. 

The firſt diſcoverer and obſerver of the Solar ſpots, as alſo of 
all the other Caleſtial novelties, was our Academick Lincens;and 
he diſcovered them anno 1610. being at that time Reader of the 
Mathematicks, in the Colledge of Padua, and there, and inVe- 
nice, he diſcourled thercot with ſeveral perſons , of which ſome 
are yet living : And the year following,he ſhewed them in Rome 
to many great perſonages, as he relates in the firſt of his Letter 
to Marcus Velſerus , * Sheriffe of Auguſta. He was the 
firſt that againſt the opinions of the too timorous and too jealous 
aſlertors of the Heavens inalterability, affirmed thoſe {pors to be 
matters, that in ſhort times were produced and diflolved : for as 
to place, they were contiguous to the body of the Sun, and re- 
volved about the fame; or elle being carried about by the ſaid 
Solar body, which revolveth 1n it {elfe about its own Centre, in 
the ſpace almoſt of a moneth, do finiſh their courſe in that time; 
which motion he judged at firſt to have been made by the Sun a- 
bout an Axis erccted upon the plane of the Ecliptick ; in "_ 
that the arches deſcribed by the ſaid (pots upon the Diſcus of the 
Sun appear unto our eye right lines, and parallcls to the plane of 
the Ecliptick : which therefore come to be altered, in part, with 
lome accidental, wandring, and irregular motions to which they 
are ſubje&, and whereby tumultuarily, and without any order 
they ſucceſſively change fituations amongſt themſelves » one 
while crouding clole rogcther, another while diſſevering, and 
ſome dividing them(clves into many and very much changing f- 
gures, which, for the moſt part, are very unuſual. And albeit 


thoſe ſo inconſtant mutations did ſomewhat alter the pPowene pi 
riodic 


Diatocue, III, 


rodick Courte of the ſaid ſpots, yet did they not alter the oPini- 
on of our friend, lo as to make him belicve, that they were any 

-fſeatial and fixed cauſe of thoſe deviations, but he continued tg 
hold, that all the apparent alterations derived themlelves from 

thoſe accidental mutations : in hike manner, juſt as it would hap- 
pen tO one chat ſhould from far diſtant Regions obſerve the mo- 
tion of our Clouds 3 which would be diſcovered to move with a 
moſt ſwift, great, and conſtant motion, carried round by the di- 
urnal Vertigo of the Earth (if haply that motion belong to the 
lame) in twenty four hours, by circles parallel to the Equino&i- 
al, bur yet altered, in part, by the accidental motions cauſed by 
the winds, which drive them, at all adventures, towards different 

quarters of che World. While this was in agitation, it came to 
paſs that V elſerns lent him two Letters, written by a certain per- 

ſon, under the feigned name of * Apelles, upon the (ubje& of 
theſe Spots , requeſting him, with importunity, to declare his 
thoughts freely upon thoſe Letters, and withall to let him know 

what his opinion was touching the eſſence of thole {pots;which his 

requeſt he ſatisfied in g Letters, ſhewing firſt of all howvain the 

conjeQures of Apelles were; & dilcovering,lecondly, his own opi- 

nions; withal foretelling to him,thar Apelles would undoubtedly 
be better adviſed in time, and turn to his opinion,as it afterwards 
came to pals. And becaulc that our Academian (as it was alſo 
the judgment of many others that were intelligent in Natures fe- 
crets) thought he had in thoſe three Letters inveſtigated and de- 
monſtcated, if not all that could be deſired, or required by hu- 
mane curioſity , at leaſt all that could be attained by humane 
reaſon in ſuch a matter, he, for ſome time (being buſied in other 
ſtudies) intermitted his continual obſervations, and onely in com- 
placency ro ſome friend, joyned with him, in making now and 
then an abrupt obſervation : till that he, and after ſome years, 
we, being then at my * Country-ſeat, met with one of the ſolita- 
ry Solar {pots very big, and thick, invited withal by a clear and 
conſtant lerenity of the Heavens, he, at my requeſt, made obſer- 
vations of the whole progreſle of the {aid ſpot, carefully marking 
upon a ſheet of paper the places that it was in every day at the 
time of the Suns coming into the Meridian ; and we having found 
that its courſe was not in a right line, but ſomewhat incurvated, 
we came to reſolve, at laſt, to make other obſervations from time 
to time; to which undertaking we were ſtrongly induced by a 
conceit, that accidentally came into the minde of my Gueſt, 
which he imparted to me in theſe or the like words. 

In my opinion, Philip, there is a way opened to a bufineſs of 
Very great conſequence. For if the Axis about which the Sun 
turneth be not ere& perpendicularly to the plane of the Eclip- 

Rr tick, 


* Thi 


313 


s Authors 


true name is Chyr- 
fhopher Scheiner wa 
a Jeluit, and thus 
Book here meant 
is intituled, Apel- 
les poſt tabulam. 


* La 
de Ile wy, 


mia villa 
uc, 


te 
- 


—_ 


314 

A concert that 
came ſuddenty me 
to the muinde of 
the «Academian 
Lyncxus concern- 
ing the great con- 
ſequence that fol- 
lowed upon the mo+ 
tron of the Solar 
ſpot 1 
Extrav.oant mile 
tations u0 be ebſer- 
vedin the motnons 
of the ſ-0:1, fore- 
ſeen by the 1A&ca- 
demick , '" caſe 
the Earth had tre 
annual motion, 


G. Gartitzus, hi Syſeme. 


tick, but is inclined upon the ſame, as cs crooked courſe, but e. 
ven now obſerved, makes me believe, we ſhall be able to make 
ſuch conjeCtures of the ſtates of the Sun a..d Earth, as neither fo 
ſolid or {o rational have bcen hitherto deducl d from any other ac. 
 cident whatſoever. I being awakened at ſo great a promile, im. 
portun d him to make a fcce dilcovery of his coneeit unto me. 
And ke continued his diicourſe to this purpole. If the Earths 
motion were along the Ecliptique about the Sun 3 and the Sun 
were conſtituted in the centre of the laid Ecliptick, and therein 
revolved in its (cif, not about the Axis of the {aid Ecliptique 
(which would be the Ax1s of the Earths annual motion) bur up- 
on one inclined, it mult needs follow, that ſtrange changes will 
repreſent themſelves ro us in the apparent motions of the Solar 
ſpots, although the ſaid Axis ot the Sun ſhould be ſuppoſed to 
perſiſt perpetually and immucably in rhe ſame inclination, and in 
one and the ſame diretion' towards the felt-ſame point of the 
Univerſe. Therefore the Terreſtrial Globe in the annual motion 
moving' round it, it will fi toFlow, that to us, carried about by 
the ſame, the courſes of the {pots ſhall -{ometimes ſeem to be 
made in right lines, but this only twice a year, and at all other 
times ſhall appear to be made by arches inſenſibly incurvared. 
Secondly, the curvity of thole arches for one half of the year, 
will ſhew inclined the contrary way to what they will appearin 
the other half; that is, for ſix moneths the convexity of the ar- 
ches ſhall be rowards the upper part of the Solar Diſcs, and for 
the other ſix moneths towards the infcriour. Thirdly,the ſpots be- 
ginning to appear,and (if I may fo ſpeak) to riſe to our eye from 
the lefc fide of the Solar Diſcs, and going to hide themſelves 
and to fet in the right fide, the Oriental termes, that is, of their 
ficſt appearings for fix mdneths, ſhall be lower than the oppoſite 
termes of their occultations 3. and for orher ſix moneths it ſhalt 
happen contrarily, to wit, that the ſaid ſpots riſing from more e- 
le-aced points, and from them deſcending, they ſhall, in their 
courſcs, go and hide themlelves in lower points ; and onely for 
rwo. dayes in all the year ſhall thoſe termes of riſings and ſet- 
tings, be equilibrated : after which-freely beginning by ſmall de- 
grees the inclination of the courſes of the ſpots, and day by day 
growing bigger, in three moneths; it ſhall arrive at its greateft 
obliqufity,and from thence beginning to diminiſh, in ſuch another 
tim- it ſhall reduce it felf to the other Aquilibrinm. It ſhall hap- 
pens tor a fourth wonder, that the courſe of the greateſt obli- 
quity ſhall be the ſame with the courſe made by the right line, 


and inthe day of the Libration the arch of the courſe ſhall ſeem 
morc than ever incurvated. Again, in the other times, accord- 


Ing/as the pendency ſhall ſucceſſively diminiſh, and make its ap- 


proach 


Diatocus. III. 


oach towards the Equilibrium, the incurvation of the arches 
of the courſes on the contrary ſhall, by degrees, increaſe. 

$a68. I confeſle, Salviatys, that to interrupt you in your 
Diſcourſe is i]] manners, bur I eſteem 1t no leſle rudeneſs to per- 


315 


mit you co run on any farther in words, whilſt they are, as the 


ſaying 15) caſt into the air : for, to ſpeak freely, I know not how 
to form any diſtin& conceit of ſo much as one of theſe conc]uli- 
ons, that you have pronounced ; bur becaule, as I thus yeneral- 
ly and contuledly apprehend them, they hold forth things of ad. 
mirable conſequence, [ would gladly, ſome way or other, be 
made to underſtand the ſame. 

Sarv. Theſame that befalls you, befell me alſo, whilſt my 
Gueſt tranſported me with bare words ; who afterwards afliſted 
wy capacity, by delcribing the buſineſle upon a material Inſtru- 
ment, which was no other than a ſimple Sphere, making uſe of 
ſome of 1ts circles, but to a different purpole from that, to which 
they are commonly applied. Now [I will lupply the defe& of 
the Sphere, by drawing the ſame upon a picce of paper, as need 
ſhall requirz. And to repreſent the firſt accident by me propoun- 
ded, which was, that the courles or journeys of the ſpots, twice 
a year, and no more, might be {een to be made in right lines, ler 
us ſuppole this point O Fin Fig.4.] to be the centre of the grand 
Orb, or, if you will, of the Ecliprick, and likewiſe alſo of the 
Globe of the Sun it {elf ; of which, by reaſon of the great di- 
ſtance that is between it and the Earth, we that live upon the 
Earth, may ſuppoſe that we ſce the one half : we will therefore 
deſcribe this circle A B C D about the ſaid centre O, which repre- 
ſenteth unto us the extream term that divideth and ſeparates the 
Hemilphere of the Sun that is apparent to us, from the other that 
15occult. And becaule that our eye, no lefle than the centre of 
the Earth, is underſtood to be in the plane of the Ecliptick, in 
which is likewiſe the centre of the Sun, therefore, if we ſhould 
fancy to our ſelves the body of the Sun to be cut thorow by the 
lad plane, the ſection will appear to our eyea right line, which 
let be B OD, and upon that a perpendicular being ler fall AOC; 
it ſhall be che Axis of the (aid Ecliptick, and of the annual mo- 
tion of the Terreſtrial Globe. Let us next ſuppole the Solar body 
(without changing centre) to revolve 1n it felf, not about. the 
Axis A © C (which is the ere& Axis upon the plane of the E- 
cliptick) but about one ſomewhat inclined , which let be this 
E OI, the which fixed and unchangeable Axis maintaineth it ſelf 
perpetually in the ſame inclination and direQion towards the 
lame points of the Firmament, and of the Univerſe. And be- 
caule, in the revolutions of the Solar Globe, each point of its ſu- 
perficies (the Poles cxcepred) deſcribeth the circumference of 

Rr 5 circle 


The firſh Ac- 
cident to be obſer» 
vrd in the moon 
of the Solar ſpots ; 
and conſequently 
all thy reſt explar- 


ned, 


g16 


G. Gar1t us, bi Syſleme. 


circle, cither bigger or leſſer, according as it is more or lefſe re. 
mote from the {aid Poles, let us take the point F, equally diſtzne 
from them, and draw the diameter F O G, which ſhall be Perpen. 
dicular to the Axis E I, and ſhall be the diameter of the grand 
circle deſcribed about the Poles EI. Suppoſing not that the 
Earth, and we with her bein ſuch a place of the Ecliptick, that 
the Hemiſphere of the Sun to us apparent 18 determin'd or bound. 
ed by the circle A B C D, which paſling (as it alwayes doth) by 
the Poles A C, paſſcth alſo by E I. It is manifeſt, thar the grand 
circle, whoſe diameter is FG, ſhall be ereCt to the circle ABC D, 
to which the ray that from our eye falleth upon the centre O, i; 
perpendicular ; ſo that the ſaid ray falleth upon the plane of 
the circle, whole diameter is F G, and therefore its circumference 
will appear to us a right line, and the ſelf lame with F G, where- 
upon it there ſhould be in the point F, a {pot , It comming after- 
wards to be carried about by the Solar converſion, would, y 

the ſurface of the Sun, trace out the circamference of that cir- 
cle, which ſeems to us a right line. Its courte or paſſage will 
therefore ſeem ſtraight. And ſtraight allo will the motion of the 
other {pors appear, which in the ſaid revolution ſhall deſcribe leſ- 
ſer circles, as being all parallel ro the. greater, and to our eye 
placed at an immente diſtance from them. Now, if you db but 
conſider, how that after the Earth ſhall in fix moneths have run 
thorow half the grand Orb, and ſhall be fituate oppoſite to that 
Hemiſphere of the Sun, which is now occult unto us, fo as that 
the boundary of the part that then ſhall be ſeen, may be the ſelf 
lame AB CD, which allo ſhall paſſe by the Poles E I; you 
ſhall underſtand that the fame will evene in the courſes of the 
(pots, as before, to wit, that all will appear to be made by tight 
lines. But becauſe that that accident takes not place, ſave one- 
ly when the terminator or boundary paſfeth by the Poles E1, 
and the ſaid terminator from moment to moment, by meanes of 
the Earths annual motion, continually altereth, therefore its paſs 
lage by the fixed Poles E I; ſhall be momentary, and conſequents 
ly momentary ſhall be the time, in which the motions of thoſt 
{pots ſhall appear ſtraight. From what hath been hicherro ſpoken 
one rhay comprehend alſo how that the apparition and beginning 
of the motion of. the (pots from the part F, proceeding towards 
G, their paſſages or courſes are from the left hand, aſcending to- 
wards the tight; but the Earth being placed in the part diame« 
trically 'oppofite the appearance of the ſpots about G, ſhall il) 
be to the left hand of the beholder, but the paſſage ſhall be del- 
ceriding towards ones 67 hand F. Let us now deſcribe the Earth 
te be. ſituate one fourth part farther diſtant from its preſent ſtate, 
and let us draw, azin the other figure, the terminator A BCD, 


| 4s 


Driatocur II]. 


[x in Fig. 5.] and the Axis, as before A C, by which the plane 
of our Meridian would paſſe, in which plane ſhould alſo be the 
Axis of the Suns revolution, with its Poles, one towards us, that 
is, in the apparent Hemiſphere, which Pole we will repreſent by 
the point E, and the other ſhall fall in the occult Hemiſphere, 
and | mark it I. Inclining therefore the Axis E I, with the ſupe- 
riour part E, towards us, the great circle deſcribed by the Sung 
converfion, ſhall be this B F D G, whole tialf by us (cen , name- 
ly B FD, ſhall no longer ſeem unto us a right line, by reaſon the 
Poles E I are not in the circumference A B CD, but ſhall appear 
incurvated, and with its convexity towards the inferiour part C. 
And it is manifeſt, that the ſame will appear 1a all the leffer cir- 
cles parallel to the lame BF D. It is to be underſtood allo, that 
when the Earth ſhall be diametrically oppolite to this ſtate, ſo 
that it ſeeth the other Hemiſphere of the Sun, which now is hid, 
it ſhall of the ſaid great circle behold the part D GB incurved, 
with its convexity towards the {uperiour part A and rhe cour- 
ſes of the {pots in theſe conſtitutions ſhall be firſt, by the arch 
BF D,and afterwards by the other D G B, and the firſt appari- 
tions and ultimate occultations made about the points B and D, 
ſhall be equilibrated, and not thoſe that are more or lefle cleva- 
red than theſe. But if we conſtitute the Earth in ſuch a place 
of the Ecliptick, that neither the boundary A B C D, nor the 
Meridian AC, pafſeth by the Poles of the Axis E I, as I will ſhew 
you anon, drawing this other Figure | viz.Fig.6.] wherein the 
appatent or viſible Pole E falleth between the arch of the cermi- 
natot A B, and the {e&ion of the Meridian A C; the diameter 
of the great circle ſhall be F O G, and the apparent ſemicircle 
FNG, and the occult ſemicircle G S F, the one incurvated with 
its cotvexity N towards the inferiour part, and the other alſo 
bending with its convexity S towards the upper part of the Sun. 
The ingreſſions and exitions of the ſpots, that is, the termes F 
and G ſhall not be librated, as the two others Band D; but F 
ſhall be lower, and G higher : but yet with lefſer difference 
than in the firft Figure. The arch alſo F N G ſhall be incurva- 
ted, but not ſo much as the precedent BF D 3 fo that in this po- 
fition the paſſages or motions of the ſpots ſhall be aſcendent 
frorh the left fide F, towards the right G, and ſhall be made by 
curved lines. And imagining the Earth to be conſtituted in the 
poſition diametrically oppoſite 3 ſa that the Hemiſphere of the 
Sun, which was before the occult, may be the apparent, and ter= 
minated by the ſame boundary A B C D, it will be manifeſtly 
diſcerned, that the conrſe of the ſpots ſhall be by the arch G SF, 
beginning from the upper point G, which ſhall then be likewiſe 
from the left hand of the beholder, and going to determine, deſ- 


cending 


The events bt- 
mg obſerved, were 
anſwerable to the 


predilt ions. 


G. Gatirt=®us, his Syſleme. 


{cending towards the right , in the point F. What I have Y 
therto {aid , being underſtood , I believe that there remaing no 
difficulty in concerving how from the paſling of the terminator of 
the Solar Hemilpheres by the Poles of the Suns converſion, or 
neer or far from the ſame, do arile all the differences in the appa- 
rent courſes of the ſpots; ſo that by how much the more thoſe Pgles 
ſhall be remote from the ſaid terminator,by ſo much the more (hall 
thoſe courſes be incurvated , and lefle oblique whereupon at 
the ſame diſtance , that is, when thoſe Poles arein the ſe&ion of 
the Meridian, the incurvation 1s reduced to the greateſt, but the 
obliquity to the leaſt , that is to Aquilibrium, as the ſecond of 
theſe three laſt ligures [ viz Fig. 5. ] demonſtrateth. On the 
contrary , when the Poles are in the: terminator , as the firſt of 
theſe three tigures [viz. Fig. 4-] ſheweth the inclination js ac 
the greateſt , but the incurvation at the leaſt, and reduced to 
recitude. The terminator departing from the Poles, the curyiry 
begins to grow ſenſible, the obliquity all the way cncreaſing, 
and the inclination growing leſler. 

Theſe are thoſe admirable and extravagant mutations, that my 
Gueſt told me would from time to time appear in the progrefles 
of the Solar ſpots , if to be it ſhould be true that the annual mo- 
tion belonged to the Earth, and that the Sun being conſtituted 
in the centre of the Ecliptick , were revolved init (elf upon an 
Axis, not cre& , but inclined to the Plane of the ſaid Eclip- 
tick. 

Sack. I do now very well: apprehend theſe conſequences, 
and believe that they will be better imprinted in my fancy, when 
I ſhall come to refle& upon them, accommodating a Globe to 
thoſe inclinations, and then beholding them from ſeveral pla- 
ces. It now remains that you tell us what followed afterwards 
rouching the event of theſe imaginary conſequences. 

Sarv. It came to paſſe thereupon , that continuing many ſe- 
veral moneths to make moſt accurate obſervations, noting down 
with great exancſſe the courles or tranſitions of ſundry ſpots at 
divers times of the year , we found the events punQually to cor- 
reſpond to the predictions. — 

Sack. Simplicins, if this which Salviatzs ſaith be true; (nor 
can we diſtruſt him upon his word) the Ptolomeans and Arivto- 
teleans hadneed of ſolid arguments , ſtrong conjeQures , and 
well grounded experiments to counterpoiſe an obje&tion of 1o 
much weight , and to ſupport their opinion from its final over- 
throw. 

Sine. Fair and loftly good Sir , for haply you may not yet 
be got, ſo far as you perſwade your ſelf you are gone. And 


though Jam nor an abſolute maſter of the ſubje& of that narra- 
tion 


Driatocus [I]. 


tion gIven us by Salviatus; yet do I not find that my Logick, 
whilſt I have a regard to form , teacheth me, that that kind of ar- 

1mentation affords me any neceſſary realon to conclude in fa- 
your of the Copernican Hypotheſis , that is, of the ſtability of 
the Sun in the centre of the Zodiack , and of the mobility of 
the Farth nnder its circumference. For although it be true, that 
the ſaid converſion of the $11n, and cirnition of the Earth being 
oranted , there be a neceſſity of diſcerning ſuch and ſuch ſtrange 
extravagancies as thele in the ſpors of the Sun, yet doth it not 
follow that arguing per converſum , from finding ſuch like un- 
uſual accidents in the Sun, one muſt of necſlity conclude the 
Earth to move by the circumference, and the Sun to be placed 
in the centre of the Zodiack. For who ſhall afſertain me that the 
like irregularities may not as wel] be viſible in the Sun, it bein 
moveable by the Ecliptick , to the inhabitants of the Earth, it 
being alſo immoveable in the centre of the ſame ? Unleſſe you 
demonſtrate to me, . that there can be no reaſon given for that ap- 

arance , when the Sun is made moveable, and the Earth ſtable, 
[ will not alter my opinion and belief that the Sun moveth , and 
the Earth ſtandeth ſtil]. 

Sac rs. Simplicius behaveth himſelf very bravely , and argueth 
very ſubrilly in defence of the cauſe of Ariſtotle and Ptolomy ; 


and if I may ſpeak the truth , mythinks that the converſation of 


Salviatus » though it have been but of {mall continuance, hath 
much farthered him in diſcourſing filogiſtically. An effe& which 
| know to be wrought in others as well as him. Butas to finding 
and judging whether comperent reaſon may be rendered of the 
apparent exorbitancies and irregularities in the motions of the 
ſpots , ſuppoſing the Earth to be immoveable, and the Sun 
moveable , I ſhall expect that Salviatus manifeſt his opinton to 


us, for it is very probable that he he hath conſidered of the 


lame , and colleged together whatever may be ſaid upon the 
point. 

Sai v. I have often thought thereon, and alſo diſcourſed 
thereof with my Friend and Gueſt afore-named ; and touching 
what is to be produced by Philoſophers and Aſtronomers, in de- 
tence of the ancient Syſteme , we are on one hand certain , cer- 
tain I ſay, that the true and pure Peripateticks laughing at ſuch 
as employ themſelves in ſuch, to their thinking , infipid foole- 
nes , will cenſure all thele Phenomena to be vain illuſions of the 
Chriſtals ; and in this manner will with little trouble free them- 
{elves from the obligation of ſtudying any more upon the ſame. 
Again, as to the Aſtronomical Philoſophers, after we have with 
{ome diligence weighed that which may be alledged as a mean 
between thoſe two others , we have not beenable to find our an 

anſwer 


3'9 


Though the an- 
x144l motion 4fſio n- 
ed rorhe Earth ans 
ſwerth to the Phx. 
nomena of the ſo- 
lar ſpots, yet dith 
it not follow by con» 
veyfion that from 
the Phxnomena of 
the ſpots one may 
infor the annual 


motion to belong is 
the Earth, 


The Pure Peri- 
paterick Phyloſo- 
pheys will laugh at 
the ſpots and their 
Phznomena , as 
illupons of the 
Chryſftals in the 
Teleſcope, 


3 20 


If the Earth be 
immoveable in the 
centre of the Zodt- 
ack, thrre muſt be 
aſcribed to the Sun 
four ſeveral moti- 
ons, 4 declared 


at langt b. 


G. Garit=us, his Sylcme. 


anſwer that ſuſficeth to ſatisfic at once the courſe of the (pots 
and the diſcourſe of the Mind. , I will explain unto you fo mich 
as I remcmber thereof, that ſo you may judge thereon as 
beſt unto you. 

Suppoſing that the apparent motions of the Solar ſpots are the 
ſame with thoſe that have been above declared , and [uppoſing the 
Earth to be immoveable in the centre of the Ecliptick, in whoſe 
circumference let the center of the Sun be placed ; it is neceſſary 
that of all the diffcrences that are ſeen in thoſe motions, the cau- 
ſes do reſide in the motions that are in the body of the Sun : 
W hich in the firſt place muſt neceſſarily revolve in itſelf (i, e, 
about itz own axis) carrying the ſpots along therewith ; which 
ſpots have beca ſuppoſed , yea and proved to adhere to the So- 
lar ſuperticies. It muſt ſecondly be confeſt, that the Axis of the 
Solar converſion is not parallel ro the Axis of the Ecliptick, that 
is as much as to ſay , that it 15 not perpendicularly ere&ed upon 
the Plane of the Ecliptick , becaulc if it were ſo, the courſes and 
exitions of thoſe ſpots would ſeem to be made by right lines pa- 
rallel to the Ecliptick. The ſaid Axis therefore is inclining , in 
regard the ſaid courſes are for the moſt part made by curve lines. 
It will be neceſſary 1n the third place to grant that the inclinati- 
on of this Axis 1s not fixed , and continually extended towards 
one and the ſame point of the Univerle , but rather that it doth 
alwayes from moment to moment go changing its direQion 3 for * 
if the pendency ſhould always look towards the {elf ſame point, 
the courſes of the ſpots would never change appearance, but 
appcaring at one time either right or curved, bending upwards 
or downwards , aſcending or deſcending , they would appear 
the ſame at all times. Ir is therefore neceſſary to lay, that the 

ſaid Axis is convertible; and 1s ſomerimes found to be in the 
Plane of the circle that is extreme, terminate » or of the viſible 
Hemiſphere ,-I mean at ſuch time as the courſes of the ſpots 
{eem .to be made in right lines, and more than ever pendent, 
which happeneth twice a year ; and at other times found to be in 
the Plane of the Meridian of the Obſervator , in ſuch fort that 
one of its Poles falleth in the viſible Hemiſpherc of the Sun , and 
the other in the occult; and both of them remote from the ex- 
treme points , or we may ſay , from the poles of another Axis of 
the Sun , which is parallel ro the Axis of the Ecliptick 3 (which 
ſecond Axis muſt neceſ{arily be aſſigned to the Selar Globe) re- 
mote, | (ay, as far as the inclination of the Axis of the reyolution 
of the ſpots doth import z and moreover that the Pole falling in 
the apparent Hemiſphere , is one while in the ſuperiour, another 
while 1n the inferiour part thereof ; for that it muſt be ſo, the 


courſcs. themſclves do manifeſtly evince at ſuch time as they are 
equt- 


leems 


Diatocus [I]. 


equilibrated , and nn their greateſt curvity , one while with 
their convexity towards the upper part, and another while 
owards the lower part of the Solar Diſcus. And becauſe 
thoſe poſitions are in continuall alteration , making the in- 
clinations and incurvations now greater, now lefſer, and ſome- 
times reduce themſelves, the firſt ſort ro perfe& libration, and 
the ſecond to perteS perpendicularity,it is neceſſary to aflert that 
the ſelf ſame Axis of the monethly revolution of the {pots hath 
A particular revolution of its own, whereby its Poles deſcribe 
two circles about the Poles of another Axis, which for that rea- 
ſon ought (as I have ſaid) to be afſigned to the Sun, the ſemidi- 
ameter of which circles an{wereth to the quantity of the incli- 
nation of the ſaid Axis. And it is neceflary, that the time of its 
Period be a year; for that ſuch is the time in which all the ap- 
pearances and differences in the courſes of the ſpots do return. 
And that the revolution of this Axis, is made about the Poles of 
the other Axis parallel to that of the Ecliptick, & not about other 
points, rhe greateſt inclinations and greateſt incurvations, which 
are always of the ſame bigneſs, do clearly prove. So that finally,to 
maintain the Earth fixed in the centre, it will be neceſſary to aſ- 
ſign to the Sun, two motions about its own centre, upon two ſeve- 
ral Axes, one of which finiſheth its converfion in a year, and the 
other in leſſe than a moneth 3 which aſſumption ſcemeth, to my 
underſtanding, very hard, and almoſt impoſſible ; and this de- 
pendeth on the neceſſity of aſcribing to the ſaid Solar body two 
other motions about the Earth upon different Axes, deſcribing 
with one the Ecliptick in a year, and with the other forming ſpi- 
rals, or circles parallel to the EquinoQiial one every day : 
whereupon that third motion which ought te be aſſigned to the 
Solar Clobe about its own centre (I mean not that almoſt 
monethly, which carrieth the ſpots about, but I {peak of that o- 
ther which ought to paſſe thorow the Axis and Poles of this 
monethly one) ought not, for any reaſon that I ſee, to finiſh its 
Period rather in a year, as depending on the annual motion by 
the Ecliptick, than in twenty four hours, as depending on the 
diurnal motion upon the Poles of the EquinoQal. I know, that 
what I now ſpeak is very obſcure, but I ſhall make it plain unto 
you, when we come to {peak of the third motion annual, aſſign- 
ed by Copernicus, tothe, Earth. Now if theſe four motions, ſo 
ncongruous with each other, (all which it would be neceflary to 
allign to the ſelf lame body of the Sun) may be reduced to one 
ſole and ſimple motion, aſſigned the Sun upon an Axis that never 
changeth poſition, and that without innoyating any thing in the 
motions for fo many other cauſes aſſigned to the Terreſtrial 
Globe, may ſo eaſily ſalve ſo many extravagant appearances tn 


the 


vu” 


wn” 


G. GAaLILzus, his Syſteme. 


the motions of the Solar ſpots, it {ſcemeth really that ſuch an 
Hypotheſis ought not to be rejected. | 

This, S1mpliciws, is all that came into the minds of our frieng 
and my (elf, that could be alledged in explanation of this Phan. 
menon by. the Copernic ans, and by the Plolomeans, in defence 
of their opinions. Do you inferre from thence what your judg- 
ment per{wades you. | 

Sine. Iacknowledge my ſclf unable to 1nterpoſe in fo im- 
portant a deciſion : And, as to my particular thoughts, 1 will 
ſtand neutral; and yet nevertheleſſe I hope that a time will 
come, when our minds being illumin'd by more lofty contempla- 
tions than thele our humane realonings, we ſhall be awakened 
and treed from that miſt which now 1s {o great an hinderance to 
our light... 

Sacr. Excellent and pious 1s the counſel taken by Simpli. 
ris, and worthy to be entertained and followed by all, as that 
which being derived from the higheſt wildome and ſupreameſt 
authority, may onely, with ſecurity be received. But yet ſo far 
as humane reaſon is permitted to penctrate,. confining my elf 
within the bounds of conjectures, and probable reaſons, I will 
lay a little more reſolutely than Simplicins doth, that amonyſt 
all che ingenuous ſubtilties I ever heard, I have never met with 
any thing of greater admiration to my 1atellect, nor chat hath 
more abſolutely captivated my judgment, (alwayes excepting 
pure.Geometrical and Arithmetical Demonſtrations) than theſe 
two conjectures taken, the one from the ſtations and retrograda- 
tions of the five Planets, and the other from thele irregularities of 
the motions of the Solar {pots : and becauſe they ſeem to me lo 
eaſily and clearly to aſlign the true reaſon of ſo extravagant ap- 
pearances, ſhewing as if they were but one ſole {imple motion, 
mixed with {o many others, fimple likewiſe, but different from 
each other, without introducing any difficulty, rather with obvi- 
ating thoſe that accompany the other Hypotheſis ; I am think- 
ng that F may rationally conclude, that thoſe who contumact- 
ouſly withſtand this DoErine, either never heard, or never un- 
gerſtood, theſe ſo convincing arguments. 

Sar v. I will not aſcribe unto them the title either of con- 
Vincing, or non-Convincing in regard my intention is not, as 1 
have ſeveral times told you, to reſolve any thing upon ſo high a 
queſtion, but onely to propoſe thoſe natural and Aſtronomicall 
reaſons, which, for the one and other Syſteme, may be produced 
by me, leaving the determination to others ; which determinatt- 
on cannot at laſt, but be very manifeſt : for one of the two poli- 
tions being of neceſſity to be true, and the other of neceſſity to 


be falle, it is a thing impoſſible that (alwayes confining our _ 
within 


Diatocue. [IL 


vithia the limits of humane dodtrine) the reaſons alledged for 
the rrae Hyporhetts ſhould not manifeſt chemlelves as concludeur 
1. thoſe for che contrary vain and ineffeQual. 

© AGr. It will be time therefore, that we hear the objections 
of the little Book of © Concluſions, Or Diſquilitions which Simpli- 
C115 did bi1ag with hun. 

Sine. Here 15 the Book, and this 1s the place where the Au- 
chor firſt briefly deſcribeth the Sylteme of the world, according 
to the Hypothetis of Copernicus, laying, Terram igttur una cum 
Luna, totoque hoc elementari mundo Copernicus, &c. 

Sir v. Foribear a little, Simplicrius, for methinks that this 
Autho.ii, 18 this firſt entrance, ſhews himſelf to be but very ill 
veilt in che Hypotheſis which he goeth about to confute, in re- 
gard, he faith that Copernicus maketh the Earth, together with 
the Mon, to deſcribe the * grand Orb in a year moving from 
Ezſtto Weſt ; a thing that as it is falle and impoſlible, fo was it 
never affirmed by Copernicus, who rather maketh it to move the 
contrary way, I mean from Welt to Eaſt, that is, according to 
the order of the Signes 3 whereupon we come to think the tame 
to be the annual motion of the Sun, conſtituted immoveable in 
the centre of the Zodiack. See the too adventurous confidence 
of this man ; to undertake the confutation of anothers Do&rine 
and yet to be ignorant of the primary fundamentals; upon which 
bis adverſary layeth the greateſt and moſt important part of all 
the Fabrick. This is a bad beginning to gain himſelf credit 
with his Reader; but let us go on. | 

Sir. Having explained che Univerſal Sylteme, he beginneth 
to propound his obje&ions agaidſt this annual motion : and 
the tirſt are theſes which he citeth Ironically, and in derifion of 
Copernicus, and of his followers, writing tharin this phantaſtical 
typothelis of the World one muſt neceflarily maintain very 
orotſe abſurdities 3 namely, that the Sun, Venus, and Mercury 
are below the Earth ; and that grave matters go naturally up- 
wards, and the light downwards 3 and that Chriſt, our Lord -and 
Redeemer, aſcended into Hell, and deſcended into Heaven, when 
hc approached towards the Sun, and that when Foſbuab com- 
mandcd the Sun to ſtand ſtill, the Earth ſtood ſtill, or the Sun 
moved a contrary way to that of the Earth; and that when the 
Sun 1S1N Cancer, the Earth runneth through Capricorn , and that 
tne Hyemal (or Winter) Signes make the Summer, and the 
Afiival Wintcr; and that the Stars do not riſe and ſet to 
the Earth, but the Earth to the Stars ; and that the Eaſt begin- 
neth in the Weſt, and the Weſt in the Eaſt; and, in a word, 
that almoſt the whole courſe of the World is inverted. 

*K& Ly. Every thing pleaſeth me, except it be his having inter- 


S{ 2 injxed: 


323 


* I ſhould have 
cold you, that the 
erue name of this 
concealed Au- 
thour 15 Chriſto- 
pher Scheinerus , 
and us tile Deſ- 
qur{rrrones AMa- 
th.matice. 


* 5.6. the Felipt'ck 4 


Inſtances of a 
Certain Book [r0- 
nically propouuded4 
againſt Coperni- 


CUS, 


— — 
- po a -— 


324 


Suppoſing the 
annual motion 10 
belong to theEarth, 
it followeth, that 
one fixed Star, 1s 
bryger than the 
whole grand Orb. 


Tvcino kis oAr- 

ument oronnned 

por 4 falſe Hypo» 
theſis, 


Litiorares Lawyers 
that av: Onmtertainse 
ed in 11 il cauſe, 
heer cloſe ts [me 
exry/ſſim fallen 
from the adverſe 


party at Knawares, 


But for your better information 3 Copernic#s having declared 


G. Gar 1Ltxus, his Syſtere. 


mixed places out of rhe lacred Scriptures(alwayes venerable, and 
to be rever'd ) amonglt thele, but two (currilous fooleiies, ang 
attempting to wound with holy Weapons, thoſe who Philoſo. 
phating in zcſt, and for divertilement neither affirm nor deny 
bur, lome preſuppolals and politions being affumed, do famili. 
arly argue. | ; | w 

S\imy. Truths, he hath dilplcaſed me allo, ard that not a 
little 3 and eſpecially, by adding preſently after that, howbeir, 
the Copernichists aniwer, thongh bur very umpertinently to theſe 
and ſuch like other realons,yert can they not reconcile nor anſwer 
choſe things that follow. 

S 11 v. This is worſe than all the reſt; for he pretendeth to 
have things more efficacious and concludent than the Authorities 
of the ſacred Leaves 3 But I pray you, let.us reverence them, 
and pallc on to natural and humane reatons : and yet if he give 
us among(t his natural arguments, things of no more (olidity , 
than thole hitherto alleadged, we may wholly decline this under- 
taking, for I as to my own parricular, do not think it fit to ſpend 
words in anſwering {uch trifling impertinencies. And as to what 
he ſaith, that the Copernicans aniwer to theſe objzeGions, it is 
molt talle, nor may it be thought, that any man ſhould et him 
{elf to waſt his time ſo unprofitably. 

Simpy. Iconcur with you in the ſame judgement 3 therefore 
let us hear the other inſtances that he brings, as much ſtronger, 
And oblerve here, how he with very cxact computations conc]ud- 
eth, that if the grand Orb of the Farth, or the ecliprick,in which 
Copernicus maketh it ro run in a ycar round the Sun, ſhould be 
as it were, inſenſible, in relpect of th: immenſlitie of the Starry 
Sphxzre , according as the laid Copernicxs , faith it is to be lup- 
poled, it would be neceſlary to grant and confirm, that the fixed 
Stars were remote from us, an unconceivable diſtance, and that 
the leſſer of them, were bigger than the whole grand Orb afore- 
{aid, and ſome other much bigger than the whole Sphere of $4- 
turn ; Males certainly too exceſſively vaſt, unimaginable, and 
incredible. | 

S a LV. Ihave heretofore ſeen ſuch another objeGion brought 
by Tycho againſt Copernicus, and this is not the firſt rime that I 
have dilcovercd the fallacy, or, to lay better, the fallacies of this 
Argumemtation,founded upon a moſttalie Hypothefis,and upon 
a Piopoſition of the ſaid Copernicus, underſtood by his adverla- 
ries, with too punQual a nicity, according to the pradile of thofe 
pleaders, who finding the flaw to be in the very merit of their 
caule, keep to ſome one word, fallen unawares from the contra- 
ry partic , and fly out into loud and tedious deſcants upon that. 


thole 


Biifoots wo! 


hoſe admirable coniequences which are derived from the Earth; 
annual motion2to the other Planets,thatis to lay, of the * direGi- 
ons and retropradations of the three uppermoſt in particular ; he 
ſubjoyneth, that this apparcnt mutation ( which is diſcerned more 
in Mars than 1n Jupiter, by realon F upiter 1s more remote, and 
yer Icſlc in Saturn, by realon It 15 More remote than Jupiter ) in 
the fixed Stars, did remain imperceptible, by realon of their 
:mmenſe remorencflc trom us, in comparilon of the diſtances of 
«pater or Saturn. Here the Adverſanics of this opinion riſe up, 
and [uppoling that fore-named mperceptibility of Copernicus, as 
if it had been taken by him, for a real and ablolute thing of no- 
thing, and adding, thata fixed Star of one of the leſſer magnt- 
tudes, 15 notwithſtanding perceptible, {ccing that it cometh un- 
der the {ence of 1ecing, they go on to calculate with the 1nter- 
vention of other falle aſſumptions, and concluding that ir is necel- 
lary by the Copernican Doctrine, to admit, that a tixed Star 15 much 
bigger than the whole grand Orb. Now ro dilcover the vanity 
of this their whole protceding, | ſhall ſhew thar a fixed Star of the 
lixth magnitude, being ſuppoled to be no bigger than the Sun, 
one may thence conclude with truc demonſtrations, that the di- 
ſtance of the laid fixed Stars from us, cometh to be lo great, that 
the annual motion of the Earth , which cauſeth ſo great and 
notable variations in the Planets, appears ſcarce obſervable in 
them ; and at the {ame time, I will diſtinaly ſhew the grols 
fallacies, in the aflumptions of Copernicas his Advertarics. 

And firſt of all, I ſuppoſe with the ſaid Coperricis, and alto 
with his oppolers, that the Semidiamcter of the grand Orb,which 
15 the diſtance of the Earth from the Sun, conraineth 1208 Semi- 
diameters of the laid Earth. Secondly, I premiſe with the allow- 
ance aforclaid, and of truth, that the * apparent diameter of the 
Sun in its mean diſtance, to be about halt a degree, that is, 3o. 
mn. prim. which are 1500. ſeconds, that is, 105000. thirds. 
And becauſe the apparent Diameter of a fixed Star of the firſt 
magnitude, 15no more than 5. ſeconds, that is, 3oo. thirds,and 
the Diameter of a fixed Star of che (ixth magnitude, 50. thirds, 
(and heccin is the greateſt errour of the Anti-Copernicans )There- 
fore the Diameter of the Sun, containeth the Diameter of a 
fixed Star of the ſixth magnitude 2160. times. And therefore 
t a fixed Star of the (ſixth magnitude, were ſuppolcd to be really 
cqual to the Sun, and not bigger, which is the lame as to ſay, if 

the Sun were ſo far removed, that its Diameter ſhould ſeem to 
bc one of the 2160. parts of what it now appeareth, its diſtance 
ought of neceſſity to be 2160. times greater than now in effect it 
15, Which is as much as to ſay, that the diſtance of the fixed Stars 


of the ſixth magnitude, is 2160. Semidiameters of the grand 
Orb. 


325 


* Oc progreſſiors, 

The aprarent 
a ver ery of motion 
inthe Plaxets, u 
rſ[-x/ible we the 
fixed Stars, 


Sppojing that 1 
fixed Star of the 
ſoxth magnitude us 
0 bigger thay tle 
Sun, the atver ſits: 
wich # ſo great 
intle Planets, mn 
the fixed Stays u 
almest wſenſ;ble, 


The dif ance of 
the Sun, cortaineth 
1203 Semid, of the 
Earth. 


* The Diameter 
of the Yun, halt a 


deorce, 


The Diameter 
of a fixed Star of 
the firſt magnt- 
rude, and of one of 
the / xth. 

The apparent 
Diameter of the 
Sun, how much it 
1s big ger than that 


of a fixed ftar. 


320 


The 1ſt ince of 
a fixel ſtar of the 
ſixth magmunie , 
h1w much it 15,the 
ſt ar berng ſuppoſed 
to be equal 19 the 
Sun, 


In the fixed ſtars 
the diver ſitie of 4- 
ſpet, cauſed ly 
the grand 0b, ts 
little more then 
that canſed by the 


E arih in th: San, 


A [tay of the 
Sxth manmade, 
ſapooſed by [ vch 
and the «Auth ur 
of the Byok of Con- 
Cluſficnt, an hurs 
dred and hx 1 li « 
ons of times bigger 
than nieds, 


T he computati- 
on of the mag ni- 
tude of the fixed 
Stars, tn reſpett to 


the grand Orb. 


aA common «y- 
rowr of all the A- 
Rronomers, trowch- 
ing the magnituae 


of the ſt ar:. 


G.Garirtfus, his Syſlcme; 


Orb. And becaulc the diſtance of the Sun from the Earth 
tains by common conlent 1 205. Scmidiameters of the ſaid Earth 
and the diſtance of the fixed Stars ( as hath been laid) 2160, 
Semediameters of the grand Orb, thercftore the Semidiamete; of 
the Earth is much greater (that is almoſt double) in compariſon 
of the grand Orb, than the Semidiameter of the grand Orb, in 
relation to the diſtance of the Starry Sphzre z and therefore the 
variation of aſpect in the fixed Stars, cauled by the Diameter of 
the grand Orb, can be but little more oblervable,than that which 
is obſerved in the Sun, occaſioned by the Semidiameter of the 
Earth. 

S aGr This is a great fall for the firſt ſtep. 

S, Lv. Itis doubtlefle an errour ; for a fixed Star of the ſixth 
magnitude, which by the compuration of this Authour, ought, 
for the upholding the propoſition of Copernicus, to be as big as 
the whole grand Orb, onely by ſuppoſing it equal to the Sun, 
which Sun 1s lefſe by far, than the kundred and fix millionth parr 
of the {aid grand Orb,maketh the ſtarry Sphzre fo great and high 
as {ufficeth to overthrow the inſtance brought againſt the ſaid Co- 
pernicus. 

Sacr. Favour me with this computation. 

Salv. The {upputation 15 caſte and ſhort. The Diameter of 
the Sun, is cleven {emidiameters of the Earth, and the Diameter 
of the grand Orb, contains 2416. of thoſe ſame {emidiameters, 
by the aſcent of both parties ; ſo that the Diameter of the ſaid 
Orb, contains the Suns Diameter 220. times very near. And 
becauſe the Spheres are to one another, as the Cubes of their Di- 
ameters, let us make the Cube of 220. which 1s 106 450000. and 
we ſhall have the grand Orb, an hundred and fix millions, four 
hundred and eighty thouſand times bigger than the Sun, to which 
grand Orb, a ſtar of che'fixth magnitude, ought to be equal,ac- 
cording to the aſſertion of this Authour. | 

SaGk-. Theerrour then of theſe men, conſiſteth in being ex- 
treamly miſtaken, in taking the apparent Diameter of the fixed 
Stars, | 

S AL v. This 15 one, but not the onely errcour of them; and 
indeed, Ido very much admire how ſo many Aſtrovomers, and 
thole very famous, as are Alfagranus, AlbategnusTebizins,and 
much more modernly the Tycho's and Clawins's , and in ſum, 
all the predeceſlors of our Academian,ſhould have been ſo grolly 
miſtaken, in determining the magnitudes of all the Stars, as well 
fixed as moveable, the two Luminaries excepted out of that num- 
ber ; and that they have not taken any heed to the adventitious 
urcadiations that deceitfully repreſent them an hundred and more 


times bigger, than when they are beheld, without thoſe capilli- 
tious 


3 COn-+ 


Diriarocus 111, 


315 raycs KOT Can ths their inadvertency be excuſcd, in regard 
that was in their power to have beheld them at their pleature 
without tholc trefles, which 13 done, by looking upon them at 
their firſt appearance in the evening, or their laſt occultation in Fes 
| ing on of day; and if none of the rcſt V YES Fanglys ribs 
the COmmIng O1 Y35 lon! » yet Venus, ror of Aﬀrone- 
which oft times 15 ſeen at noon day, fo ſmall, that one muſt ſhar- mers 57 determon- 
en the fight 1n diſcerning it and again, in the following night, /;* | ply. uy 
(eemeth a great flake of light, might advertiſe them of their fal- 5. : 
lacy; for 1 will not believe that they thought the true Diſcus to 
be that which 1s teen in the oblcureſt darknefles, and not that 
which is diſcerned in the luminous Med:um : for our lights, which 
ſeen by night afar off app-ar great, and neer at hand ſhew their 
truc luſtre ro be terminate and (mall, might have eaſily have 
made them cautious 3 nay, if I may freely ſpeak my thoughts, 1 
ablolutely believe that none of them, no not Tycho himſelf, fo 
accurate in handling Aſtronomical Inſtruments, and that ſo great 
and accurate, without ſparing very great coſt in their conſtru- 
on, did ever go about to take and meaſure the apparent dia- 
meter of any Star, the Sun and Moon excepted ; but I think, 
that arbitrarily, and as we ſay, with the eye, ſome one of the 
more antient of them pronounced the thing to be {o and ſo, and 
that all that followed him afterwards, without more ado, kept 
cloſe to what the firſt had laid ; for if any one of them had ap- 
plicd hwlelt to have made {ome new proof of the ſame, he would 
doubrlctlc have diſcovered the traug]. 
SaGs. Butif they wanted the Teleſcope, and you have al- 
ready ſaid, that our Friend with that ſame Inſtrument came to 
the knowledge of the truth, they ought to be excuſed, and not 
acculed of ignorance. 
Sa1v. This would hold good, if without the Teleſcope the 
buſinefſe could nor be effe&ed. Its true, that this Inſtrument by 
ſhewing the Diſcus of the Star naked, and magnihed an hun- 
died or a thouſand times, rendereth the operation much more ea- 
ſie, but the ſame thing may be done, although not altogether fo 
exalily, without the Inſtrument, and I have many times done 
the ſame, and my method therein was this. 1 have cauſed a rope: as 
y to ma” 
to be hanged towards ſome Star, and I have made uſe of the fare the | apparent 
Conſtellation, called the Harp, which riſeth between the North ner of « /tar. 
and * North-caſt , and then by going towards, and from , 
the {aid rope, interpoled between me and the Star, I have found 7.xjnc CS hor 
the place from whence the thickn: fle of the rope hath juſt hid ” * foy, Nonh» 
the Star from mc : this done, I have taken the diſtance from the ng 
eyctothe rope, which was one of the ſides including the angle 
that was compoſed in the eye, and * which inſiſteth upon the . ,. ;. "VE 
thicknefſe of the rope, and which is like, yea the ſame with the ded y. 
angle 


G. Garitxus, bi Syſleme. 


angle in the Starry Sphere, that inſiſteth upon the diamete; of 
the Star, and by the proportion of the ropes thickneſle to the 
diſtance from the eye to the rope, by the table of Arches and 
Chords, I have immediately found the quantity of the angle; y. 
ſing all the while the wonted caution that is obſerved in takin 
angles ſo acute, not to forme the concourſe of the viſive raye. 
in the centre of the eye, where they are onely refraQed, þy, 
beyond the eye, where really the pupils greatneſle maketh them 
to Concur. 

Sas. I apprehend this your cautelous procedure, albeit x 
have a kind of hzfitancy touching the ſame, but that which moſ 
puzzleth me is, that in this operation, if it be made in the dark 
of night, methiaks that you meaſure the diameter of the irradia. 
ted Diſcus, and not the true and naked face of the Star. 

S a 1 v. Not ſo, Sir, for the rope in covering the naked body 
of the Star, taketh away the rayes, which belong not to it, but 
to our eye, of which it is deprived ſo ſoon as the true Diſcus 
thereof is hid ; and in making the obſervation, you ſhall ſee, how 
unexpectedly a little cord will cover that reaſonable big body of 
light, which ſcemed impoſſible to be hid, unlefſe it were with a 
much broader Screene : to meaſure, in the next place, and exa- 
Aly to find out, how many of thoſe thickneſles of the rope inter- 
pole in the diſtance between the ſaid rope and the eye, I take not 
onely one diameter of the rope, bur laying many pieces of the 
ſame together upon a Table, ſo that they touch, I take with a 
pair of Compaſles the whole ſpace occupicd by fifteen, or twen- 
ty of them, and with that mealure I commenlurate the diſtance 
before with another ſmaller cord taken from the rope to the con- 
courſe of the viſive rayes. And with this ſufficiently-exa& ope- 
ration I finde the apparent diameter of a fixed Star of the firſt 
magnitude, commonly eſteemed to be 2 min. pri- and alſo 3 min. 


_— of prim. by Tycho in his Aſtronomical Letters, cap. 167. tobe no 
« fixed ſtar of the more than 5 ſeconds, which is one of the 24. or 36. parts of what 
fff magnitude rot they have heldit : ſee now upon what groſle errours their Do- 


more than feue ſec. 


&rines are founded. 


SaGk. Ice and comprehend this very well, but before we 
paſſe any further, I would propound the doubt that ariſeth fn 
me in the finding the concourſe [or interſeQion] of the viſual 
rayes beyond the eye, when obſervation is'made of objeas com- 
prehended between very acute angles 3 and my ſcruple proceeds 
from thinking, that the ſaid concourſe may be ſometimes more 
remote, and lometimes lefſe ; and this not ſo much, by meanes 
of the greater or leſſer magnitude of the objeR that is beheld, as 
becaule that in obſerving obje&s of the ſame bigneſle , it ſeems 
ro me that the concourſe of the rayes, for certain other re- 


ſpeQs 


Diatocus 111 


jpeCs ought to bc made more and etl: remote from the-eye. 
S,Lv. | (ee already, whither the apprehenſion of Sagredus, 
a moſt diligent obſerver of Natures fecrets, tendeth; and 1 
would lay any wager, that amongſt the thoulands that have ob- 
ſerved Cats to contrat and inlarge the pupils of their eyes very 
much, there arc not two, nor haply one that hath obſerved the 
like effc& ro be wrought by the pupils of men in ſeeing, whilſt 
the medium is much or little i]lumin'd, and that in the open light 
the circlet of the pupil diminiſheth conſiderably : fo that in loo- 
king upoa the face or Diſcus of the Sun, it is reduced to a {mall- 
nefle Iefſer than a grain of * Panick, and in beholding obje&s 
chat do not ſhine, and are 1n a lefle luminous medinm, it 1s inlar- 
gcd to the biguctle of a Lintel or more; and in ſumme this 
expaniion and contraction differeth in morc than decuple pro- 

ortion : From whence it 1s manifeſt, that when the pupil 1+ 
much dilatcd, it is neceflary that the angle of the rayes con- 
courſe be more remote from the eye; which happencth in be- 
holding obyeRs lictle luminated. This is a Doctrine which Sa- 
gredus hath, juſt now, given me the hint of, whereby, if we 
were to make a very exact oblervation, and of great conſe- 
quence, WC arc advertized to make the obſervation of that con- 
courſe in the a of the ſame, or juſt ſuch another operation ; but 
in this oar cale, wherein we are to ſhew-the errour of AStrono- 
mers, this accuratenefle 1s not neceſlary : for though we ſhould, 
in favour of the contrary party, {uppole the ſaid concourle to be 
made upon the pupil it lelt, ir would import little, their miſtake 
being lo great. 1 am not certain, Sagredxs, that this would have 
been your objection. 2 

SaGk. Iris the very lame, andl am glad that it was not al- 
together without realon, as your concurrence in the fame afſy- 
reth me ; bur yet upon this occaſion I would willingly hear what 
way may be taken to tinde out the diſtance of the concourſe of 
the viſual rayes. 

Sar v. The methods very eaſic, and this it 15, I take two 
long * labe!s of paper, one black, and the other white, and make 
the black half as broad as the white 3 then I ſtick up the white a- 
gainſt a wall, and far from that I place the other upon a ſtick, or 
other {upport) ata diſtance of fifteen or twenty yards, and rece- 
ding from this, {econd another {uch a {pace in the ſame right line, 
It 1s very manifeſt, that at the ſaid diſtance the right lines will 
concur, that departirg from the termes of the breadth of the 
white picce, ſhall paſle clole by the edges of the other label pla- 
ced in the mid-way ; whence it followeth, that in caſe the eye 
were placed in the point of the {aid concourſe or interſe&ion, 
the black lip of paper in the midſt would preciſely hide the op- 

. Tet polite 


bg 


T he circleof the 
puril of the eye en- 
largeth and con- 
tratteth. 


+ Panicuw , 2 
{mall grain like to 
M:!1,1 take it to be 
the ſame with that 
call:d Bud Secd. 


* Srriſc®, 
How to find the 
diſt ance of the rays 


concourſe fromike 


pupil, 


C 


b > los 


G. Garirtzus, biSyſleme. 


poſite blank,if the ſight were made in one onely point ; but if ye 


ſhould find, that the edges of the white cartel appear diſcoyereq 
it ſhall bea neceſſary argument that the viſual rayes do not 7"Ri 
from one ſole point. And ro make the white label to be hiq by 
the black, it will be requiſite to draw neerer with the eye : 
Therefore, having approached (o neer, that the intermediate 1. 
bel covereth the other, and noted how much the required ap. 
proximation was, the quantity of that approach ſhall be the cer. 
tain meaſure, how much the true concourle of the vilive rayes, ;, 
remote from the eye in the ſaid operation, and we ſhall moreover 
have the diameter of the pupil, or of that circlet from whence 
the viſive rayes proceed : for it ſhall be to the breadth of the 
black paper, as is the diſtance from the concourle of the lines, 
that are produced by the edges of the papers to the place where 
the eye ſtandeth, when it firſt ſeeth the remote paper to be hid 
by the intermediate one, as that diſtance is, I ſay, to the diſtance 
that is betwcen thoſe two papers. And therefore when we 
would, with exaGneſle, meaſure the apparent diameter of a Star, 
having made the obſervation in manner, as aforeſaid, it would be 
neceſlary to compare the diameter of the rope to the diameter of 
the pupil; and having found v.g. the diameter of the rope to be 
quadruple to that of the pupil, and the diſtance of the eye from 
the rope to be, for example, thirty yards, we would ſay, that the 
true concourſe of the lines produced from the ends or extremi- 
ties of the diameter of the ſtar, by the extremities of the dia. 
meter of the rope, doth fall out to be fourty yards remote from 
the ſaid rope, for ſo we ſhall have obſerved, as we ought, the pro- 
portion between the diſtance of the rope from the concourſe of 
the ſaid lines, and the diſtance from the ſaid concourſe to the 
place of the eye, which ought to be the ſame that is between 
the diameter of the rope, and diameter of the pupil. 

SAG KR. I have perfectly underſtood the whole buſineſle, and 
therefore let us hear what Simplicizs hath to alledge in defence of 
the Anti-Copernicans. 

Sine. Albeit that grand and altogether incredible inconve- 
nience inſiſted upon by theſe adverſaries of Copernicys be much 
moderated and abated by the dilcourle of Salviatus, yet do I 
not think it weakened ſo, as that it hath not ſtrength enough lett 
to foil this ſame opinion. For, if I have rightly apprehended the 
chief and ultimate concluſion, in caſe, the ſtars of the ſixth mag- 
nitude were ſuppoſed to be as big as the Sun, (which yet I can 
hardly think) yet it would ſtill be true, that the grand Otb [or 
Ecliptick] would occalion a mutation and variation in the ſtarry 
Sphere, like to that which the ſemidiameter of the Earth produ- 
ceth in the Sun, which yet is obſervable; ſo that neither that, 00 

nor 


; TS 


Diatocue. LIT, 


-0r a Icfſe mutation being ailcerned ia the fixed Stars, methinks 
that by this means che annual motion of the Farth is deſtroyed 
and overthrown. | 
Satv. You might very well fo conciude, Simplicivs, if we 
had nothing elle to iay in behalf of Copernicis : but we have 
many things to alledge that yet have nor been mentioned ; and 
25 to that your reply, nothing hindereth, but that we may ſ(up- 
pole the diſtance of the fixed Stars to be yer much greater than 
that which hath been allowed them, and you your ſelf, and who- 
ever elſe will not derogate from the propoſitions admitted by 
Piolomy's (etators, mult needs grant it as a thing moſt requilite 
to (uppole the Starry Sphere to be very much bigger yet than 
that which even now we laid thatit ought to be eſteemed. For 
all Aſtronomers agreeing in this, that the caule of the greater 
rardity of the Revolutions of the Plancts 1s, the majority of 
their Spheres, and that therefore Saturn is more flow than Fu- 
piter, and Jupiter than the Sun, for that the firſt is to delcribe a 
ccater circle than the {econd, and that than this later, &c. con- 
tdering that Saturn v.g. the altitude of whole Orb is nine times 
higher than that of the Sun, and that for that caule the time of 
one Revolution of Saturn, 1s thirty times longer than that of a 
converſion of the Sun, 1n regard rhat according to the Do&rine 
of Ptolomy, one converſion of the ſtarry Sphere is finiſhed in 
36000. years, whereas that of Saturn is conſummate in thirty, 
and that of the Sun in one, arguing with a like proportion , and 
ſaying, if the Orb of Saturn, by reaſon it is nine times bigger 
than that of the Sun, revolves in a time thirty times Jonger, by 
converſion, how great ought that Orb to be, which revolves 
36000. times more {lowly ? it ſhall be found that the diſtance of 
the ſtarry Sphere ought to be 10800 lemidiameters of rhe grand 
Ocb, which ſhould be full five times bigger than thar, which even 
now we computed it to be, in caſe that a fixed Star of the ſixth 
magnitude were equal to the Sun. Now ſce how much lefler yet; 
upon this account, the variation occaſioned in the ſaid Stars, by 
the annual motion of the Earth, ought to appear. And if at the 
{ame rate we would argue the diſtance of the ſtarry Sphere from 
Tupiter, and from Mars, that would give it us to be 15000. and 
this 27000 ſemidiameters of the grand Orb, to wit, the firſt 


ſeven, and the ſecond twelve times bigger than what the mag- #4 


mtude of the fixcd Star, ſuppolcd equal ro the Sun, did make 
it. 
| Sie. Mecthinks that to this might be anſwered, that the mo- 
tion of the ſtarry Sphere hath, ſince Ptolomy, been obſerved not 
to be {o flow as he accounted it ; yea, if 1 miſtake not, I have 
heard that Copernicus himfelf made the Obſervation. 
Tt 3 


SALY- 


331 


eAll Aitroroe 
mers agree that 
the preater OEITIE 
trials of te (): bes 
& the cauſe ef tie 
tardity of the C 93* 
Ter/ions. 


By another ſu?2+ 
Poſition taken fr em 
Aſtroromeys p the 
diſtance of the fix- 
ed Stars bs calcu- 
lat:d tobe 1©g00 
ſemidiameteys of 


the grand Orb. 


By the proportion 
of Jpirer and of 
Mais, the ſtarry 
YPhere is fourd to 


© yer m0"eremoc, 


5 
C 
_ 


332 G. Gallitzaus, his Syſleme. 


SAativ. Youlay very well z but you alledge nothing in that 
which may favour the caulc of the Ptolomeans in the leaſt, who 
did never yet reze& the motion of 36000. years in the ſtarry 

* Sphere, for that the ſaid tardity would make it too vaſt and in. 
menſe. For if that the {aid immenlity was not to be ſuppoſedin 
Nature, they ought before now to to have denied a converſion 
ſo flow as that it could not with good proportion adapt i: ſelf 
ſave onely to a Sphere of monſtrous magnitude. 

S a 6 &. Pray you, Salviatys, let us lole no more time in Pro- 
cecding, by the way of theſe proportions with people that are apt 
to admit things moſt dil-proportioaate 3 10 thar its impoſſible 
to win any thing upon them this way: and what more diſpropor- 
tionate proportion caa be imagined than that which theſe men 
lwallow down, and admit, in that writing, that there Cannot be a 
more convenient way to diſpoſe the Caeleſtiai Sphercs, in order, 
than to regulate them by the differences of che times of their pe- 
riods, placing from one degree to atiother the more flow above 
the more {wift, when rhey have conſticuted the Starry Sphere 
higher than the reſt, as being the loweſt, they frame another 
higher ſtill than that, and conſequently greater, and make it re- 
volve in twenty four hours, whilſt theenext below, it moves not 
round under 36000. years ? 

Saulv. Icould wiſh, Simplicixs, that ſuſpending for a time 
the affection rhat you bear to the followers of your opinion, you 
would ſincerely tell me, whether you think that they do 1n their 
minds comprehend that magnitude, which they reze& afterwards 
as uncapable for its immentity to be aſcribed to the Univerſe. 

Immerſe mag- For I, as to my own part, think that they do not ; But believe, 
rear jars that like as in the apprehenſion of numbers, when once a man 
benfble os «». begins to paſle thole millions of millions, the imagination is con- 
der ſtanding, founded, and can no longer form a conceipt of the ſame, ſo ic 

happens allo in comprehending immenſe magnitudes and diſtan- 
ces 3 ſo that there intervenes to the comprehenſion an effeR like 
to that which befalleth the ſenſe ; For whileſt that in a ſerene 
night I look towards the Stars, I judge, according to ſenſe, that 
their diſtance is but a tew miles, and that che fixed Stars are not a 
Jjot more remote than Fupiter or Saturn, nay than the Moon: 
But without more ado, conſider the controverſies that have paſt 
between the Aſtronomers and Peripatetick Philoſophers, upon 
occaſion of the new Stars of Caſſiopeia and of Sagittary, the A- 
ſtronomers placing them amongſt the fixed Stars, and the Philo- 
ſophers believing them to be below the Moon. So unable 15 our 
ſenſe to diſtinguiſh great diſtances from the greateſt, though theſe 
be in reality many thouſand times greater than thoſe. Ina word, 


I ask of thee, O fooliſh. man ! Doth thy imagination comprehend 
: Fe 


Diatrocus [I]. 


hat vaſt magnitude of the Unfverſe, which thou atterwards judg. 
eſt to be roo immenle ? If rhou comprehendeſt it ; wilt thou 
hold that thy apprehenſion exrendeth it lelf farther than the Di- 
vine Power ? wilt thou ſay, that thou canſt imagine greater 
things than thole which God can bring ro paſle ? But it thou 
apprehendeſt it not, why wilt thou paſſe thy verdi upon things 
beyond thy comprehenſion ? 

Siny. All this 1s very well, nor can it be denied, but that 
Heayen may 1n greatneſle {urpaſle our imagination, as allo that 
God might have created it thouſands of times vaſter than now it 
is; but we ought not to grant any thing to have been made in 
vain, and to be idle 1a the Univerſe. Now,1in that we lee this ad- 
mirable order of the Planets, diſpoſed about the Earth in diſtan- 
ces proportionate for producing their effects for our advantage, 
to what purpoſe is it to interpole afterwards between the ſublime 
Orb of Saturn and the ſtarry Sphere,a vaſt vacancy, without any 
ſtar that 15 ſuperfluous, and to no purpole ? To what end? For 
whole profit and advantage ? 

Sar y. Methinks we arrogate too much to our ſelves, Simpli- 
cius, whilſt we will have it, that the onely care of us, is the ad- 
Xquate work, and bound, beyond which the Divine Wiſdome 
and Power doth, or diſpoſeth of nothing. Bur I will not con- 
ſent, that we ſhould ſo much ſhorten its hand, but deſire that we | 
may content our ſelyes with an affurance that God and Nature 
are ſo imployed in the governing of humane affairs, that they 
could not more apply themſelves thereto, although they had no 
other care than onely that of mankind ; and this, I chink, I am 
able to make out by a moſt pertinent and moſt noble example, 
taken from the operation of the Suns light, which whileſt ir at- 
trateth theſe vapours, or ſcorcherh that plant, it attraReth, ir 
ſcorcheth them, as if it had no more to do; yea, in ripening that 
* bunch of grapes, nay that one ſingle grape, 1t doth apply it ſelf 
ſo, that it could not be more intenſe, if the ſum of all its bufineſs 
had been the only maturation of that grape. Now tt this grape 
receiveth all that it is poſſible for it to receive from the Sun, not 
luffering the leaſt injury by the Suns production of a thouſand 
other effeds at the ſame time ; it would be either envy or folly 
to blame that grape if it ſhould think or wiſh that the Sun would 
onely appropriate its rayes to its advantage. I am confident that 
nothing is omitted by the Divine Providence, of what concernes 
the povernmerit of humane affairs; but that there may not be 
Other things 1n the Univerſe, that depend apon the ſame infinite 
Wiſdome, I cannot, of my ſelf, by what my reaſon holds forth 
to me, bring my ſelf to believe. However, if it were not ſo, 


yet ſhould I not forbear to believe the reafons laid before ” by 
ome 


God & Nature 
do imploy them 
ſelves in Caring 


for men, as if they 


eAncxample of 


ods care of 1341n- 


nd taken from 


334 G. Gai1it*us, bis Syleme. 


ſome more ſublime intclligence® In the mean time , if gqe 
ſhould te)1 me, that an iummenle [pace interpoſed between the 
Orbs of the Planets and the Starry Sphere , deprived of ſtars and 
idle , would be vain and ulelelle , as likewile that fo greatan 
immenſiry for reccipt of the fixed ſtars, as exceeds our utmoſt 
comprehenſion would be luperfluous, 1 would reply , that it i; 
raſhneſle to go about to make our ſhallow reaſon judg of the 
Works of God, and to call vain and luperfluous , whatſoeyer 
thing in the Univerle 1s not (ubleryicnt to us. 
ay : Sar. Say rather, and | beheve you would {ay better, that 
Ie © nfs we know not what is ſublervient to us; and I hold ir one of the 
rh1t robe (up-rflu> preatelt vanities , Yea tollies, that can be 1a the World, to lay, 
-. x mY apts, b.caulc I know not of what utc Jupiter or Saturn are to me, that 
p--c:596 1 be made therefore thele Planets are {uperfluous, yea more , that there are 
for hs no (uch things in reram watura 3 when as, oh fooliſh man! 1 
kno not ſo much as to what purpoſe the arteries, theypriſtles, 
the : >icen, the gall do terve 3 nay 1 ſhould not know that | have 
a gall, ſpleen, or kidneys , if in many deſe&ed Corps , they were 
not ſhewn unto me; and then onely ſhall I be able ro know what 
the (pleen worketh 1n me, when it comes to be taken from me. 
8» d-»riving To beableto know what this or that Caleſtial body worketh in 
Ferwen of ſome me (iceing you will have it thar all their influences direct them- 
ſtr , cnme might | : . | 
come 1 know what Telves to us) it would be requiſite'to remove that body for ſome 
influence it hath time; and then whatlocyer cffe& I ſhould find wanring in me, | 
"POO would lay that it depended on that ſtar. Morcover, who will pre- 
j ſume to lay that the ſpace which they call too vaſt and uſcleſſe 
| between Saturn and the fixed ſtars, is void of other mundane bo- 


Many things dies ? Muſt it be fo, becauſe we do not {ce them ? Then the four 


may be in Heaven, Mediccan Planets , and the companions of Saturn came firſt in« 
that are invifibl: 
ſo 


to Heaven , when we began to ſec them, and not before? And 
by this rule the innumerable other fixed ſtars had no exiſtence 
before that men did look on them ? and the cloudy conſtellati- 
ons called Nebuloſ« were at firſt only white flakes, but afterwards 
with the 'Teleſcope we made them to become conſtellations of 
many Jucid and bright ſtars. Oh preſumptious, rather ohcaſh 
ignorance of man'! | 
SaLv. Ir's to no purpoſe Sagredns,to {ally out any more 1nto 
theſe unprofitable exaggerations : Let, us purſue our intended 
deligne of examining the validity of the realons alledged on et- 
ther tide , without determining any thing , remitting the judg- 
ment thercot when we have done, to ſuch as are more knowing, 
Returning therefore to our natural and humane diſquiſitions, 1 
Great , ſmall, lay, that grear, liccle, immenſe, ſmall, &vc. are not abſolute, 
orenſes Ke. #4 bur relative terms , ſo that the ſelf ſame thing compared with 


(tl atrUe [Ermys. : ; 1 | 
divers others , may one while be called immenſe , and anot ; 
v7 while 


Diatocus [[]. 


while ;mperceptible , not to lay {mall. This bcing ſo, I demand 
:n relation tO what rhe Starry Sphere of Copernicus may be cal- 
Icdover vaſt. In my judgment it cannot be compared , or (aid 
0 be ſuch , unleſle 1t be in relation to {ome other thing of the 
ame kind; now let us take the very leaſt of the ſame kind, 
which ſhall be the Lunar Orb ;_and if the Starry Orb may be to 
cenſured to be too big in reſpe& to that of the Moon , every 0- 
cher magnitude that with like or greater proportion exceedeth 
another of the ſame kind , ought to be adjudged too vaſt, and 
for the ſame reaſon to be denied that they are to be found in the 
World ; and thus an Elephant, and a Whale, ſhall without more 
ado be condemned for Chymeras , and Poetical fictions, be- 
cauſe that the one as being too vaſt in relation to an Ant, which 
is a Terreſtrial animal , and the other in relpect to the *Gudgeon, 
which is a Fiſh, and are certainly fccn to be in rerum natura, 
would be too immeaſurable ; for without all diſpute, the Ele- 
phant and Whale exceed the Ant and Gudgeon in a much great- 
er proportion than the Starry Sphere doth that of the Moon, 
although we ſhould fancy the iaid Sphere to be as big as the Co- 
pernican Syſteme maketh it. Moreover , how hugely big is the 
Sphere of Jupiter , or that of Saturn , deſigned for a receptacle 
but for one ſingle ſtar ; and that very (mall in compariſon of one 
of the fixed ? Certainly if we ſhould aſlign to every one of the 
fixed ſtars for its receptacle ſo.great a part of the Worlds ipace, 
it would be neceſſary to make the Orb wherein fuch innumerable 
multitudes of them reſide , very many thoulands of times big- 
ger than that which ſerveth the purpole of Copernicus. Beſides, 
do not you call a fixed ſtar very ſmall, I mean even one of the 
moſt apparent , and not one of thoſe which ſhun our ſight ; and 
dowe not call them (ſo in reſpe& of the vaſt ſpace circumfuſed ? 
Now if the whole Starry Sphere were one entire lucid body ; who 
isthere,that doth not know that in an infinite {pace there might be 
aligned a diſtance fo great , as that the ſaid lucid Sphere might 
from thence ſhew as little , yea lefle than a fixed ſtar , now ap- 
peareth beheld from the Earth ? From thence therefore we 
ſhould then judg that ſelt {fame thing to be little, which now from 
hence we eſteem to be immeaſurably great. 

Sacr. Great in my judgment , is the folly of thoſe who 
would have had God to have made the World more proportinal 
to the narrow capacities of their reaton , than to his immenſe, 
rather infinite power. 

Sine. All this that you ſay 1s very true ; but that upon 
which the adverſary makes a ſcruple , 15, to grant that a fixed 
ſtar ſhould be not onely cqual to, but ſo much bigger than the 
Sun ; when as they bothare particular bodies ſituate within the 

Starry 


Vanity of theſe 
mens diſconrſerlo 
Judg the ſtarry 
ſphere tro waſt im 
the Copernican 
Hvyetne 1s. 


© Sprlloncolayinhich 
's here put for the 
[-allt of Fili.es, 


The ſpace a(- 
ſigned to a ſixed 
ftar, u much {eſſe 
than that of a Plas 


mer, 


ef ſtar ts cal- 
led inreſpett of the 


ſpace that environs 
't, 


The whole ſtar- 
ry ſphere behcld 
rom 4A great di- 
ſtance might aps 
pear 4s ſmall 6 


one fngle ſtar, 


—C a _ py 


339 


I. flames ft ihe 
Anth:vy of tle 
Concluſfyons by w1) 
of iniexrog ation, 


* Or Gulph. 


Anſwers to the 


rnterrogatnries of 
the ſaid Autl,our, 


The «Authour 
of the Conclufi- 
ons confound and 
conty aditts _ bim- 
ſelfin bis interr 9* 
£ ations. 

[nter egatories 
Put ro the » A 1f* 
thour of the Con- 
clufions, by which 
the weakneſſe of 


hu made aPprar, 


G. Garitzus, his Syſtene, 


Starry Oib : «Ard indecd inf.my opinion this Authour very 
« pertinently queſtioneth and asketh : To what end, and 
« for whole ſake are (ſuch huge machines made ? Were they 
« produced for the Earth, for an incon(ſiderable point? And 
« why ſo remote? To the end they might feem to very (mall 
«and might have no influence at all upon the Earth ? To 
<« what purpole 1s {uch a necdlefle monſtr..us * immenſicy be. 
<« tween them and Saturn ? All thole aſſertions fall to the 
a ground that arc not upheld by probable reaſons, 

S a Lv. 1 conceive by the queſtions which this perſon asketh, 
that one may cojlc& , that in caſe the Heavens, the Stars, aud 
the quantity of thu diltances and magnitudes which he hath 
hithcr:o held , be Jer alone, (although he never certainly fancied 
to himſeF any conccivalie magnitude thereof ) he perfectly dif. 
cerns and comprehends the benefits that flow from thence tothe 
Earth, which is no longer an incon(iderable thing 3 norare they 
any longer {o remote as t« appear fo very imall, bur big enough to 
be able to operate on the Earth 3 and that the diſtance between 
them and Saturn is very well proportioned , and that he, for all 
theſe things, hath very probable reaſons ; of which I would glad- 
ly tave heard ſome one : but being that in theſe few words he 
confounds and contradicts himlelf, it maketh me think that he 
1s very Poor and 1l] turniſhed with thoſe probable reaſons, aud 
that thoſe which he calls reaſons, are rather fallacies, or dreams 
of an over-weening fancy. For | ask of him, whether thele Ce- 
leſtial bodies truly operate on the Earth, and whether tor the 
working of thole effefts they were produced of tuch and ſuch 
magnitudes, and diſpoled at iuch and {uch diſtances , or elle 
whether they have nothing at all ro do with Terrene mattets. If 
they have nothing to do withthe Earth; iris a great folly for us 
that are Earth-born, to off:r to make our ſelves arbitrators of 
their magnitudes , and regulators of their local diſpolitions , lee- 
ing that we are altogether ignorant of their whole buſineſle and 
concerns z bur if he ſhall ſay that they do operate, and that they 
are dir<Cted to this end, he doth affirm the ſame thing which a 
liccle betore he denied, and praileth that which even now he 
condemned , in that he ſaid, that the Celeſtial boutes ſituate fo 
tar remote as that they appear very ſmall , cannot have any in- 
fluence at all upon the Earth. Bur, good Sir, in the Starry Sphere 
pre-eſtabliſhed at its preſent diſtance , and which you did ac- 
knowledg to be in your judgment, well proportioned to have an 
influcnce upon theſe Terrene bodies, many ſtars appear very 
{mall , and an hundred times as many more are wholly 1aviſible 
unto us ( which is an appearing yer leſſe than very (mall ) 


therefore it 1s neceſſary that (contradicting your ſelt ) you do 
non 


Diatocus 11I. 

now deny their operation upon the the Earth ; or elſe that (till 
contradicting your ſelf): you grant that their appearing very ſmall 
doth not in-the leaſt leflen their influence 3 or elle that ( and this 
ſhall be-a mere ſincere and modeſt-conceſlion) you acknowledg 
and freely confeſſe , that our paſſing yudgmenit upon their mag- 
nitudes and diſtances is a vanity , not to fay preſumption or 
raſhneſle. $240 | 

Sine. Truth is, I my felf did alſo, in reading this paſſage 
perceive the manifeſt contradiQtion , in laying,'that the Stars (i 
one may ſoſpeak) of ' Copernicux appearing lo very ſmall, could 
not operate on the Earth, -and nor petceiving that he had granted 
an influence upon'the Earth to thoſe-of Prolowy, and his ſefta- 
tors, which appear not only very-i{mazll, but are, for the moſt 
part, very inviſible. 

S 4 L vi But I proceed to another: conſideration: What is the 
reaſon, doth/he ſay, why the ſtars appear lo little ? Is it haply, 
becauſe they ſeem fo to us? Doth not he know, that this com- 
meth from-the Inſtrament that we'tmploy in beholding them, to 
wit, from onr eye? And that this'4s true, by changing Inftru- 
ment, we ſhall ſee them bigger and bigger, as much as we will. 
And who knows but that: to the Earth, which beholdeth them 
without eyes,'they may'inot ſhewwery. great, andiſuch az an reali- 
ty they are? Bur it's cime that, omitring theſc trifles, we come 
to things of-more moment; and-therefore 1 baving already de- 
monſtrated theſe two things : Firſt, how far-off the Frmamenc 
ought to be placed to make, that the grand Orb cauſeth no grea- 
ter difference than that which the Terreſtrial Orb occafioneth iri 
the remoteneſle of the Sun ; And next, how likewiſe to make 
that a ſtar of the Firmament appear to us of the ſame bigneſle, 
25 now we ſee it, itis not neceſſary to ſappole it bigger than the 
Sen ; I would know whether Tycho, or any of his adherents hath 
ever attempted to find out, by any- means, whether any appea- 
rance be to be diſcovered in the ſtarry Sphere, upon which one 
may the more reſolutely deny or admit the annual motion of 
the Earth, | | 

Sas. would anſwer for them, that there is not, no nor is 
there any need there ſhould ; ſeeing that it is Copernicus himſclf 
that ſaith, that no ſuch diverſity is thete : andrhey, arguing «d 
bomrinem, admit him the ſame; ard upon this =" LO, a they 
demonſtrate the improbability that followeth thereupon, name- 
ty, that it would be neccffary to. make the Sphere ſo mmenſe, 
that a fixed ſtar, to appear unto us as great a9 it. now ſeems; ought 
of neceſſity to be of ſo immenſe 4 magnitude, as that it. would 
exceed the bignelle of the whole grand Orb, a thing, which not- 
withſtanding, as they lay, is RE incredible. . s 

V AL V, 


337 


T hat remote ob* 


jeits appeare fo 


ſmall, « the defelt 


of the eye, aa vu 
; Rne<.ai 


Tycho mor bs 
followers ever at- 
tempted to ſee whi® 
ther there arc any 
Appearances tn the 
Firmament for or 
againft the annual 
apetion. 


33s 


eAſtronomery , 
perhaps , have not 
known what ap= 
pearances _ to 
follow upon the an» 
vual motion of the 


Earth. 


Copernicus un» 
der food not ſome 
things for want of 
Inſtruments. 


Tycho and 0- 
thers argue @4- 
gainſt the annual 
motion , from the 
invariable eleva- 
tion of the Pole, 


* Chriſtophorus 
R ot) mannus, 


G. Garrrtzus, his Yylcme, 


Sa rv. Iam of the ſame judgment, and verily bglicye thar 
they argue contre hominem, ſtudying more to defend another 
man, than deſiring to come to the knowledge of the truth. Ang 
L do not only believe, that none of them ever applied themſelyes 
to make any ſuch obſervation, but I am allo uncertain , whether 
any of them do know what alteration the Earths annual motiog 
ought to produce in the fixed ſtars, in cale the ſtarry Sphere were 
not ſo far diſtant, as that in them the ſaid diverfity, by reaſon of 
its minuity diſ-appeareth ; for their {urceaſing that Inquiſition, 
and referring themſelves to- the meer. aſſertion of Copernicus, 
may very well ſerve to conyict.a man, but,not to: acquir him of 
the fa&t : For its poſlible that luch a diverſity may be, and yer 
not have bcen ſought for ; or that either by reaſon of its minui- 
ty, or for want of exaCt Inſtruments it was not diſcovered by Co- 
pernicus; for though it were ſo, this would not be the firſt thing, 
that he either for want of Inſtruments, or for ſome other defe& 
hath notknown 3 and yet he proceeding upon other ſolid and 
rational conzeQures, affirmeth that, which the things by him not 
diſcovered do leem to contradi& : for, as hath been ſaid already, 
without the Teleſcope, neithet could Mars be diſcerned to in- 
creaſe 60. times ; nor Venxs 40. more in that than in this poſitis 
on ; yea, their differences appear much Jeſſe than really they are: 
and yet nevertheleſſe it is certainly diſcovered at length, that 
thoſe mutations are the ſame, to an hair that the Copernican. $y- 
ſteme required. Now it would be very well, it with. the greateſt 
accurateneſle poſlible one ſhould enquire whether {ſuch a muta- 
tion as ought ro be diſcoverable in the fixed ſtars, ſuppoſing the 
annual: motion of rhe Earth, would be obſerved really and in 
effe&, athing which I verily believe hath never as yet been done 
by any. 3 done, (aid I? no, nor haply (as I ſaid before) by many 
well underſtood how it ought to be done. Nor ipeak I this at 
randome, for I have heretofore ſeen a certain Maguſcript of 
one of theſe Anti-Copernicans, which ſaid, that there would ne- 
ceſſarily follow, 1n caſe that opinion were true, a continual ri- 
ſing and falling of the Pole from fix moneths to ſix moneths, ac 
cording as the Earth in ſucha time, by ſuch a ſpace as is the dia- 
meter of the grand Orb,retireth one while towards the North,and 
another while togyd5ds the South ; and yet it ſeemed to-him realor 
nable, yea neceſſary, that we, following the-Earth , when we were 
towards the North ſhould have the Pole more elevated than when 
we are towards the South. In this very error did one fall that was 
otherwile a very skilful Mathemartician, & a follower of Copernic. 
as Tycho relaterh in his *Prog ymnaſma.pag-684.which ſaid,that he 
had obſerved ihe Polar altitude to vary, and to differ in Summer 


from what it is in Winter : and becauſe Tycho denieth the merit 
0 


DiatoGus [IT 


of the cauſe, but findeth no fault with the method of it ; that 
is, denierh that there 15 any mutation to be ſeen in the altitude of 
the Pole, but doth nor blame the inquiſition, for not being adap- 
red to the finding of what is ſought, he thereby ſheweth, that he 
alſo eſtecemed the Polar altitude varied, or not varied every (ix 
moneths,to be a good teſtimony to diſprove or inferre the annual 
motion of the Earth. 

S1my. In truth, Salviatzs, my opinion allo tells me, that the 
ſame muſt neceſſarily enſue : tor I do not think that you will de- 


ny me, but that if we walk only 6o. miles towards the North, 


the Pole will riſe unto us a degree higher, and that if we move 
60. miles farther Norchwards, the Pole will be elevated to us a 
degree more, &c. Now it the approaching or receding 60. miles 
onely, make ſo notable a change in the Polar altitudes, what 
alteration would follew , if the Earth and we with ir, ſhould 
be tranſported, I will not lay 60. miles, but 60. thouſand miles 
that way. 

S az v. Ir would follow (it it ſhould proceed in the ſame 
proportion) that the Pole ſhall be elevated a thouſand degrees. 
See, Simplicius, what a long rooted opinion can do. Yea, by 
reaſon you have fixed it in your mind for {o many years, that it 
is Heaven , that revolveth in twenty four hours , and not the 
Earth, and that conſequently the Poles of that Revolution are in 
Heaven, and not in the Terreſtrial Globe, cannot now, in an 
hours time ſhake off this habituated conceipt, and take up the 
contrary, fxncying to your (elf, that the Earth is that which mo- 
veth, only for ſo long time as may ſuffice ro conceive of what 
would follow, thereupon ſhould that lye bea truth. If the Earth 
Simplicizs, be that which moveth in its (elf in twenty four hours, 
n it are the Poles, in it is the Axis, 1n 1t is the Equinodual, thar 
is, the grand Circle, deſcrib:d by the point, equidiſtant from the 
Poles, in it are the infinite Parallels bigger and leffer deſcribed by 
the points of the ſuperficies more and lefſe diſtant from the Poles, 
in it are all theſe things, and not in the ſtarry Sphere , which, as 
being immoveable, wants them all, and can only by the imagina- 
tion be conceived to be therein, prolonging the Axis of the Earth 
ſo far, till that determining, it ſhall mark our two points placed 
right over our Poles, and the plane of the EquinoG@ial being ex- 
tended, it ſhall deſcribe in Heaven a circle like it ſelf. Now if the 
true Axis, the true Poles, the true EquinoGtial , do not change 
in the Earth {o long as you continue in the ſame place of the 
Earth, and though the Earth be tranſported, as you do pleaſe, 
yet you ſhall not change your habitude either to the Poles, or to 
the circles , or to any Other Earthly thing 3 and this becaule, that 
that tranſpoſition being common to you and to all Terreſtrial 

V y 2 things; 


239 


24 $ 


*f;,'rrw *y 
it 4 C0-109%. 14 As 
To it WeUCYT 10:70, 


An example fit- 
ted to prove that 
the altituge of the 
Pole ought not 10 
vary by means of 
the Earths annual 
motion, 

* Coyſra, the bark 
or bench on which 
ſlaves lit in a Gal- 


ly, 


CG. Gatilt=us, his Syleme. 


_ things 3 and that motion where it 15 common, js as if it neyer 


were 3 and as you change not habitude to the Terreſtrial Pole. 
(habitude | ſay, whether that they rilc , or deicend) {o neither 
ſhall you change poſition to the Poles imagined in Heaven; 11. 
wayes provided ihat by Celeſtial Poles we underſtand (as hath 
been alrcady defined) thole two points that come to be marked 
out by the prolongation of the Terreſtrial Axis unto thatlength. 
Tis true thoſe points in Heaven do change, when the Farths tran- 
ſportment is made after {uch a manner, that its Axis cometh to 
paſſe by other and other points of the immoveable Celeſtial 
Sphere , but our habirude thereunto changerh nor, to as that the 
{econd ſhould b- morc clevated to us than the firſt. I any one 


- will have one of the points of the Firmament, which do anſwer 


to the Poles of rhe Earth to aſcend , and the other to deſcend, 
he muſt walk along the Earth towards the one,receding from the 
other , for the tran{portment of the Earth, and with it us our 
ſelves, (as I told you before) operates nothing at all. 

SaGux. Permit me, Ibeleech you Salwviatxs , to make this a 
little more clear by an example , which although profle, is a- 
commodated to this purpole. Suppole your ſelf, Smplicins, to 
be aboard a Ship, and that ſtanding in the PGope, or Hin-deck; 
you have direfted a Quadrant , or ſome other Aftronomical In- 
ſtrument, towards the top of the Top-gallant-Maſt , as if you 
would take its height , which ſuppole it were v. gr. 40. degrees, 
there is no doubt, but that if you walk along the * Hatchesto- 
wards the Maſt 25. or 30- paces; and then again dire the (aid 
Inſtrument to the ſame Top-Gallant-Top. You ſhall find its ele- 
vation to be greater, andto be encreafed v. gr. 10. degrees; but 
if inſtead of walking thoſe 25. or 30. paces towards the Maſt , 
you ſtand (till at the Sterne , and make the whole Ship to move 
thitherwards, do you believe that by reaſon of the 25. or 3o. 
paces that it had paſt, the elevation of the Top-Gallant-Top 
would ſhew 10. degrees encreaſed ? 

S1nv. I believe and know that it would not gain an hairs 
breadth in the paſling of 3o. paces , nor of a thouſand, no nor of 
an hundred thouſand miles 3 but yet 1 believe withal chat look: 
ing through the fights at the Top and Top-Gallant , if 1 ſhould 
find a fixed Star that was in the {ame elevation, I believe I ay, 
that, holding ſtill the Quadrant , after I had ſailed towards the 
ſtar 60, miles , the eye would meet with the top of the ſaid 
Maſt , as before , but not with the ſtar , which would be eleva- 
reU to me one degree. 

S a'G 8. Then you do not think that the ſight would fall upon 


that point of the Starry Sphere , that anſwereth to the dire&io0n 
of the Top-Gallant Top ? 


SIMP: 


Diatocus. III, 


341 


$11. No: For the point would be changed , and would be 


beneath the ſtar firſt obſerved. 

$aGr. Youare in the right. Now like as that which in this 
example an{wereth to the elevation of the Top-Gallant-Top, is 
not the (tar , but the point of the Firmament that lyeth in a right 
line with the eye, and the ſaid rop of the Maſt, ſo in the caſe 
exemplified , that which in the Firmament anſwers to the Pole 
of the Eartie, is not a ſtar, or other fixed thing in the Firma- 
ment ; bur 15 that point in which the Axis of the Earth continu- 
ed ſtreight out, till it cometh thither doth determine , which point 
is not fixed , but obeyerh the mutations that the Pole of the 
Earth doth make. And therefore Tycho, or who ever elle thar 
did alledg this obje&tion , 'ought to have ſaid that upon that 
{ame motion of the Earth, were it true, one mighr obſerve ſome 
difference in the clevation and depreſlion (not of the Pole, but) 
of ſome fixed ſtar roward that part which an{wereth to our Pole. 

Simy. I already very well underſtand the miſtake by them 

commitred ; but yet therefore (which to me ſeems very great) of 
the argument brought on the contrary is not leſſened , ſuppo- 
ſing relation to be had to the variation of the ſtars, and not of 
the Pole ; for if the moving of the Ship but 60. miles, make a 
fixed ſtar riſe to me one degree , ſhall 1 not find alike, yea and 
very much greater mutation , if the Ship ſhould fail towards the 
ſaid ſtar for ſo much ſpace as is the Diameter of the Grand 
Orb , which you affirm to be doable the diſtance that is between 
the Earth and Sun ? | 

SaGsr. Herein Simplicins , there is another fallacy , which, 
truth is, you underſtand , but donot upon the ſudden think of 
the lame , bur I will try to bring it to your remembrance : Tell 
metherefore ; it when after you have direed the Quadrant to 
a fixed ſtar, and found wv. g. its elevation to'be 4o. degrees, 
you ſhould without ſtirring from the place , incline the fide of 
the Quadrant , fo as that the ſtar might remain elevated above 
that diretion , would you thereupon ſay that the ſtar had acqui- 
red preater elevation ? | 

Sine. Certainly no : For the mutation was made in the In- 
ſtrument and not in the Obſerver ', ' that did change place, mo- 
ving towards the lame. 

Sack. Butif you fail or walk along the ſurface of the Terre- 
trial Globe , will you ſay that there is no alteration made in the 
{aid Quadrant ; butthat the ſame elevation is ſtill retained in re- 
ipe& of the Heavens, ſo long as you your (elf do not incline it, 
but ler it ſtand at its firſt contin 2 

S1M2. Give me leave to think of it. 1 would ſay without 
more ado, that it would not retain the ſame, in regard the pro- 


greſle 


{Upon the annu- 
al motion of the 
Earth, alteration 
may enſne un 
ſome fixed ſtar, 


wot in the Pole. 


The equivoke 0 f 
thoſe who believe 
that in the annual 
motion great mu 
tations are to be 
made about the 
elevation of a fix- 
ed ſtar , ts confu- 
ted. 


q 


— 


The right line, 
and circumference 
of an infimre C17 - 
oe, are the ſame 


thing, 


Enguiry 1s made 
what mutations, 
in what /t ars,areto 
be diſcovered , by 
means of the an- 
nual motion of the 


Earth, 


G, Garlitaus, biSyſmme. 


refle I make is not in plaro , but about the circumference of che 
Terreſtrial Globe , whichat every ſtep changeth inclination in 
reſpe& to Heaven , and conlequently maketh the ſame change 
in the Inſtrument which 1s ere&ed upon the lame. 

Sac» You lay very well: And you know withal , that by 
how much the bigger that circle ſhall be upon which you move, 
ſo many more miles you are to walk, to make the {aid ſtar to 
rile that ſame degree higher ; and that finally if the motion ro- 
wards the ſtar ſhould bein a right line , you ought to moye yer 
farther , than if it were about the circumference of never {9 
great acurcle? 

Sarty. True : For in ſhort the circumference of an infinite 
circle, and a right line are the {ame thing. 

SAG &k. But this I do not underſtand, nor as I believe, doth 
Simplicius apprehend the ſame 3 and it muſt needs be concealed 
from us urder ſome miſtery , for we know that Salviatys never 
ſpeaks at random , nor propoſeth any Paradox, which doth not 
break forth into ſome conceit, not trivial in the leaſt. Therefore 
in due time and place I will put you in mind to demonſtrate this, 
chat the right line 1s the ſame with the circumference of an infi- 
nite circle , but at preſent I am unwilling that we ſhould inter- 
rupt the diſcourſe in hand. Returning then to the calc , I pro- 
pole to the conſideration of Simplicius , how the acceſſion and 
receflion that the Earth makes from the ſaid fixed ſtar whichis 
neer the Pole can be made as it were by a right line , for ſuchis 
the Diameter of the Grand Orb, ſo that the attempting to re- 
gulate the elevation and depreſſion of the Polar ſtar by the mo- 
tion along the ſaid Diameter , as if ic were by the motion about 
the little circle of the Earth , is a great argument of but little 
judgment. 

S1me. But we continue ſtill unſatisfied , in regard that the 
ſaid ſmall mutation that ſhould be therein , would not be dilcer- 
ned; and if this be zu} , then muſt the annual motion about 
the Grand Orb aſcribed to the Earch, be null allo. 

S a GR. Here now I give Salviatus leave to go on, whoasl 
believe will not overpaile the elevation and depreſſion of the 
Polar ſtar or any other of thole that are fixed as u#ll , although 
not diſcovered by any one, and affirmed by Copernices himſelf 
to be, I will not ſay mull, but unoblervable by reaſon of its 
minuity. 

Sar v. I have already ſaid above, that I do not think that 
any one did cver [ect himſclt to obſerve, whether in different times 
of the year there is any mutation to be ſeen in the fixed ſtars, that 
may have a dependance on the annual motion of the Earth, and 
added withal, that I doubted leaſt haply ſome mighe never have 


under- 


Driatocus, IIh 
\nderſtood what thole mutations are , and amongſt what ſtars 
they ſhould be diſcerned ; therefore it would be neceſlary that 
ve in the next place narrowly examine this particular, My. ha- 
zing onely found written 1n general terms that the annual-moti- 
»n:of the Earth about the Grand Orb , ought not to be admit- 
ted , becauſe it is not probable bur that by means of the ſame 
there would be diſcoverd ſome apparent mutation 1n the fixed 
ſass,and not hearing ſay what thole-apparent mutations ought to 
be. particular, and in what ſtars ,-\maketh me very reaſonably 
to inter that they who rely upon that-general poſition , have-not 
underſtood , no nor poſlibly endeavoured to underſtand, :how 
the buſineile- of thele mutations goeth , nor what things thoſe 
are which they ſay ought-to be ſeen. And to this judgment] am 
the rather - induced ; knowing that the annual motion aſcribed 
by Copernicus to the Earth , if it ſhould appear ſenſible. iv the 
Sarry Sphere , 15 not to make apparent mutations equal-1n're- 
ſpect to all the ſtars , - but thoſe appearances 'ought ro be made 
in ſome greater , in others leſſer, and in others yet lefler; and 
laſtly , in- others abſolutely nothing at all; ''by reafon of: the 
vaſt magnitude that the circle of this annual 'motion is ſuppoſed 
to be of. As for the mutations that ſhouldb - feen , they are of 


two kinds, one is the ſaid ſtars changing apparent magnitude, 


and the other their variation of - altitudes 1n the Meridian.'' Upon 
which neceſſarily followeth the mutation of riſings and ſettings, 
and of their diſtances from the Zenith, &vc. ' * | 
Sacr. Methinks I fce preparing for me fuch a skean of theſc 
revolutions,: that 1 wiſh it may never be my task to diſ-intangle 
them , for ro:confeſſe my infirmity to Salviatss, I have ſome- 
tines thought thereon, but conld never find the * Lay-band of 
it, and I ſpeak not ſo much of this which pertains to the fiked 
ſtars, as of another more terrible labour which you bring to my 
remembrance by maintaining theſe Meridian Altitudes ; Ortive 
Lattudes and diſtances from the Vertex, &c.. And that which 
purzlech my brains, arileth from what 1 am now about to tell 
you. Copernicus {uppoleth the Starry Sphere immoveable, and 
the Sun in the centre thereof immoveable alſo. Therefore eve - 
ry mutation which ſeemeth unto us to be made in. the Sun or in 
the fixed ſtars, muſt of neceſſity befall the Earth and be ous. 
But the Sun riſeth and declineth in our Meridian by a very great 
ach of almoſt 47. degrees, and by arches yet greater and 
greater, variethirs Ortive and Occidual Larirudes in the oblique 
Hotrons. Now how can the Earth ever incline andelevate fo 
notably to the Sun, and nothing at all to the fixed ftars , or fo 
little, that it is not ro be perceived ? This is that knot which 
could neyer get thorow my * Loom-Combe 3 and if you ſhall 


ulatie 


343 


eAſtronomers hes 
v1kg omitted to un- 
ſtance what alte- 
rations thoſe are 
that may be deri- 


; ved from the an* 


nual motion of the 
Earth , ds thereby 
teſtifie thar they 
never rightly un- 


derſtood the ſame. 


The mnt dtions 
of the fixed ſtars 
ought to be in ſome 
greater, in others 
leſſer, and in others 
nothing at all. 


* Bandola that 
end of a 5keen 
Wherewith houſe- 
wives faſten their 
hankes of yarn, 
thread or ilk. 

The grand dif- 
ficulty tn Coper- 
nicus bss DoArine, 
# that which cog- 
cerns the Phzno- 
mena of the Sut 
and fixed ſtars, 


* Pettine, it is 
the Nay in a Wea- 
yets Loom , that 
permittcth n'» knot 
or ſnarle to paſſe 
it, called by cheh 
che Combe of che 
Loom. 


344 


Ariſtotles ar g4- 
ment againſt the 
A ncitnt1,who beld 
that the Earth 
wa i Planet. 


The annual mo- 
1ti0n made by the 
centre of the Earth 
wander the Eclip- 
tick and the diur- 
nal motion made 
by the Earth abons 
3; own centre, 


The axu of the 
Earth continuetb 
alwaycs parallel to 
it ſelf, and deſcri- 
beth 4 Cylindrai- 
cal ſ«rex ficie g, 19m 
elrning to the 
rand Orb, 


G. Gatitzus; bis Syſeme. 


untie it I ſhall Hold you for more than an Alexander, 

Sau v. Theſe are (cruples worthy of the ingenuity of $4 gre- 
dus , and this doubt is ſointricate, thateven Copernicus himſe\f 
almoſt deſpaired of being able to explain the ſame , fo as tg 
render it intelligible , which we lee as well by his own confeſſion 
of its obſcurity , as alſo by his, at two ſeveral times, taking two 
different wayes to make it out. And, I ingenuouſly confefſe that 
I underſtood not his explanation till ſuch time as another me. 
thod more plain.and manifeſt, had rendred it intelligible; and 
yet neither was that dane without a long and laborious applica+ 
tion of my .thoughts:to the ſame. 

S1m ey. Ariftutle law the ſame ſcruple , and makes.uſe there- 
of to oppoſe certain .of the Ancients, who held that the Earth 
was a.Planet; againſt whom he argueth, that if it were ſo, it 
would follow that it alſo, as the reſt of the Planets , ſhould have a 
plurality. of motions, from whence would follow theſe variati- 
ons in the riſings and ſettings of the fixed ſtars , and likewiſe in 
the Meridian Altitudes. And in regard that he propoundeth the 
difficulty , and doth not anſwer it , it muſt needs be, if not im- 
poſlible , at leaſt very difficult to be reſolved. 

S a v. The ſtrefſe and ſtrength of the knot rendereth the 
ſolution thereof moxe commendable and admirable ; but I do 
not promiſe you. the ſame at this time , and pray you to diſpenſe 
with me thercig till tgo morrow , and for the preſent we will go 
conſidering and explaining thoſe mutations and differences that 
by means of the annual motion ought to be diſcerned in the fix- 
ed ſtars, like as even now we ſaid , for the explication whereof 
certain preparatory points offer themſelves , which may facili- 
tate the anſwer to the grand objzetion. Now reaſſuming the 
two motions aſcribed to the Earth (two 1 ſay , for the third is 
no motion, as inits place I will declare) that is the annual and 
diurnal , the firſt is to be underſtood to be made by the centre of 
the Earth in or about the circumference of the grand Orb, that 
is of a very great circle deſcribed in the plain of the fixed and 
ynmutable Ecliptick ; the other, namely the diurnal, is made 
by the Globe of the Earth in. it ſelf about its own centre , and 
own Axis, not ere&, but inclined to the Plane of the Ecliptick, 
with the inclination of 23. degrees and an half, or thereabouts, 
che which incligation is maintained all the year about, and that 
which ought eſpecially to be obſerved , is alwayes ſituate to- 
wards the ſame point of Heaven : in ſo much that the Axis of the 
diurnal mozion doth alwayes remain parallel to it ſelf; fo that 
if we imagine that ſame Axis tobe continued out until it reach 


"che fixed ſtars, whilſt the centre of the Earth is encircling ths 
;. Whole Ecliptick in a ycas , the ſaid Axis deſcribeth the ſuper- 


fcies 


Diatocus II. 


5cs of an oblique Cylinder , which hath for one of its baſe« 
he id annual circle , and for the other a like circle Imagina- 
BY deicribed by its extremity , or, (if you will) Pole , amongſt 


he (jxed ſtars. And this ſame cylinder is oblique to the Plane of 


-be Ecliptick , according to the inclination of the Axis that de- 
(cribeth it, which we have ſaid to be 23 degrees and an half, 
the which continuing perpetually the ſame (fave onely, that in 
inany thouſands of years it maketh {ome very .{mall mutation, 
which norbing importeth in our preſent bulinefle) cauſerth thar 
the Terreſtrial Globe doth never pore incline or elevate , but 
ill conſcrveth the ſame ſtate without mutarion. From whence 
enſueth , that as ro what pertaineth to the mutations to be ob- 
{crved in the fixed ſtars dependant on the fole annual motion, 
the ſame ſhall happen to any point whatſoever of the Earths 
lurface, as befalleth unto the centre of the Earth it ſelf ; and 
therefore in the preſent explanations we will make ule of the 
centre , as if it were any whatſoever point of the ſuperticies. 
And for a more facile underſtanding of the whole, let us deſign 
the ſame in lineal figures : And firſt of all let us deſcribe in the 
plane of the Ecliprtick the cucle ANB O | in Fig. 7.] and let 
us underſtand the points AandB, to be the extreams towards 
the North and South ; that is, the beginning of | or entrance into} 
Cancer or Capricorn , and let us prolong the Diameter A B, in« 
determinately by D and C rowards the Starry Sphere. I ſay 
now in the firſt place , that none of the fixed ſtars placed in the 
Ecliptick , ſhall ever vary elevation, by reaſon of any whatſo- 
ever mutation made by the Earth along the ſaid Plane of the 
Ecliptick , but ſhall alwayes appear in the ſame fuperticies, al- 
though the Earth ſhall approach and recede as great a ſpace as is 
that of the diameter ot the Grand Orb., as may plainly be 
leenin the ſaid figure. For whether the Earth be in the point 
Aorin B, the ſtar C alwaycs appearcth in the ſame line A B C; 
although the diſtance B C , be lefſe than A C, by the whole 
diameter A B. The moſt therefore that can be.diſcovered in the 
ſtar C,, and in any other placed in the Ecliptick, is the aug=« 
mented or diminiſhed apparent magnitude , by reaſon of the ap- 
proximation or receſſion of the Earth. 

Sacs. Stay a while I pray you, for I meet witha certain 
(cruple, which much troubleth me , and it is this : That the ſtar 
C may be ſeen by the ſame line ABC, as wel when the Earth 
EnA, as when itisin B, Iunderſtand very well, as alſo fur- 
thermore 1 apprehend that the ſame would. bappen in all the 
Points of the line A B , ſo long as the Earth ſhould paſſe from A 
to Bby the ſaid line 3 but ir paſſing thither, as is to be ſuppoſed; 
by the arch AN B, it is manifeſt that when it ſhall be in the 


R X point 


345 


The Orb of the 
Earth never incli-- 
neth, but is im- 


mutably the ſame, 


The fixed fhars 
placed in the E- 
cliptick never ele« 
vate mr deſcend, 
on account of the 
annual motion, bus 
Jet approach and 
recede, 


Objeftions againſ 
the Earth: annual 
motion taken from 
the fixed lars 
placed tn the F+ 
cliptick, : 


* Or will prove 
of good alloy. 


G: Ga r1tzus, biSyane. 


point N, and in any other except theſe two Aand B the (119 
ſtar ſhall no longer be obſerved in the line A B3 butin other, 
So that, if the appearing under ſeveral lines ought to cauſ« 
apparent mutations, ſome difference muſt necds appear j; 
this caſe, Nay more, I will ſpeak it with that Philolophica] 
freedom , which ought to be allowed amongſt Philoſophick 
friends , methinks that you , contradicting your felt, deny tha 
now , which but even now to our admiration, you proved to he 
really true z and conſiderable; I mean that which happencth jn 
the Planets , and particularly in the three ſuperiour ones, that 
being conſtantly in the Ecliptick , or very near unto it , do not 
onely ſhew themlelyes one while near unto us , and another 
while remote , but ſo deformed in their regular motions, that 
they ſeem ſometimes immoveable , and ſometimes many de- 
grees retrograde z and all upoa no other occalion than the an- 
nual motion of the Earth. 

Sazv. Though by a thouſand accidents I have been hereto- 
fore aſſured of the wittineſſe of Sagredxs , yetlI had a deſire by 
this one experiment more to aſcertain me of what I may expe& 
from his ingenuity , and all this for my own intereſt , torin caſe 
my Propofitions ſtand but proof againſt the hammer and fur. 
nace of his judgment , 1 ſhall be confident that they will abide 
the * teſt of all Touch-ſtones. I ſay therefore that 1 had pur- 
poſcly diſſembled this obz<Qion , but yet not with any intentto 
deceive you , and to put any falſhood upon you , as.it might 
have happened if the obje&ion by me diſguiſed , and by you o- 
ver-lookt , had been the ſame in effe& as it ſeemed to be in ap- 
pearance , that 1s, really valid and concluſive ; but it is not fo; 
ray I rather {uſpe& that to try me, you make as if you did not 
ſee its nullity. But I will herein be too hard for you , and force 
from your tongue, that which you would ſo artificially conceal ; 
and therefore tell me, what that thing ſhould be , whereby you 
come to know the ſtation and retrogradation of the Planets, 
which 1s derived from the annual motion , aud which is fo great, 
that at leaſt ſome foot-ſteps of ſuch an effe& ought to appear in 
the ſtars of the Ecliptick ? 

SaG&. This demand of yours contaigeth two queſtions, to 
which it is neceſlary that I make reply ; the firſt relatesto the 
imputation which you lay upon me of a Diſſembler ; the other 
concerneth that which may appear in the ſtars, g-c. As to the 
firſt, I will ſay with your permiſſion, that it is not true , that | 
have diſſembled my knowing the nullity of that objcRtion 3 and 
to aſſure you of the ſame , I now tell you that I very well under- 
ſtand the nullity thercof. 

SAL Vs But yet I do not underſtand how it can be, _ "ou 

pake 


DriatoGut. I it, 


(pa'c not friendly , when you ſaid you did not know that ſame 
© Mlcy which you now-contef[> that you know very well. 

Gags The very confeſſion of knowing it may aſſure you 
ar 1 did not diſſemble , when 1 ſaid that I did not underſtand it: 
fr if 1 had had a mind, and would difſemble, who could hin- 
der me from continuing 1a the fame ſimulation, aud denying ſtill 
that 1 underſtand the fallacy ? I ſay therefore that] 6. 3 RY 
not the ſame, at that time , but that I do now at this preſent ap- 
prchend ir, for that you have prompted my intelle&', firſt by 
telling me reſolutely that it is null, and then by beginning to 


queſtion me lo at large what thing that might be, whereby I 


might come to know the ſtation and retrogradation of the Pla- 
acts 3 and becaulc this is known by comparing them with the fix- 
ed ſtars, in relation ro which, they are lecn to vary their mo- 
tions, one while rowards the Weſt , and another towards. the 
Faſt, and loimetimes to abide immoveable ;' and becauſe there 
not any thing above the Starry Sphere, immenlely more remote 
from us , and vitible unto us , wherewith we may compare our 
fixed ſtars, therctore we cannot diſcover in the fixed ſtars an 
foor-ſtceps of what appeareth to us.in the Planets. This I believe 
15 the (ubſtance of rhat which you would force from me, 
Satyv. Itis(o, with the addition moreover of your admi- 
rable ingenuicy 3 and if with half a word I did open your eyes, 
you by the like have remembred me that it is not altogether im- 
poſſible , bur that ſometime or other ſomething obſervable may 
be found amongſt the fixed ſtars , by which it may be gathered 
whereia the annual converltion reſides , fo as thar they allo no 
leffe chan the Planets and Sun it (elf , may appear in judgment to 
bear witneſſe of chat motion, in favour of the Earth; for 1 do not 
think thar the ſtas are {pread in a [pherical ſuperticies equally re- 
motc from a common centre, but hold, that their diſtances from 
us are {o various, that ſome of them may be twice and thrice as 
remote as others ; ſo that if with the Teleſcope one ſhould ob- 
ſerve a very [mall ſtar ncer to one of the bigger, and which 
therefore was very exceeding high , it might happen , that ſome 
lenſible mutation might fall our between them , correſponderit 
to that of the ſuperiour Planets. And fo niuch ſhall ferve to have 
ipoken at this time touching the ſtars placed in the Ecliptick. 
Letus now come to the fixed ſtars , placed out of the Ecliprick;, 
and Ict us ſuppole a great circle ere upon | i. e. dt right angles 
to] the Plane of the * ſame; and let ir , for example  beacir- 
cle that in the Starry Sphere anſwers to the Solſtitial Colure : 
and let us mark it C FE H [in Fig. 8.] which ſhall happen to be 
withal a Meridian , and in it we will take a ſtar without the Eclip- 


ck, which tet bz E. Now this ſtar will indeed vary its elevatt-. 


A X32 on 


347 


T he ftation, d;. 
reition and retro 
gradation of the 
Planets ts known, 
mm re'ation to the 


fixed ſtars, 


eAn Indice it 
tre fixed ſtars like 
to that which & 
jren tm the Pla- 
res , 15 477 a7 ite 
ment of the E arth: 
Annual motion, 


The fixed ftars 
without the Eclige 
rich elevate and 
deſcend more _ or 
leſſe, according to 
their diſt ance from 
the ſaid Ecliptich, 

2 f, e. of the, E- 
cliptick, ; 


345 


G. Garitzus, bi Syſme. 


on upon the Earths motion 3 for from the Earth in A it ſhall be 
ſeen according tothe ray AE, with the elevation of the angle 
E AC; but from the Earth placed in B, it ſhall be ſeen ac- 
cording to the ray BE , with the elevation of the angle E BC, 
bigger than the other E AC, that being cxtern, ard this jp. 
tern and oppoſite in the triangle E A B, the diſtance therefore 
of the ſtar E from the Ecliptick , ſhall appear changed; and 
likewiſe its altitude in the Meridian ſhall become greater inthe 
poſition B, than in the place A, according as the angle E B C 
exceeds the angle E A C , which excefle 15 the quantity of the 
angle AEB : For in the triangle EAB, the fide A B being 
continued co C, the exteriour angle EB C (as being equal to 
the two intcriour and oppolite E and A) exceedeth the ſaid an- 
gle A, by the quantity of the angle EF. Andif we ſhould take 
another far in thelame Meridian , more remote from the Eclj- 
ptick , as for inſtance the ſtar H , the diverlicy 1n it ſhall be 
greater by being obſerved from the two ſtations A and B, accor- 
ding as the angle AH B 1 greater than the other E ; which an- 
gle ſhall encreale contivually according as the obſerved ſtar ſhall 
be farther and farther from the Ecliptick , till that at laſt the 
greateſt mutation will appear in thar ſtar that ſhould be placed in 
the very Pole of the Echptick. As for a full underſtanding there- 
of we thus demonſtrate. Suppole the diameter of the Grand 
Orb to be A B , whoſe centre | inthe ſame Figure] is G, and 
let it be ſuppoſed to be continued out as far as the Starry Sphere 
in the points D and C, and from the centre G let there be eretted 
the Axis of the Ecliptick G F , prolonged till it arrive at the ſaid 
Sphere, in whicha Meridian D F C is {uppoled to be deſcribed, 
that ſhall be perpendicular to the Plane of the Ecliptick ; and 
in the arch F C any points Hand E, are imagined to be taken, 
as places of fixed ſtars : Let the lines FA, FB, AH, HG, 
HB, AE, Gt, BE, be conjoyned. Andlet the angle of dit- 
ference, or, if you will, the Parallax of the ſtar placed in the 
FoleF, beAFB, and let that of the ſtar placed in H, bethe 
angle AHB, and let that of the ſtar in E , be the angle 
AE B. I ay, that the angle ot difference of the Polar ſtar F, is 
the greatcſt , and that of the reſt , thoie that are nearer to the 
greateſt are bigger than the more remore ; that is to ſay, that the 
angle F is bigger than the angle H, aud chis bigger than the angle 
E. Now about the triangle F A B, let us tuppolc a circle to be de- 
ſcribed. And becauſe the angle F is acute, (by reaſon that its balc 
AB is lefſe than the diameter DC, of the ſemicircle D F C)it ſhall 
be placed in the greater portion of the circumſcribed circle ci 
by the baſe AB. And becauſe the ſaid A B is divided in the 
midſt, and at right angles by F G, the centre of the —— 
c 


Diatcocust [I] 

bed circle ſhall be in the line F G, which let be the point I; and 

-cauſe that of ſuch lines as are drawn from the point G, which 
:- not the centre, unto the circumference of the circumſcribed 
ciccle, the biggeſt is that which paſſerh by the centre, GF ſhall 
be bigger than any other that is drawn from the point G, to the 
circumference of the ſaid circle; and therefore that circumfe- 
rence will cut the line G H (which is equal to the line G F)) and 
cutting GH, it will alfo.cut A H. Let it cut it in L, and con- 
joynche line LB. Theſe two angles, therefore, A F B and ALB 
ſhall be equal, as being in the ſame portion of the circle cic- 
cumſcribed. But A L B external, 1s bigger than the internal H ; 


therefore the angle Þ 15 bigger than the angle H, And by the 


ſame method we might demonſtrate the angle H to be bigger 
than the angle E, becauſe that of the circle deicribed about the 
triangle A H B, the centre isin the perpendicular G F, to which 
the line G H is nearer than the line G E, and therefore the cir- 
cumfterence Of it cutteth G E, and alſo A E, whereupon the pro- 
polition is manifeſt. We will conclude from hence, that the dif- 
terence of appearance, (which with the proper term of art, we 
might call che Parallax of the fixed ſtars) is greater, or lefle, ac- 
cording as the Stars obſerved are more or lefſe adjacent to the 
Pole of the Ecliptick, fo that, in concluſion. of thoſe Stars that 
are in the Ecliptick ic felt, the (aid diverſity is reduced to nothing. 
In the next place, as to the Earths acceſſion by that monon to, 
or receſſion from the Stars, it appeareth to, and recedeth from 
thoſe that are in the Ecliptick, the quantity of the whole diame« 
ter of the grand Orb, as we did fee even now , but that acceflion 
or receſſion ro, or from the ſtars about the Pole of the Ecliptick, 


5 almoſt nothing ; andin going to and from others, this diffe- or 


rence groweth greater, according as they are neerer to the Eclip- 
tick. We may, ia the third place, know, that the ſaid difference 
of Alpe& growerh greater or lefler, according as the Star obſer- 
ved ſhall be neerer to n+, or farther from us. For if we draw a- 
nother Meridian, lefle diſtant from the Earth ; as for example, 
thsDFI1 [in Fig. 7. ] a Star placed in F, and (cen by the ſame 
ray AFE, rhe Earth being 1n A, would, in caſc it ſhould be ob- 
lerved from the Earth in B, appear according to the ray B F, and 
would make the angle of difference , namely, BF A , bigger 
than the former A E B, being the exreriour angle of the trian- 
vieBFE. 

dacs. With great delight, and alſo benefit have I heard 
your diſcourſe ; and that I may be certain, whether I have right- 
ly underſtood the ſame, I ſhall give you the ſumme of the Con- 
cluſions in a few words. As Itake it, you have explained to us 
the different appearances; that by means of the Earths annual mo- 


tion, 


349 


T he Earth ap- 
proacheth or yece- 
deth from the fix- 
ed ſtars of the E- 
cliptick,the quan- 
tity of the Diame- 


_— the Grand 


The ſtars near 
er to us make 
greater differences 
tran the more 1e- 
mote. : 


The Epilogue o 
the Eg ak 
off the fixed tars 
canſed by the an- 
wual morion of thy 
Earth. 


In objefts far 
remote, and lumi- 
90s y 4 ſmall a»- 
proach or receſſion 
is imp:rceptible, 


G. Gar1t*us, his Sylcmc; 


tion, may be by us obſerved in the fixcd ſtars to. be of wo 
kinds : The one is, that of their apparent magnitudes varied, ac. 
cording as We, tranſported by the Earth, approach or recede 
from the ſame : The other (which likewiſe dependeth on the 
{ame acceſſion and rceeflion) their appearing unto us in the 
ſame Meridian, one while more elevated, and another.whilc Jeff. 
Moreover, you tell us (and I underſtand it very well) that the 
one and other of: theſe mutations are'not. made alike in all the 
Rars, but in ſome greater, and in others lefler, and in others not 
at all. The acceflion and receſſion whereby the ſame ſtar ought 
to appear, one while bigger, and another while lefler, is infenſi- 
ble, and almoſt nothing in the ſtars neer unto the pole of the E- 
cliptick, but is greateſt in the ſtars placed in the Ecliprick it clf, 
and indifferent mn the intermediate : the contrary happens ia the 
other difference, that 1s, the elevation or depreflion of the ſtars 
placed in the Ecliptick is nothing at all, greatcſt in thoſe necreſt 
ro the Pole of the {aid Ecliptick, and indifterent in the interme- 
diate. Beſides, both thele differences are mote {enfible in the 
Stars neereſt to us; in the more remote lefle ſenſible, and in 
thoſe that are very far diſtant wholly dilappear. This is, as to 
what concerns my {elf ; it iemaineth now, as 1 conceive, that 
ſomething be ſaid for the faticfaGiion of Simplicius, who, as] 
believe, will not eaſily be made to over-paſle thole differences, 
as inſenſible that are derived from a motion of the Earth lo vaſt, 
and from a mutation that trani{ports the Earth into places twice 
as far diſtant from us as the Sun. 

S1m e- Truth is, to ſpeak frecly, I am very loth to confeſle, that 
the diſtance of the fixed Stars ought to be 1uch, that in them the 
fore-mentioned differences ſhould be wholly imperceptible. 

S ar v. Do notthrow your {elf into ablolute deſpair, Simpli- 
cins , for there may perhaps yet ſome qualification be found tor 
your difficulties. And firſt, that the apparent magnitude of the 
ſtars 15 not ſeen to make any (enfible alteration , ought not to be 
judged by you a thing improbable, in regard you {ee the guelles 
of men in this particular to be fo grofſcly erroneous, eſpecially in 
looking upon ſplendid objze&s ; and you your ſelf beholding 
v.g. a lighted Torch at the diſtance of 200 paces , if it ap- 
proach nearer to you 3. or 4- yards, do you think that it will 
ſhew any whit encreafed in magnitude? I for my part ſhould 
not perceive it certainly , although it ſhould approach 20. or 

3o- yards nearer ; nay it hath ſometimes happened that 1n {eeing 
iuch a light at that diſtance I know not how to reſolve whether 
ir came towards me, or retreated from me , when as it did 1n 
reality approach nearer to me. But what need I ſpeak of this? 
If the ſelf ſame acceſſion and receſlidn (I ſpeak of a diſtance 


twice 


Diatocur 1}: 


vice a5 great as that from the Sun to us) in the ſtar of Saturn is 
\lmoſt totally imperceptible, and in Jupiter not very obſerya- 
vle, what ſhall we think of the fixed ſtars , which I believe you 
«ill not ſcruple to. place twice as far off as. Saturn? In Mars, 
which for that it is nearer to us 

$1 e. Pray Sir, put your ſelf to no farther trouble in this 
particular , for I already conceive that what hath been ſpoken 
couching the unalrered apparent magnitude of the fixed ſtars may 
rery well come to paſſe , but what ſhall we ſay of the other dif- 
ficulty that proceeds from not perceiving any variation in the 
mutation of aſpe& ? 

Satyv. We will ſay that which peradventure may fatisfie 
you allo in this particular. And to make ſhort, would you not 
be ſatisficd if there ſhould be diſcovered in the ſtars face muta- 
ti.ns that you think ought to be diſcovered, in caſe the annual 
motion belonged to the Earth ? 

S1 me. Iſhould ſo doubtleſl>, as to what concerns this par- 
ticular. 

SAL v. I could wiſh you would ſay that in caſe ſuch a diffe- 
rence were diſcovered , nothing more would remain behind, that 
might render the mobility of the Earth queſtionable. But al- 
though yet that ſhould not ſenſibly appear # yet is not its mo- 
bility removed , nor its immobility neceſfarily proved, it being 
poſſible, (as Copernicus affirmeth) that the immenſe diſtance of 
the Starry Sphere rendereth fuch very {mall Phanomens unobſer- 
vable z the which as already hath been ſaid , may poflibly not 
have been hicherto ſo much as {qughe for , or if ſought for, yet 
not ſought for in ſuch a way as they ought, to wit, with that 
exatnefſe which to ſo minute a punQuality would be neceffary; 
which exactneſle 1s verydithculrt to-obtain,as well by reaſon of the 
deficiency of Aſttonomical Inſtruments, ſubze& to many altera- 
tions, as alſo through the fault of thoſe that manage them with leſs 
diligence then is requiſite. A neceflary argument how little cre. 
dit 15 to be given to thoſe obſervations may be deduced from the 
differences which we find amongſt Aſtronomers in aſſigning the 
places, | will not ſay, of the new Stars or Comets, but of the fixed 
ſtars themſelves, even to the altitudes of the very Poles, in 
which, moſt an end, they are found to differ from one another 

many minutes. And to ſpeak the truth, who can in a Quadrant; 
or Sextant, that at moſt ſhall have its fide * 3. or 4. yards long, 
alcertain himſelf in the incidence of the perpendicular , or in the 
UireGon of the ſights, nor to erce twa or three minutes, which 
10 us circumference ſhall not amount to the breadth of a grain of 
*Mylet? Beſides that, it is almoſt impoſlible, that the Inſtrumenc 
ſhould be made, and kept with abſolute exa&nefſe, Ptolomey 


ſhewethi 


If im the fpxed 
ſtars one fhowld 
diſcover any an- 
nual mutation, the 
motion of the 
Earth would be 
nndeniable, 


4t ir proved whas 
ſmall credit is tobe 


given to Aftrone- 
mical Inſtr & 


in minute obſer y4- 
tons, 


* Braccia Italian, 


? Or Mil, 


4 he 


Prolomy did not 
tre:/{ ts an Inſlyu- 
ment made by At- 


chimedes, 


Inflruments of 
Tycho made with 
great es pence, 


phat Inſtru- 
rents aye aft for 


moſt exalt obſer- 


VA! i0n. 


* Ttalian braces. 


«An exquiſite 

ob ſervation of the 

approach and de 

arture of the Sun 

a the Summer 
Solfice, 


of place accom- 
Swodated for the 
obſervation of the 
fixed ſtars, as to 


what concers the 


annual motion of 


the Earth, 


G. Gar 1txus , his S)ſteme. 


ſheweth his diſtruſt of a Spherical Inſtrument compoſed by 4. 
chimedes hiſmelt to rake the Suns ingreflion into the Aqui. 
noCtial. | | 
S1my. Butif the Inſtruments be ſo ſuſpitious , and the obſer. 

vations ſo dubious , how can we ever come to any certainty of 
things, or free our ſelves from nuſtakes ? I have heard ſtrange 
things of the Inſtruments of Tycho made with extraordinary coſt, 
and of his ſingular diligence in obſervations. 

 Sarv. All this 1 grant you; but neither one nor other of 
theſe is ſufficient to aſcertain us in a buſineſle of this: importance. 
I deſire that we may make uſe of Inſtruments greater by far, and 
by far certainer than thole of Tycho , made with a very ſmall 
charge ; the ſides of which are of 4. 6. 20. 30. and 50. miles, {g 
as that a degrce is a mile broad, a minute prim. 50 *yards, a 
{econd but little lefle than a yard, andin ſhort we may without 
a farthing expence procure them of what bigneſlc we pleaſe. ] 
being in a Countrey Seat of mine near to Florence, did plainly 
obſerve the Suns arrival at , and departure from the Summer 
Solſtice , whilſt one Evening at the time of its going down it ap- 
peared upon the top of a Rock on the Mountains of Pictrapang 
about 60- miles from thence , leaving diſcovered of it a ſmall 
ſtreak or filament, towards the North , whole breadth was not 
the hundredth part of its Diameter 3 and the following Evenin 
at the like ſetting , it ſhew'd ſuch another part of it , bur notably 
more ſmall , a neceſſary argument , that it had begun to retede 
from the Tropick ; and the regreſſion of the Sun from the firſt to 
the ſecond obſervation , doth not import doubtleſle a ſecond mi- 
nute in the Eaſt. The obſervatBn made afterwards with an ex- 
quiſite Teleſcope, and that multiplyeth the Diſcus of the Sun 
more than a thouſand times , would prove caſie, and withall 
delightful. Now with ſuch an Inſtrument as this, I would have 
obſervations to be made 1n the fixed ſtars , making uſe of ſome 
of thole wherein the mutation ought to appear more conſpicu- 
ous , ſuch as are (as hath already been declared) the more re- 
more from the Ecliptick , amongſt which the Harp a very great 
ſtar, and'near to the Pole of the Ecliptick, would be very pro- 
per in Countries far North , proceeding according to the man- 
ner that I ſhall ſhew by and by , burin the uſe of another ſtar 3 
and I bave already fancied to my {elf a place very well adapted 
for ſuch an obſervation. The place is an open Plane , upon 
which towards the North there riſeth a very eminent Mountain 
in the apex or top whereof is built a little Chappel, ſituate Ea 
and Weſt, ſo as that the ridg of its Roof may interſc& at right 
angles, the meridian of ſome building ſtanding in the Plane. | 


will place a beam parallel to the faid ridg , or top of the wm 
an 


Diatocut 111. 353 


and diſtant from it a yard or thereabours. This being placed, f | 
wil ſeek in the Plain the place trom whence one of the ſtars of | 
(harls's Waine, in patling by the Meridian , comerh to hide it 


ſ-]1f bebind the beam. to placed, or in cale rhe beam ſhould not ; h 
he lo big as to hide the ſtar, I will ftinde a ſtation where one 4 
may lec the ſaid beam to cut the {aid ſtar into two equal Parts ; Wi 
an cfﬀfec& thar with an * exquiſite Teleſcope may be perfe&ly 4 
diſcerned: Andif 1n the place where the faid accident 1s diſcover- « 


cd, rhere were fome building , it will be the more commodious ; 
but if not-, 1 will cauſe a Pole to be ſtuck very faſt in the 
ground , with ſome ſtanding mark to dice& where to place the | 
ey anew, when ever I have a mind to repcat the obſervation. "x 


The firſt of which oblervacions I will make about the Summer } 
Solſtice . to cominue afterwards from Monerh to Moneth , or | 
when I ſhall to plcale , to the other Solſtice 3 with which obſer- d 
vation one may dilcover the elevation and depreſſion of the ſtar, : 


though it be very imall. And if in that operation it ſhall hap- 
pen, that any mutation ſhall diſcover it ſelf , what and how great 
benefit will it bring to Aſtronomy ? Secing that thereby, beſides 
onr being atlured of the annual motion ; we may come to know 
the grandure and diſtance of the ſame ſtar. 

SaGcr. I very well compreherd your whole proceedings; 
and the operation ſeems ro me ſo calie, and ſo commodious tor 
the purpole , chat it may very rationally be thought , that cither 
Copernicus himſelf, or ſome other Aſtronomer had made trial 


of it. : 

S atv. Burljudg the quite gontrary , for it is not probable, \, 
that if any one had experimented it , he would not have men- Wi 
tiened the event, whether it fell out in favour of this , or that i. 
opinion 3 beſides rhat', no man that I can find , either for this, 
or any other end, did ever go about to make ſuch an Obſeryati- } 
on; which alſo withour an exact Teleſcope could bur badly be X 
efteted. * | 


Sinp. I am fully ſatisfied with what you ſay. But ſeeing , 
that it 1s a great While to night , if you defire that I ſhall paſſe [ 
the ſame quietly , let it not be a trouble to you to explain unto ' 
us thoſe Problems , the declaration whereof you did even now 
requeſt might be deferred unti] roo morcow. Be pleaſed to grant 
us your promiſed indulgence, and, laying aſide all other diſcour- ' 
les, proceed ro ſheiv us, that the motions which Copernicus alligns | 
tothe Earth being taken for granted , and ſuppoſing the Sun 
and fixed ſtars immoveable, there may follow the {ame acci- 
dents touching the elevations and depreflions of the Sun , touch- o 
ng the mutations of the Scaſons, and the inequality of dayes 
ad nights, vc. in the (elf ſame manner , juſt as they are with 


Yy fa- 


The Coperni- 
can Syfeme difſi- 
cult to be under- 
ſtood, but eaſie to 
be effefted, 


Neceſſary pre- 
poſitions for the 
bettey concerning 
of the corſequciices 
of the Exrths m9* 
S111 


G. Gat1L*®us, his Syſteme. 


racility apprehend:d in the Ptolonrarck Syſteme. : 

Sa1v. I ncither ought, nor can deny any thing that Sagredus 
ſhall requeſt : And the delay by me delired was to no other eng, 
ſave only that I might have time once again to methodize thoſe 
prefatory points, 1n my tancy, that ſerve for a large and plain de- 
claration of the manner how the forenamed accidents follow, 243 


wdl in the Copernican poſition, as in the Ptolomaick : nay, with 


much greater facility and (implicity in that than in this. -Whence 
one may manitcſtly conceive that Hypothelis to be as eaſe to be 
effeted by nature, as difficult to be apprehended by the under- 
ſtanding : yet nevertheleſſe, I hope by making ule of another 
kind of explanation, than that uſed by Copernicxs,to render like- 
wiſe the apprehending of it ſomewhat lefle obſcure. Which 
that I may do, I will propole certain ſuppolitions of themſelyes 
known and manifeſt, and they ſhall be theſe that follow. 

Firſt, I ſuppole that the Earth is a ſpherical body, turning 
round upon its own Axis and Poles, and that cach point afligned 
in its {uperficies, deſcribeth the circumference of a circle, great- 
cr or lefler, according as the point aſſigned ſhall be neerer or 
farther from the Poles : And that of theſs circles the greateſt is 


. that which is deſcribed by a point equidiſtant from the {aid Poles; 


» A plain Scheme 
repreſenting the 
Copernican Hypo- 
the is, and its con» 
ſequences, 


and all thele circles are parallel to cach other; and Parallels we 
will call them. 

Secondly, The Earth being of a Spherical Figure, and of ano- 
pacous ſubſtance, it is continually illuminated by the Sun, accor- 
ding to the halt of its ſurface, the other half remaining obſcure, 
and the boundary that diſtinguiſheth the illuminated part from 
the dark being a grand circle, we will call that circle the termi- 
nator of the light. | 

Thirdly, If che Circle that is terminator of the light ſhould 
paile by the Poles of the Earth, it would cut (being a grand 
and pringjpal circle) all. the parallels into equal parts 3 but not 
paſſing by the Poles, it would cut them all in parts unequal, ex- 
cept only. the circle 1n the middle, which, as being a grand circle 
will be curgnto equal parts. 

Fourthly, The Earth turning round upon its own Poles, the 
quantities of dayes and nights are termined by the arches of the 
Parallels, interſefed by. the circle, that is, the terminator of the 
light, and the arch that is ſcituate in the illuminated Hemiſphere 
preſcribeth the length of theday,and the remainer is the quan- 
rity of the night. ; 

Theſe things being preſuppoſed, for the more clear inder- 
ſtanding of that which remaines to be ſaid, we will lay it down 
in a Figure. And firſt, we will draw the circumference of 2 
circle, that ſhall repreſent unto us that of the grand Orb. deſcr- 


bed 


Diatocus 111. 35s 
ved in the plain of the Ecliptick, and this we will divide into 
four equal parts with the two diameters Capricorn Cancer, and 
Libra Aries, which, at the {ame time, ſhall repreſent unto us the 
four Cardinal points, that is, the two Solſtices, and the two E- 
quinoQials z and in the centre of that circle we will place the 
Sun O, fixed and immoveable. 


Let us next draw about the four points, Capricorn, Cancer, 
Libra and Aries, as centres, four equal circles, which repreſent 
unto us the Earth placed in them at four ſeveral times of the 
year. The which, with its centre, in the ſpace of a year, paſſeth 
through the whole circumference, Capricorn, Aries, Cancer, Li- 
bra, moving from Eaſt to Weſt, that is, according to the order 
of the Signes. It is already manifeſt, that whilſt the Earth is in 
Capricorn, the Sun will appear in Cancer, and the Earth moving The $un: es: 
along the arch Capricorn Aries; tlic Sun will ſeem to move along 4? motion, how 
the arch Cancer Libra, and in ſhort, will run thorow the Zodiack arcending fo Pale 
accotding to the order of the Signes; in the ſpace of a year 3 and p*rnicu, =» 
by this firſt aſſumption, without all queſtion, full ſatisfaRion is 
given for the Suns apparent annual motion under the Ecliptick. 
Now, comirig to the other, that is, the diurnal motion of the 
Earth in it (elf, it is neceſſary to eſtabliſh its Poles and its Axis, 
the which muſt be anderſtood not to be ere& perpendicularly 
upon the plain of the Ecliptick, that is, not to be parallel to the 
Axis of the grand Orb, but declining from a right angle 23 de- 
grees and an half, or thereabouts, with its Narth Pole towards 
Yy 3 the 


G. Gar LE us, bis Syſlicmc, 


the Aiz of the grand Orb, the Earths centre being in the Solſtie 
tial poiut. of Capticorn. Suppoking theretore the Terreſtriq 
Globe to have its centre in the;point Capricorn, we will deſcribe 
its Poles and Axis AB, inclined upon the diameter Capricorn 
Cancer 2:3 degrees and, an halt, ſo that ghe angle A Capricorg 
Cancer cometh to be the complement of a Quadrant or Radic 

that is, 66 degrees and an halt ; and this inclination muſt be un« 
derſtood to be immutable, and we will ſuppoſe the ſuperiour 
Pole A to be Boreal, or North, and the other Auſtral, or South. 
Now imagining the Earth to revolve in it ſelf about the Axis A B 
in twenty four hours, from Weſt ro Eaſt, there ſhall by all the 
points afſigncd in its ſuperſicies, be circles deſcribed parallel to 
each other. We will draw, in this firſt poſition of the Earth, 
the greateſt C D, and thole two diſtant from it'gr.'23, and an 
half, EF above, and G M beneath, and the other two extream 
ones I K and L M remote, by thoſe intervals from the Poles A 
and B; and as we have marked thele five, fo we may imagine in 
numerable others, parallel ro theſe, deſcribed by the innumera- 
ble points of the Terreſtrial ſurface. Next let us ſuppoſe the 
Earth, with the annual motion of its centre, to transferre it ſelf 
into the other places already marked ; bur to paſſe thither in ſuch 
a manner, that its own Axis A B ſhall not only not change incli- 
nation upon the plain of the Ecliptick, but ſhall alſo never vary 
direQion ; ſo that alwayes keeping parallel co it felt, it may 
continually tend towards the ſame part of the Univerle, or, if 
you will, of the Firmament , whereas, it we do but ſuppole it 
prolonged, it will, with its, extxeam termes, deſigne a Circle pa- 
ralle] and cqual to the grand Orb, Libra. Capricorn Aries Cancer, 
as tha ſuperiour baſe of a: Cylinder deſcribed by it ſelf in the an- 
naal; motion above the inferzour baſe,; Libra Capricorn Aries 
Cagcee.,.. And therefore this immutability of inclination conti- 
nuing, we will deſign theſe;other three figures about the centres 
Ames, ,\Cancer, and Libra , alike in eyery thing to that firſt de- 
{cribed about 'the.oentre Capricorn. Now we will ; conſider the 
ficſt, figure of the Earth, in which, in regard the Axis, A B is de- 
clined fem perpendicularity, upon the 'diameter Capricorn Can- 
cer 23 degrees and. an half towards the Sun O, and the arch AI 
being alſo 23 degrees andan half, the illumination of the Sun 
will illaſtrate the'Hemilphere of the Terreſtrial Globe expoſed 
towards the Sun (of which, in this place, balf .is to be ſeen) dir 
vided from the abſcure [part by the'Terminator,: of the light 
I M, by. which the parallel, C D, as being a grand circle, ſhall 
come to be divided into equal parts, but all the reſt jnto parts us” 
cqual;: being that; the terminator of the light: 1M. pallegh a9 
by thew Poles AB,andheparallel L K,.together withall the zeſt 


deſcribed 


DialtoGUue. LI. 


jelcribed within the ſame, and neerer to the pole A, ſhall wholly 
»- included in the illuminated part 3 as on the contrary, the oP- 
olite ones towards the Pole B, contained within the para]- 
(el LM, ſhall remain in the dark. Moreover, the arch A | be- 
ing equal to the arch F D, and the arch A F, common to them 
both, the two arches Il K F and AFD ſhall be equal, and each 
a quadrant or 90 deprees. And becaule the whole arch I F M 
is a ſemicircle, the arch F M ſhall be a quadrant, and equal to 
the other FKI; and therefore the Sun O ſhall be in this ſtate 
of the Earth vertical to one that ſtands in the point F. But b 
the revolution diurnal about the ſtanding Axis A B, all the points 
of the parallel E F paſle by the fame point F : and therefore in 
that ſame day the Sun, ar noon, ſhall be vertical to all the inha- 
bitants of the Parallel EF,and will ſeem to them to deſcribe in its 
apparent motion the circle which we call the Tropick of Cancer. 
But to the inhabitants of all the Parallels that arc above the pa- 
allel E F, towards the North pole A, the Sun declincth from 
their Vertex or Zenith towards the South ; and on the contrary, 
to all che inhabitants of the Parallels that are beneath E F, to- 
wards the EquinoGtial C D, and the South Pole B, the Meridian 
Sun is elevated beyond their Vertex towards the North Pole A. 
Next, it is viſible that of all the Parallels, only the greateſt C D 
is cut in equal parts by the Terminator of the light IM. But 
the reſt, thar are beneath and above the ſaid grand circle, are all 
interſe&ed in parts unequal : and of the ſuperiour ones, the (e- 
midiurnal arches, namely thoſe of the part of the Terreſtrial ſur- 
tace, illuſtrated by the Sun, are bigger than the ſeminoQurnal 
ones that remain in the dark : and the contrary befalls in the 
remainder, that are under the great one C D, towards the pole B, 
of which the ſemidiurnal arches are lefſer than the ſeminoQurna}, 
Itis likewiſe apparently manifeſt; that the differences of the ſaid 
aches go augmenting, according 2s the Parallels are neerer to 
the Poles, till ſuch rime as the parallel I K comes to be wholly in 
the part Huminated, and the inhabitants thereof have a day of 
twenty four hours long, without any night; and on the contrary, 
the Parallel L M, remaining all in obſcurity , bath a night of 
twenty four hours, without any day. Come we next to the 
third Figure of the Earth, placed with its centre 1n the point 
Cancer, where the Sun ſeemeth to be in the firſt poinit of Ca- 
pricorn. © We have already ſeen very manifeſtly, that by reaſon 
the Axis A B doth not change inclination, but continueth para]- 
leltoit ſelf, the aſpe& and fituation of the Earth is the ſame to 
an hair with that in the firſt Figure ; fave onely that that Hemi- 
{phere which in the firſt was illuminated by che Sun, in this rc- 
marneth obtcnebrated, and that cometh to be luminous, Wen 
| the 


eAn admirable 
accident dependwg 
on the not inclining 
of the E arths ax 


G. Gallitzus, his S yiteme. 


the firſt was tenebrous : whereupon that which bappened before 
concerning the differences of dayes and nights, touching the 
dayes being greater or leſſer than the nights, now falls our quite 
contrary. And firſt, we ſee, that whereas in the firſt Figure the 
circle I K was wholly in the light, it is now wholly in the dark; 
and the oppoſite arch L M 1s now wholly in the light, which 
was before wholly in the dark. Of the parallels between the 
grand circle C D, and the Pole A, the ſemidiurnal arches are now 
Jeſſer than the ſemino&urnal, which before were the contrary. 
Of the others likewiſe towards the Pole B, the ſemidiurnal arch. 

es are now bigger than the ſeminoCturnal, the contrary to what 

happened in the other poſition of the Earth. We now ſee the 

Sun made vertical to the inhabitants of the Tropick GN, and to 

be depreſſed towards the South, with thoſe of the Parallel E x, 
by all the arch E C G, that is, 47 degrees and in ſumme;, to haye 
paſſed from one to the other Tropick, traverling the EquinoRial, 
elevating and declining in the Meridians the {aid ſpace of 47 de- 
grees. Andall this mutation 1s derived not from the inclination 
or elevation of the Earth, but on the contrary, from its not in- 
clining or elevating at all ; and in a word, by continuing always 

in the {ame poſition, in reſpe& of the Univerſe, onely with turn- 

ing about the Sun ſituate 1 the midſt of the ſaid plane, in which 

it moveth it (elf about circularly with its annual motion. And 

here is to be noted an admirable accident, which 1, that like as 

the Axis of the Earth conſerving the ſame direction towards the 

Univerſe, or we may ſay, towards the higheſt Sphere of the fixed 
ſtars, cauſeth the Sun to appear to elevate and incline {o great a 

{pace, namely, for 47 degrees, and the fixed Stars to incline or e- 
levate nothing at all ; ſo, on the contrary, if the ſame Axis of 
the Earth ſhould maintain it ſelf continually in the ſame inclina- 
tion towards the Sun, or, if you will; towards the Axis of the 
Zodiack, no mutation would appear to be made in the Sun about 

its elevating or declining, whereupon the inhabitants of one and 
the lame place would alwayes have ane and the ſame difference 
of dayes and nights, and one and the ſame conſtitution of Sea- 
ſons, that is, ſome alwayes Winter , others alwayes Summer, 
others Spring, &c. but, on the contrary, the alterations in the 
fixed Stars would appear very great, as touching their elevation, 
and inclination to us, which would amount to the ſame 47 de- 
grees. For the underſtanding of which let us return to conſider 
the poſition of the Earth, in its firſt Figure, where we ſee the 
Axis A B, with the ſuperiour Pole A, to incline towards the Sunz 
but in 1ts third Figure, the ſame Axis having kept the ſame dire- 
&ion towards the higheſt Sphere, by keeping parallel to it (elb, 
inclines no longer towards the Sun with its ſuperiour Pole A, but 
ON 


Diatocus. III. 
1n the coatrary ceclines from its former poſition gr. 47. and in- 
-lineth cowards the oppolire part, ſo that to reſtore the ſame in- 
ination of the ſaid Pole A towards the Sun, it would be requi- 
ite by turning round the Terreſtrial Globe, according to the 
ciccumference A C B D, to tranſport it towards E thote {ame 
7r.47. and for ſo many degrees, any whatſoever fixed ftar ob- 
{erved in the Meridian, would appear to be elevated, or inclined. 
Let us come now to the explanation of that which remains, and 
let us conſider the *Earth placed in the fourth Figure, that is, 
with its centre in the firſt point of Libra; upon which the Sun 
will appear in the beginning of Aries. And becauſe the Axis of 


RS 
— £þ— 


—  —— w__— 


he Earth, which in the'firſt Figure'is ſuppoſed to be inclined up- 
onthe diameter Capricorn Cancer, and therefore to be in' that 
lame plane, which cutting the plane of rhe grand Orb, accor- 
ding to the line Capricorn Cancer, was ereRed perpendicularly 
upon the ſame; tranſpoſed into the: fourth Figure, and maintai- 
ned, as hath alwayes been ſaid, parallel to it (elf, it ſhall come 
to be in a' plane in like manner ere&ed to the ſuperficies of 
the Grand Orbe, and parallel to the plane , which at right 
angles cuts the' ſame ſuperficies, according to the diameter Ca« 
pricorn Cancer. And' therefore the line which goeth from 
the-centre of the Sunne to the centre of the Earth, that is, 
O Libra, ſhall be' perpendicular to the Axis B A : but the 
lame line which gocth from the centre of the Sunne to the 
centre of the Earth, is alſo alwayes perpendicular to +] 

z circle 


355 


L-_ 


390 


G. Galitznus , his Syſtere. 


circle that is the Terminator - of the light ; therefore this 
circle ſhall paſſe by the Poles A B in the fourth bgure , and 
in its plain the Axis A B ſhall fall ; bur the greateſt circle paſſing 
by the Poles of the Parallels , divideth them all in equal pars; 
therefore the arches IK, EF, CD, GN, LM, ſhall be all 
ſemicircles, and the illumin'd Hemiſphere {hall be this which 
looketh towards us , and the Sun , and the Terminator of the 
light ſhall be onc and the ſame circle A C BD , and the Earth 
being in this place ſhall make it EquinoGiial to all its Inhabitants. 
And the ſame happeneth in the {econd figure , where the Earth 
having its illuminated Hemiſphere towards the Sun , ſheweth us 
the other that is obſcure, with its noQurnal arches , which in 
like manner are all ſemicircle, and conlequently, here allo it 
maketh the EquinoGial. And laſtly in regard thac the line pro- 
duced from the ccntre of the Sun to the centre of rhe Earth, i; 
perpendicular to the Axis AB, to which the greateſt ciccle of 
the parallels C D, is likewiſe erea, the faid line O Libra ſhall 
paſle of neceſlity by the ſame Plain of the parallel CD; cutting 
its circumference in the midſt of the diurnal arch CD ; and 
therefore the Snn ſhall be vertical to any one that ſhall ſtand 
where that intcr{eGion is made ; but all the Inhabitants of that 
Parallel ſhall paſſe the ſame , as being carried about by the 
Earths diurnal converſion ; therefore all thef upon that d; 

ſhall have the Meridian Sun in their vertex. And the Sun at the 
ſame time to all the Inhabitants of the Earth ſhall ſeem to de- 
ſcribe the Grand Parallel called the EquinoCtial. Furthermore, 
foraſmuch as the Earth being in both the Solſticial points of the 
Polar circles IK and LM, the one is wholly in the light, and 
the other wholly in the dark ; but when the Earth is in the Equi- 
no&ial points , the balves of thoſe ſame polar circles are inthe 
light, the remainder of them being in the dark ; it ſhould not 
be hard to underſtand , how that the Earth &. gr. from Cancer 
(where. the parallel I K is wholly in the dark) to Leo,one pact of 
the paralle] rowards the point I,beginneth to, enter into the light, 
and that,the Terminator of the light IM beginneth to, retreat to- 
wards the Pole AB,interſeQing the ciccle ACBD nolonger in IM, 
but in two other points falling between the terms I A and MB,of 
the arches IA and M B; whereupon the Inhabitants of the circle 
bcgin to enyoy the light , and the other Inhabitants of: che circle 
L M to partake of night. And thus you ſee that by two ſimple 
motions made 1n times proportionate to their bignetles, and not 
contrary to one another , but performed , as all others that þe+ 
long to moveable mundane bodies, from Weſt to Eaſt aſligned 
to the Terreſtrial Globe , adequate reaſons are rendred ot all 

thoſc Phenomena or appearances , for the AT Eat | pl 

WRIC 


lame 


Diratocus 111. 


which to the ſtability of the Earthir is neceſſary (forſaking that 
Symetry which is obſerved to be between the velocities and mag- 
-:cudes of moveables) ro aſcribe to a Sphere , vaſt above all 
others z an unconceiveable celerity , whilſt the other letler 
&pheres MOVE EXTream lowly ; and which is more, to make that 
motion contrary to all their inotions; aud, yer again to adde to 
the improbability , to make that ſuperiour Sphere forcibly to 
cranſport all the inferionr ones along with it contrary to their 
proper inclination. And here I refer it to your jadgment to de- 
cermine which of the two is the moſt probable. 

SaG8. Tome, asfar as Concerneth {ſenſe , there appeareth 
no {mall difference betwixt the timplicity and facility of opera- 
ung cffe&s by the means aſſigned in this new conſtitution , and 
the multiplicity , confuſion, and difficulty , that is found in the 
ancient and commonly received Hypothetis. For if the Univerſe 
were diſpoled according to this multiplicity , it would be ne- 
cellary to renounce many Maximes in Philolophy commonly re- 
cived by Philoſophers , as for inſtance , That Nature doth 
not multiply rhings without neccflity 3 and, That She makes uſe 
of the moſt facile and ſimple mcans in producing her effetts ; 
and, That She doth nothing in vain, and the like. I do confefle 
that | never heard any thing more admirable than this , nor can 1 
believe that Humane Underſtanding ever penetrated a more 
ſublime ſpeculation. I know not what Simpliczus may think 
of it. 

Sinr. Thcſe (if 1 may fpeak my judgment freely) do ſeem 
to me ſome of thoſe Geometrical ſubtilties which Ariſtotle finds 
faule with in Plato , when he accuſeth him that by his too 
much ſtudying of Geometry he forlook ſolid Philolophy ; and I 
have known and heard very great Peripatetick Philolophers to 
diſlwade their Scholars from the Study of the Mathemaricks , as 
thoſe that render the wit cavilous, and unable to philoſophate 
well; an Inſtitute diametrically contrary to that of Plato, who 
admitted uone to Philoſophy, unlefle he was firſt well entered in 
Geometry. 

Sarv. I commend the policy of theſe your Peripateticks, in 
dehorting their Dilciples from the Study of Geometry , for that 
there is no art more commedious for detc&ing their fallacies; but 
(ce how they differ from the Mathematical Philoſophers, who 
much more willingly converſe with thoſe that are well verſt in 
the commune Peripatetick Philoſophy , than with thoſe that are 
deſtitute of that knowledg , who for want thereof cannot di- 
ſtinguiſh between dodrine and dofrine. But paſſing by this, tell 
me | beſeech you , what are thoſe extravagancies and thoſe too 


aftc&ed (ubtilties that make you think this Copernican Syfteme 
theleſſe plauſible ? L 7 SIMP, 


eA xiores com- 
monly admitted by 
all Philoſopherr. 


Ariſtotle t4xo 
th Plaro for being 
too ſiudjons of Ge» 
onetry. "2 


Peripatetick Phi- 
I,ſophers condemn 
the Study of Gee- 
metry, and why: 


362 


— 


Four ſeveral 


motions aſſigned to 
the Earth, 


The motion of 
deſcent belongs not 
to the terreſtrial 
Globe , but to its 


G. Garitxus, ha Syſlume. 


$1mv. To tcllyou true, I do not very well know ; 
becauſe I have not 1o much as learnt the realons that arc by Ftoly. 
my produced, of thole effects, 1 mean of thole ſtations, retrogra. 
dations, acccſſions, receſſions of the Planets; lengthenings and 
ſhortnings of dayes, changes of icalons, &c. But Omnting the 
conſequences that depend on the t1i ft luppoſitions » I find jn the 
ſuppolitions themle]ves no (mall difficulties ; which luppoſitions, 
if once they be overthrown, they draw along with them the ryjne 
of the whole fabrick. Now foraſmuch as becaule the whole 
module of Copernicxs ſeemeth in my opinion to be built upon in- 
firm foundations,in that it relycth upon the mobility of the earth, 
if this ſhould happen to be dilproved, there would be no need of 
farther diſpute. And to diſprove this, the Axiom of Ariſtotle 
15 in my judgement moſt ſufficicnt , That of one ſimple body, 
one ſole ſimple motion can be natural : bur here in this cale , to 
the Earth, a ſimple body, there are aſſigned 3. it not 4. motions, 
and all very different from each other. For belides the tighe 
motion, as a grave body towards its centre, which cannot be de- 
nied it, there 1s aſſigned to it a circular motion in a great circle 
about the Sun in a year, and a vertiginous converſion about its 
own centre in twenty four hours. And that in the next place 
which is more cxorbitant,8& which happly for that reaſon you pal; 
over in ilence, there is aſcribed to it another revolution about 
its own centre, contrary to the former of twenty four hours , 
and which finiſheth its period in a year. In this my underſtand. 
ing apprehendeth a very great contradiftion. 

SaLv. Asto the motion of deſcent, it hath already been con- 
cluded not to belong to the Terreſtrial Globe which did never 
move with any ſuch motion,nor never ſhall do ; but 1s (if there be 


Peihaps, 


parts. —(uch a thing) that propenfion of its parts to reunite themlelyes 


T he annual and 
dinrnal mgtion are 
compatible in the 


Earth. 


Every penfil and 
librated, body car- 
yyed round in the 
circumference of 4 
circle, acquireth of 
it ſelf a motion in 
it ſelf contrary to 
that, 


to their whole. As, inthe next place, to the Annual motion, 
and the Diurnal , theſe being both made towards one way , are 
very compatible , in the ſame manner juſt as if we ſhould let a 
Ball trundle downwards upon a declining luperfticies, it would in 
its deſcent along the ſame ſpontaneouſly revolve in it ſelf. As 
to the third morion aſſigned it by Copern:icxs , namely about it 
ſelf in a year, onely to keep its Axis inclined and direQed | 
towards the ſame part of the Firmament, I will tell you a thing 
worthy of great contideration : namely xt tantum abeſt (although 
it be made contrary ro the other annual) it 1s fo far trom having 
any repugnance or difficulty in it,that naturally and without any 
moving cauſe, it agreeth to any whatſoever ſuſpended and libra- 
ted body, which if it ſhall be carcicd round in the circumference 
of a circle, immediate of it ſelf, it acquireth a converſion about 
1ts own Centre, contrary to that which carrieth it about, = 8 
uc 


Diiroour th | 


ſuch velocity, that they both finiſh one revolution in the ſame 
time precilely. You may {ee this admirable » and to our Pputr- 
poſe accommodate experience, if putting in a Baſon of water a 
Ball chat will ſwim 3 and holding the Baſon in your hand , you 
rarn cound upon your toc , for you ſhall immediarly ſee the Ball 
begin co revolve 1n 1t ſelf with a motion, contrary to that of the 
Balon, and it ſhall finiſh its revolution , when that of the Baſon it 
ſhall finiſh. Now what other 15 the Earth than a pen(i] Globe 
librated in tenuous and yielding aire , which being carried a- 
bout in a year along the circumference of a great circle, muſt 
needs acquire, without any other mover, a revolution about its 
own centre, annual, and yet contrary to the other motion in like 
manncr annual 2 You ſhall ſee this effe& I {ay, but if afterwards 
you more narrowly conſider it, you ſhall find this to be no real 
thing, but a meer appearance 3 and that which you think to be 
a revolution init (elf, you will find to be a not moving atall , 
but a continuing altogether immoveable in reſpe& of all that 
which without you,and without the veſſel is ummoveable : for if in 
that Ball you ſhall make ſome mark, and conſider to what part of 
the Room where you are; or of the Field , or of Heaven it is 
fituate z you ſhall ſee that mark in yours , and the veſſels revolu- 
tion to look alwayes towards that {ame part 3 but comparing it to 
the veſſel and to your ſelf that are moveable, it will appear to go 
altering its dire&ion , and with a motion contrary to yours , and 
that of the veſlcl, to go ſeeking all the points of its circumgyra- 
tion; fo that with more reaſon you and the baſon may be ſaid 
to turn round the immoveable Ball, than that it moveth rotnd 
in the bafon. In the latne manner the Earth ſuſpended and li- 
brated in the circumference of the Grand Orbe, and ſcituate in 
ſuch ſort that one of its notes, as for example, its North Pole,loo- 
keth towards ſuch a Star or other part of the Firmament,it always 
keepeth dirc&ed towards the {ame , although carried round by 
the annual motion about the circumference of the {did Grand 
Orbe. This alone is {uffictent to make the Wonder ceaſe, and 
to remove a] difficulties. But what will Simplicins ſay , if to 
this non-indigence of the co-operating cauſe we ſhould adde 
an admirable intrinſfick vertue cf the Terreſtrial Globe, of look- 
ing with its determinate parts towards determinate parts of the 
Firmament, I ſpeak of the Magnetick vettite conſtantly partici- 
pated by any whatſoever piece of Loade-ſtone. And if every 
minute particle of thar'S.one have in it ſuch a vettue, who will 
queſtion but that the ſame more powerfully reſides in this whote 
Terreſtrial Globe , abounding in that Magnetick matter , and 
which happily it ſelf , as to its internal and primary ſubſtance, is 
Rothing elſe but a luge maſſe of Loade-ſtone. ET HE 
| Zr 7 S1MF; 


363 


An Experiment 
which ſenjibly 
ſhews that two con- 
IYAYY Potions may 
naturally agree in 
the ſame move» 
able, 


T he third motion 
aſcribed to the 
Earth u rather 4 
reſting iMmor't- 
able, 


eAn admirable 
mern veris: of the 
terreſtrial Globe of 
alwajes bebolding 
the ſame part of 
Heaven, 

The terreſtrial 
OAlobe made of 
L1ade-ſtone. 


364 


» An emiment 
Door of Phyli:ick, 
our Coun:rey man, 
born at Colcheſter, 
2nd famous for this 
his I:arncd Ircas 
tiſe, puoliſhed a» 
bout 6o years lince 
at London, The 
Magnetick Phi- 
loſophy of Willam 
Gilbert» 


The Prufillant- 
mity of Popular 
fits, 


G. Garitzus, hi Syſcme. 


S1m y. Then you are one of thole it lcems that hold the Mag. 
netick Phyloſophy William * Gilbert. 

Sauv. Iam tor certain, and think that all thoſe that haye 
ſcriouſly read his Book, and tricd his experiments, will bear me 
company therein ; nor ſhould I deſpair, that what hath befallen 
me in this caſe, might poſlibly happen to you allo, if ſobe a cy- 
1ioſity, like ro mince, and a notice chat infinite things in Natyre 
are ſtill conccal'd from the wits of mankind, by delivering you 
from being captivated by this or that particular writer in natural 
things, ſhould but flacken the reimes of your Reaſon , and mol- 
lie the contumacy and renaceouſneſle of your ſenſe ; ſo as that 
they would not refule ro hearken lometimes to novelties never 
before ſpoken of. But (permit me to ule this phraſe) the puſilla- 
nimity of vulgar Wits 15 come to that paſle, that not only like 
blind men, they make a gift, nay tribute of rheir own aſſent to 
whatſoever they find written by thoſe Authours, which in the 
infancy of their Studics were laid before them, as authentick by 
their Tutors, but refuſe to hear (not to lay examine) any new 
Propoſition or Probleme, although it not only never hath been 
Sas \15 but not ſo much as examined or confidered by their 
Authourz. Amongſt which, one is this, of inveſtigating what is 
the true, proper, primary, interne, and general matter and ſub- 
ſtance of this our Terreſtrial Globe; For although it never came 
into the mind either of Ariſtotle, or of any one elle, before Wail- 
liam Gilbert to think that it might be a Magnet, fo far are Ari- 
ftotle agd the reſt from confuring this opinion , yer nevertheleſle 
I have met with many, that at the very firſt mention of it, as a 
Horſe at his own ſhadow, have ſtart back, and refuſed to dil- 
courſe thereof, and cenſured the conceipt for a vain Ch mers, 
yea, for. a ſolemn madneſle : and its poſſible the Book of Gilbert 
had never come to, my hands,if a Peripatetick Philoſopher,of great 
fame, as I bclicve, to free his Library from its contagion, had not 
given yr.me. | 

Sunyg.., I, who ingenuouſly confeſle my ſelf to be one of 
thoſe vulgar Wits, and never till within theſe few dayes that I 
have. been admitted to a ſhare in your conferences, could I pre- 
tend to have in the-leaſt withdrawn from thoſe trite and popu- 
lar paths, yet, forall chat, 1 thiak I have advantaged my {elf fo 
much, .as that I could without much trouble or difficulty, maſter 
the roughneſſes of theſe novel ;and fantaſtical opinions. 

SAL v. If that which Gilbert writeth be true, then is it no 0- 
Pinion, but the lubzec of Science ; nor is it new, but as antient 
as the Earth itſelf; nor can it (being true) be rugged or diffi» 
cult, bug Plajn and cafie ; and when you pleaſe I ſhall make you 
feel the ſame in your hand, ifox that you of your ſelf fancy it " 

| e 


Diatocuse [I]. 


1-2 Ghoſt, and ſtand 1n fear of that which hath nothing in it of 
1ccadfall, like as a lictle child doth fear rhe Hobgoblin, without 
knowing any more of it, ſave the name; as that which beſides 
the name 15 nothing. 

$1» y. I ſhould beglad to be informed, and reclaimed from 
21 crrour. 

SL v. Anſwer me then to the queſtions that I ſhall ask you. 
And fiſt of all, Tell me whether you believe, that this our Globe, 
which we inhabit and call Earth, conſiſteth of one ſole and fim- 
ple matter, or elſe that it is an aggregate of matters different 
from cach other. 

S$1iny. Ifccit to be compoſed of ſubſtances and bodies very 
differcnt 3 and tuſt, for the greateſt parts of the compoſition, 


I ſce the Water and the Earth, which extreamly differ from one /; 


another. 

Sar v. Let us, for this once, lay aſide the Seas and other Wa- 
ters, and let us conſider the folid parts, and rell me; if you think 
them oae and the {ame thing, or elle different. 

$1m?e. Asto appearance, I ee that they are different things, 
there being very great heaps of unfruirful ſands, and others of 
fruitful ſoiles 3 There are infinite ſharp and ſteril mountains, full 
of hard ſtones and quarries of ſeveral kinds, as Porphyre, Ala- 
blaſter, Jaſper, and a thouſand other kinds of Marbles : There 
are vaſt Minerals of ſo many kinds of metals; and in a word, 
ſuch varietics of matrers, that a whole day would not ſuffice on- 
ly tocnunferare them. 

S 4 1 v.' Now of all theſe different matters, do you think, 
that in the compoſition of this grand maſſe, there do concur por- 
tions, or cIfe thar amongſt them all there is one part that far ex- 
ceeds the reſt, and is asit were the matter and ſubſtance of the 
mmenſe lump ? 

S 1m y. Ibcheve that the Stones, Marbles, Metals, Gems, and 
the fo many other ſeveral matters are as it were Jewels, and ex» 
teriour and ſuperficial Ornaments of the primary Globe, which 
in profſe, as I believe, doth without compare exceed all theſe 
things pur roge ther. | 

Saiv. And this principal and vaſt maſſe, of which thoſe 
things above 'named are as it were excreſſences and ornaments, of 
what matter do you think that it is compoſed ? 

, A » y. I think that it is the ſimple, or leſſe impure element of 
arth. | 

SALv. But what do you underſtand by Earth? Is it haply 
that which is diſperſed all over the fields, which is broke up with 
Mattocks and Ploughs, wherein we ſowe corne, and plant fruits, 
and in which great boſcages grow up, without the help of cul- 
| cure 


365 


The Terreftrial 
Globe compoſed of 
#'dr y maitert. 


_— 
ZE 


The interne parts 
of the terreſtrial 
Globe muſt of 14» 
ceſſity be ſold, 

" Or MOULD. 


*Of which with 
*nc Latin tran{]1- 


tour, I muſt once 


more proteſle my 
ſclt 198norant. 


G. Gatitn®us, his Syſcme; 


ture, and which 15, in a word, the habitation of all animals 
the womb of all vegetables ? 

S 1» re. Tis this that I would affirm to be the ſubſtance of ti, 
our Globe. | 

S a L v.. But in this you do, in my judgment; affirm that which, 
15 not right : for this Earth which is broke up, is ſowed, and ;; 
fertile is but one part, and that very ſmall of the ſurface of the 
Globe, which doth not go very deep, yea, its depthis very ſmall, 
in compariſon of the diſtance to the centre : and experience 
ſheweth us, that one ſhall not dig very low, but one ſhall finde 
matters very diffcrent fi om this exteriour {curf, more {olid, and 
not good for the p:oduQtion of vegetables. _ Beſides the interne 
Parts, as being compreſſed by very huge weights that lie upon 
them, arc, in all probability, lived, and made as hard as an 
hard rock. One may adde to this, that fecundity would be in 
vain conferred upon thoſe matters which never were deſigned to 
bear fruit, but to reſt eternally buricd in the profound and dark 
abyſſes of the Earth. | 

S1my. But who ſhall aſſure us, that the parts more inward 
and near tothe centre are unfruitful? They alſo may, perhaps, 
have their productions of things unknown to us ? 

SaLlv, You may aſwell be aſſured thereof, as any man elſe, 
as being very capable to comprehend, that if the integral bodies 
of the Univerſe be produced onely for the benefit of Mankind, 
this above all che reſt ought to be deſtin'd to the ſole convenien- 
ces of us its inhabitants, But what benefit can we draw from 
matters ſo hid and remote from us, as that we ſhall never be a- 
ble to make uſe of them ? Therefore the interne ſubſtance of 
this our Globe cannot be a matter frangible, diflipable, and non- 
coherent, like this ſuperficial part which we call * Earn: but 
1t muſt, of neccſlity, be a moſt denſe and ſolid body, and in a 
word, a moſt hard ſtone. And, if it ought to be ſo, what reaſon 
15 there that ſhould make you more ſcrupulous to believe that it 
1s a Loadſtone than a Porphiry, a Jaſper, or other hard Mar- 
ble ? Happily if Gilbert had written, that this Globe is all com- 
pounded within of * Pietra Serena, or of Chalcedon, the paradox 
would have ſeemed to you lefſe exorbitant ? 

S1Mmy. That the parts of this Globe morc intern are more 
compreſſed , and fo more lived together and ſolid , and more 
and more ſo, according as they lie lower, 1 do grant , ando 
likewiſe doth Ariſtotle , but tliat they degenerate and become 
other than Earth, of the ſame ſort with this of the ſuperficial 
parts, 1 ſee nothing that obliege'h me to believe. 

S a L v. I undertook not this Fcourſe with an intent to prove 
demonſtratively that the primary and real ſubſtance of - eas 

| obe 


p and 


Diatocus [I]. 


Globe is Load-ſtone 3 but onely to ſhew that no reaſon could be 

ven why one ſhould be more unwilling to grant that it is of 

Load-ſtone , than of ſome other matter. And if you will but 

ſeciouſly conſider , you ſhall find that it 1s not improbable, that 

one ſole» pure, and arbitrary name , hath moved men to think 

that it conliſts of Earth; and rhat 1s their having made uſe com- 

monly from the beginning of this word Earth , as well to ſigni- 
Ge that matter which is plowed and fowed , -as to name this our 
Globe. The denomination of which if it had been taken from 
ſtone , as that it, might as well have been taken from that as 
from the Earth ; the laying that its primary lubſtance was ſtone, 
would doubtleſſe have found no {cruple or oppolition in any 
man. Andis ſo much the more probable, m that I verily be- 
lieve, that if one could but pare off the jcurt of this great Clobe, 
taking away but one full thouſand or two thouland yx:ds ; and 
afterwards ſeperate the Stones from the Earth , the accumulati- 
on of the ſtones wonld be very much biger than that of the fer- 
tile Mould. But as for the reaſons which concludently prove de 
facdo., thatis our Globe is a Magnet , I have mentioned none of 
them, nor is this a time to alledg them , and the rather , for that 
to your benefit you may read them in Gzlbert 3 onely to encou- 
rage you to the peruſal of them, I will ſet before you, in a ſimi- 
litude of my own , the method that he obſerved in his Philoſo- 
phy. I know you underſtand very well how much the know- 
ledy of the accidents is fubſervient to the inveſtigation of the 
ſubſtance and eſſence of things ; therefore I defire that you 
would take pains to informe your ſelf well of many accidents and 
properties that are found in the Magnet, andin no other ſtone, 
or body ; as for inſtance of attracting Iron, of conterring up- 
on it by its ſole preſence the {ame virtue , of communicating 
likewiſe to it the property of looking towards the Poles, as it 
allo doth it ſelf; and moreover endeavour to know by trial, 
that it containeth in it a virtue of conferring upon the magnetick 
needle not onely the diretion under a Meridian towards the 
Poles, with an Horizontal motion , (a property a long time ago 
known)but a new found accident, of declining (being ballanced 
under the Meridian before marked upon a little ſpherical Mag- 
ner?) of declining 1 ſay to determinate marks more or leſſe, ac- 
cording as that needle is held nearer or farther from the Pole, 
till thac upon the Pole it ſelf it ere&erh perpendicularly , where- 
a in the middle parts it is parallel to the Axis: Furthermore pro- 
cure a prook to be made, whether the virtue of attraGting Iron, 

reliding much more vigorouſly about the Poles , than about the 

middle parts, this force be not notably more vigorous in one 

fole than in the other , and that in all pieces of Magnet ; the 

ſtronger 


467 


Our Globe would 
have been called 
ſtone , in ſtead of 
Earth , «sf that 
name hai beer gi- 
wen 5t in the be- 


grinning, 


The method of 
loſopby. 


Many propere 
ties in the Mage 


ner, 


: 
: 
4: 
[7 
2 


: 

T 
£ « } 
LE 
* 


— — — 


G. Gaitltzus, his Syſteme: 


ſtronger of which Poles is that which looketh towards ,the South, 
Obſerve, in the next place, thatin a little Magner this Souch and 
more vigorous Pole, becometh weaker, when ever it is to take 
up an iron in preſence of the North Pole of another much big. 
ger Magnet : and not to make any tedious diſcourſe of it, afſer. 
rain your ſelf, by experience, of thele and many other properties 
deicribed by Gilbert, which are all 1o peculiar to the Magnet, as 
that none of them agree with any other matter. Tell me now, 
31mplicins, if there were laid before you a thouſand pieces of 
coral matters, but all covered and concealed in a cloth, under 

h;ch itis hid, and you were required, without uncovering them, 

() iN.iKe 2 gucſle, by external {1gnes, at the martrer of cach of 
them, and that in making trial, you ſhould hit upon one that 
ſhould openly ſhew it ſelt ro have all the properties by you alrea- 
dy acknowledged to reſide onely in the Magnet, and in no other 
matter, what judgment would you make of the eſſence of ſuch a 
body ? Would you ſay, that it might be a piece of Ebony, or 
Alablaſter, ot Fn. 


S1nye. I would ay, withoutthe leaſt heſitation, that it was a. 
piecc of Load-ſtone. 

Sar v. It it beſo, ſay refolutely, that under this cover and 
(curk of Earth, ſtones, metals, water, &c. there is hid a great 
Magnet, foraſmuch as about the {ame there may be ſeen by any 
one that will heedfully obſerve the ſame; all thole very accidents 
that agree with a true and vitible Globe of Magnet 3 but if no 
more were to be {cen than that of the Declinatory Needle, which 
being carried about the Earth, more and more inclineth, as it a 
proacheth to the North Pole, and declineth lefle towards the E- 
quinoEial, under which it finally 1s brought to an Aquilibrinm, 
it mighr {erve to perlwade even the moſt (crupulous judgment. I 
forbear ro mention that other admirable effe&, which is ſenſibly 
obſerved in every piece of Magnet, of which, to us inhabitants 
of the Northern Hemiſphere, the Meridional Pole of the ſaid Mag= 
net is more vigorous than the other ; and the difference is found 
greater, by how much one recedeth from the Equino&ial ; and 
under the EquinoGtial both the parts arc of equal ſtrength, but 
notably weaker. But, in the Meridional Regions, far diſtant 
trom the EquinoGal, it changeth nature, and that part which to 
us was more weak, acquireth more ſtrength than the other : and 
all this I confer with that which we ſee to be done by a ſmall 
piece of Magnet, in the preſence of a great one, the vertue of 
which (uperating the lefler, maketh it to become obedient to I, 
and according as it is held,either on this or on that ſide the Equi- 
noctial of the great one, maketh the ſelf ſame mutations, 
which I have ſaid are made by every Magnet, carried on - 

#1 1 


Diatocut IL 


:-, or that ſide of the EquinoGtall of the Earth. | 

346k I was perlwaded, at the very firſt reading of the Book 
of Gilkertus , and having met with a moſt excellent piece of 
Magnets I, for a long time, made many Obſervations, and all 
worchy of extream wonder ; but above all, that ſeemerh ro me 
ery ſtupendious of increaſing the faculty of taking up Iron ſo 
much by arming it, like as the {aid Authour teacherh; and with 
arming that piece of mine,l multiplied its force in oCtuple propor- 
tion; and whereas unarmed it {carce took up nine ounces of 
Icon, it being armed did rake up above fix pounds : And, it 
may be, you have leen this Loadſtone in the * Gallery of your 
Moſt Serene Grand Duke (to whom I preſented it) upholding 
two little Anchors of Iron. 

Sa Lv. Ilaw it many times, and with great admiration, till 
that a little piece of the like ſtone gave me greater cauſe of won- 
der, that is in the keeping of our Academick, which being no 
more than of {1x ounces weight, and ſuſtaining, when unarmed, 
hardly two ounces, doth, when armed, take up 160. ounces, ſo 
asthat it is of So. times more force armed than unarmed, and 
takes up a weight 26. times greater than its own ; a much greater 
wonder than Gulbert could ever meet with, who writeth, that he 
could never get any Loadſtone that could reach to take up four 
tunes its own weight, 

Sack. In my opinion, this Stone offers to the wit of man a 
large Field to Phyloſophate in ; and I have many times thought 
with my (elf, how it can be that it conferreth on that Iron, which 
armeth it, a ſtrength ſo ſuperiour to its own 3 and finally, I finde 
nothing that giverh me {atisfaCtion herein 3 nor do I find any 
thing extraordinary in that which Gilbert writes about this partt- 
cular 3 1 know not. whether the ſame may have befallen 
ou. ; 

S aL v. I cxtreamly praiſe, admire,, and envy this. Authour, 
for that, a conceit {o ſtupendious ſhould come into his minde; 
touching a thing bandled by infinite ſublime wits, and hit upon 
by none of them ; I think him moreover, worthy of extraordi- 
nary applaule for the many new. and true Obleryations that he 
made, to the diſgrace of ſo many. fabulogs Authours, that write 
not only what they do not know,, but what ever they hear {po 

ken by the fooliſh vulgar, never feeking to afſure themſelves of 
the ſame by experience, perhaps; becauſe:they are unwilling to 
diminiſh the bulk of their Books. . That which 1 could have de 
fired in Gilbert, ts, that he had been a little, greater Mathematici- 
an, and particularly well grounded in Geometry, the practice 
whereof would have rendered him leſs reſolute in accepting thoſe 


reaſons for true Demonſtrations, which he producerh for truc 
ek 2 cauſey 


369 


The Magnet 
armed takes up 
much more Irow, 
than when armed. 


+ Or Cloſet 


rarities. 


370 


The firſt obſer» 


vers and inventers 


of thugs ought to 
l admired, 


The true caſe 
of the multiplica- 
tron of wertwe in 
the Magnet , b) 
means of the ar- 
ming. 


Of anew effett 
its neceſſary that 
the cauſe be like- 


wiſe new, 


It ts proved , 
that Tron conſfiits 
of Parts more ſub* 
rl, pure, and com 


vets 


G. Ga1tlitzus, bis S1ſieme. 


cauſes of the true concluſions obſerved by himſelf. Which rea. 
ſons (freely ſpeaking) do not knit and bind lo faſt, as thoſe un. 
doubtedly ought to do, in that of natural, neceſlary, and laſtin 

concluſions may be alledged. And I doubt not, but that in Pro- 
ceſſe of time this new Science will be perfe&&d with new obſer. 
vations, and, which is more, with true and neceſſary Demonſtra. 
tions. Nor ought the glory of the firſt Inventor to be thereby 
diminiſhed ; nor do I lefle eſteem, but rather more admire, the 
Inventor of the Harp (although it may be ſuppoled that the In- 
ſtrument at firſt was but rudely framed, and more rudely finger- 
cd) than an hundred other Arrtiſts, that in the inluing Ages redu- 
ced that profeſiion to great perfe1on. And methinks, that An- 
tiquity had very good reaſon to enumerate the firſt Inventors of 
the Noble Arts amongſt the Gods 3 ſeeing that the common wits 
have (o lictle curioſity, and are ſo little regardful of rare and ele- 
gant things, that though they ſee and hear them exercitated by 
the exquitite profciſors of them, yet are they not thereby per- 
{waded toa defire of learning them. Now judge, whether Capa- 
cities of this kind would ever have attempted to have found out 
the making of the Harp, or the invention of Muſick, upon the 
hihr of the whiſtling noiſe of the «dry ſinews of a Tortois, or 
from the ſtriking of foqyr Hammers. The application to great 
inventions moved by {mall hints, and the thinking that under a 
primary and childiſh appearance admirable Arts may lie hid, is 
not the part of A trivial, but of a {uper-humane ſpirit. Now an- 
{wering to your demands, I fay, that I alſo have long thought 
upon what might poſſibly be the cauſe of this ſo tenacious and 
potcht-uniony that we ſee to be made between the one Iron that 
armeths the Magnet; and the other that conjoyns it (elf unto it. 
And feſt, weare certain, that the vertue and ſtrength of the ſtone 
doth not augment by being armed, for it neither attrads at 
greater diſtance, nor doth it hold an Iron the faſter, if berween it, 
aild the arining or'cap,a very 'fine paper, or a leaf of beaten gold, 
be interpoſed ; nay ; with that interpoſition, ' the 'naked ftone 
wkesup mdre Iron than the armed. There 1s therefore no alte- 
ration inthe: vertue; and yet there is an innovation in the effes. 
And becaule 'frs neceſfary, thata'new effe& have a new cauſe, if 
it beinquited what novelty is introduced in the a& of taking up 
with the cap or atiliifrs, there is no mutation to be diſcovered, but 
m the different eontaft; for whereas before Iron toucht Load- 
ſtone, now Iron teucheth Tron. Therefore it is neceſſary to con- 
clude, that the diverſity of conta&s is the cauſe of the diverſity 
of effe&ts. And for the: difference of contaQts it cannot, 'as I ſee, 


be derived-fromvany thing el(c, fave from that the fubftance 6f 


pat than the mag he 


# 


hoh/ is of 'patts Wore'ſubtil; more pare, and mote v_ 


Dritocue. LIL 


«d than thoſe of the Magnet, which are more groſle, impure, and 
acc. From whence it tollowerh, that the ſuperficies of two [- 
-0ns that are to touch, by being exquiſitely plained, filed, and 
burniſhed, do ſo exaGtly conjoyn, that all the infinite points of 
he one meet with the infinite points of the other ; fo that the 
Glaments, if I may ſo fay, that collegate the two Irons, are many 


371 


more than thoſe that collegate the Magnet to the Iron, by reaſon 


-hat the ſubſtance of -rhe Magner is more porous, and lefle com- 
pa, which maketh that all the points and filaments of the Load- 
ſtone do not cloſe with that which it unites unto. In the next 
place, that the ſubſtance of Iron (eſpecially the well refined, as 
namely, the pureſt Reel) is of parts much more denſe, ſubtil, 
and pure than the matter of the Loadſtone, is (een, in that one 
may bring its edge to an cxtraordinary ſharpneſle, ſuch as is that 
of the Raſor, which can never be in any great meaſure effeted in 
a piece of Magnet. Then,as for the impurity of the Magnet, and 
its being mixed with other qualities of ſtone, it is firſt ſenſibly 
diſcovered by the colour of ſome little ſpors, for the nioſt part 
white 3 and next by preſenting a needle to ir, hanging in a 
thread, which upon thole ſtonyneſlcs cannot find repoſe, but 
being attraed by the parts circumfuſed, ſeemeth to fly from 
* thoſe, and to leap upon the Magnet contiguous to them : and 
as ſome of thoſe Heterogeneal parts are for their magnitude ve- 
ry vilible, ſo we may. believe, that there are others, in great a- 
bundance, which, for their ſmallnefle, are imperceptible, that are 
diſſeminated throughout the whole maſſe. Thar which I ſay, 
(namely, that rhe multitude of contacts that are made between 
Iron and Iron, is the cauſe of the fo folid conjunQion) is con- 
firmed by an experiment, which is this, thac if we preſent the 
ſharpned point of a needle to the cap of a Magnet, it will tick 
no faſter to it , than to the ſame ſtone unarmed : which can 
procced from no other cauſe, than-from the equality of the con» 
ads that are both of one ſole point. But. whar then ? Let a 
' Needle be taken and placed upon a Magnet; ſo that one of its 
extremities hang ſomewhat over, and to that preſent a Nail to 
which the Necdle will inſtantly cleave, inſomuch that withdraw- 
Ing the Nail, the Needle will ſtand in ſuſpenſe, and. with its two 
ends touching the Magnet and the Iron 3 and withdrawing the 
Nail yet a little further, the Needle will forſake the Magnet ; 
provided that the eye of the Needle be towards the Nail; and 
the point towards the Magnet ; but if the eye be towards the 
Loadſtone, in withdrawing the Nail the Needle will cleave to 
the Magnet 3 and this, in my judgment, for no other reaſon; 
{ave onely that the Needle, by reafon it is bigger towards the 
eye, toucheth in much more points than is ſharp poiot doth. 
Aaa 2 SOAPS 


A ſenſible proc 
of the impurity 
the Mag net. 


* The Author 
hereby meaneth 
that' the fone 
doth not all con« 
fiſt of magnerick 
Mmatrer 5 but that 
the whiter ſpecks 
being weak, thoſe 
other parts of the 
Loadſtone of a 
more dark & con« 
Rant colour, cone 
tain all chat yertue 
Wherewith bodies 
are attracted, 


* A common 
ſewing needle, 


360 


G. Gar1tzus, his Syſteme. 


S a6 & Your whole diſcourſe hath been in my judgment ye 
concluding , and this experiment of the Needle bath madc the 
think it little infertour to a Mathemarical Demonſtration ; and 
I mgenuouſly confeſſe, that in all rhe Magnetick Pluloſophy -4 
never heard or read any thing, that with fuch ſtrong reaſon; 
gave account of its ſo many admirable accidents, of which, if the 
cauſes were with the {ame peripicuity laid open ;-1 know not 
what ſweeter food our Intelle&s could deſire. {2 

SaLtv. In {ecking the reaſons of concluſions unknown unto 
us, it 43 requiſite to have the good fortune to: dire&:the dif. 
courſe from the very beginning rowards the way of truth ; in 
which if any one walk, it will ealily happen, that one. ſhall meet 
with ſeveral other Propoſitions known ro be true , either by dif. 
putes of experiments, from rhe certainty. of which the truth of 
ours atquireth ſtrength and evidence ; as it did 1n every. reſpe& 
happen to me in the preſent Probleme , for being deſirous to af- 
ſure my ſelf, by ſome other accident, whether the reafqn of the 
Propofition, by me found, were true 3 namely, whether the ſub. 
ſtance of the Magnet were really much lefle continuate than that 
of Iron or of Steel:, 1 made the Artiſts that work in the Gallery 
of my Lord the Grand Duke, to {mooth one ſide of that piece 
of Magnet, which formerly was yours ,. and then to poliſh and 
burniſh 1t3. apon which to my: ſatisfaction 1 found what I defired. 
For I diſcovered many ſpecks of colour different from the reſt, 
but as ſplendid and bright, as any of the harder ſort of ſtones; 
the reſt of the Magnet was polite, but to the tact onely , not 
being in the leaſt ſplendid ; bur rather as if it were {meered over 
with foot 3 and this was the ſubſtance of the Load-ſone, and 
che ſhining part was the fragments of other ſtones intermixt 
therewith , as was ſenſibly made known by preſenting the face 
thereof to filings of Iron, the which 10 great number leapt to 
the Load-tone , but not {ſo much as one grain did ſtick to the 
faid ſpots, which were many , ſome as big as the fourth part of 
the nail of a mans finger, others ſomewhat leſſer , the leaſt of 
all very many, and thoſe that were ſcarce vitible almoſt inna- 
merable: //So that I did afſure my (elf, that my conjeRure was 
true , when I firſt thought that the {ubſtance of the Magnet 
was not cloſe and compa, but porous, or to ſay better, ſpon- 
gy 3 but with this difference, that whereas the ſponge 1n 1ts 
cavities and little cels conteineth Air or Water, the Magnet hath 
ts pores full of hard and heavy ſtone , as appears by the exqui- 
fite luſtre which thoſe ſpecks receive. Whereupon, as I have ſaid 
from the beginning , applying the ſurface of the Iron to the ſu- 
perficies of the Magnet the minute particles of the Iron, though 
perhaps more continuate than theſe of any other body ba ts 

ining 


Diatocue 11L 


hining more-than any other matter doth ſhew) do not all, nay 
bur very few of them incounter pure Magnet 3 and the contaQs 
bciag few » the union is but weak. Bur becauſe” the tap of. the 
Load-ſtone , beſides the contat of a great part bf its ſhpetficies, 
nveſts irs (Jt alſo with the virtue of the parts adjoyning, al- 
though they touch not 3 that ſide of it bemy exaGly ſmoothed 
ro which the other face, in like manner well poliſhc of tht Irani to 
be attracted, is applyed, the conttatt is 'made by innjipera- 
ple minute particles , if not haply by the infinite points'f both 
the {uperhicies , whereapon the union becometh' very ſtrong. 
This obſervation of ſmoothing the' [tirtaces 'of thie Trons thit are 
co touch , came not into the thoughts of Gelbert', for he makes 
the Irons convex, {othat their contattis very ſmall ; atid there- 
upon it cometh/to paſſe that che renacity, wherewith thoſe Irons 


conjoyn , 1s much leffer. | | | 
Sack. Lam, asI told you before, little leffe ſatisfied with 
this reaſon , that if it were a pure Geometrical Demonſttarion ; 
and becauſe we {peak of a Phyſical Problem \, I'believe that alſo 
Simplicius will find himſelf ſatisfied as far as natural ſcience ad- 
mits, in which he knows that Geometrical evidence is not to be 
aired. 7 0-1 22! HH CONN 3%: 
Sin e. I think indeed, that Safvietns with'a fine Cirtiimlo- 
cution hath ſo manifeſtly diſplayed the cauſe'of this effe&',” that 
any indifferent wit , though not.'verſt in the Sciences',* may ap- 


prehend the ſame ; but we, confining our ſelves to the terms of 7, 


Art, reduce the cauſe of theſe and "other the like natural effe&s 
to Sympathy , which is a certain agreemet and mutua] appetite 
which ariſeth between things that are ſemblable to one another 
in qualities; as likewiſe on the cotitrary rhat hatred 8& eomiry for 
which other things ſhun & abhor one another we call Antipathy. 

Sack And thus with theſe rwo words men come to'rendec 
reaſons of a great number of accidents and effe&s which we fee 
not withont admiration to be produced in nature. But this kind 
of philoſ-pharting ſeems ro me to; have great ſympathy with a 
certain way of Painting that a Friend of mine uſed, who'writ 
upon the Tele or Canvaſle in chalk, here 1 will have the Foun- 
tain with Diana and her Nimphs, there certain Hariers , in this 
corner 1 will have a Hant(-man with the Head of a Stag, the reſt 
ſhall b: Lanes, Woods, and Hills ; and left the remainder for 
the Painter to ſet forth with Colours; and thus he perſwaded 
himſelf that he had painted the Story of AGeon , when as he had 
contributed thereto nothing of his own more than the names. 
But whether are we wandred with ſo long a digreffion , contrary 
to our former reſolutions? I have althoſt forgot what the point 
was that we were upon when we fell into = magnetick diſ- 


courſe: 


373 


Sy n thy ll 
Antipathy, #799: 
wſed by Philoſe- 
her: to give h rea® 

eafily of 4” 
40 — Ft ofF + 


A pleaſant ex- 
ampledeclaringthe 
invalidity of ſome 
Phyloſophical 4ar- 
£ wment ALIOng. 


alba” ff 2 


—_—_— 
—Y = _ 


a 
| 


04 


374 


The ſeveral wa- 


tural motions of 


the Magnet, 


G. Gaiit#us, his Syſlane. 


courſe £ and yet I had ſomething in my mind that I intendeq tg 
have ſpoken upoa that ſubject. | | 

$ ary. We were about to demonſtrate that third motion +. 
ſcribed by Copernic#s to the Earth to be no motion but a quie- 
ſcence and maintaining of it (elf immutably dire&ed with its de. 
terminate parts towards the ſame & determinate parts of the Uni. 
verſe , that is a perpetual conſervation of the Axis of its diurnal 

;revolution parallel to it ſelf, and looking towards ſuch and ſuch 
fixed ſtars; which moſt conſtant poſition we ſaid did naturally 
agree with every librated body ſuſpended in a fluid and yielding 
medium , which although carried about, yet did it not change di- 
retionin reſpe& of things external, but onely ſeemed to reyolye in 
its (elf, in rciſpe&t of that which carryed ic round, and to the 
veſſel in which it was tranſported. And then we added to this 
ſimple and natural accident the magnetick virtue , whereby the 
ſelf Terreſtrial Globe might fo much the more conſtantly keep it 
immutable, — - | 

Sa G6 x. Now Lremember the whole buſineſſc ; and that which 
then came into my minde,8& which I would have intimated, was a 
certain conſideration touching the ſcruple and objection of Sim- 
plicius, which he AER" againſt the mobility of the Earth, 
taken from the multiplicity of motions, impoſlible to be aſſigned 
to a ſimple body, of which but one ſole and ſimple motion, ac- 
cordipg to the dodtrine of. Ariſtotle, can be natural ; and that 
which [ would have propoled to.conſideration, was the Magnet, 
to which we manifeſtly ſee three motions naturally to agree : 
one tawards the centre of the Earth, as a Grave; the ſecond is 
the circular Horizontal Motion, whereby it reſtores and con- 
ſerves-jts Axis towards determinate parts of the Univerſe; and 
the third is this, newly diſcovered by Gilbert, of inclining its 
Axis, being in the plane of a Meridian towards the ſurface of the 
Earth, I this more and lefle, according as it ſhall be diſtant 
from the EquinoGtial, under which it is parallel to the Axis of 
the Earth. Beſides theſe three, it is not perbaps improbable, 
but that it may have a fourth, of revolving upon its own Axis, in 
caſe it were librated and ſuſpended in the air or other fluid and 
vielding Medium, ſo that all external and accidental impediments ” 
were removed, and this opinion Gilbert himſelf ſeemeth alſo to 
applaud. So that, Simpliczus, you ſee how tottering the Axiome 
of Ariſtotle is. 

Sine. This doth uot only not make againſt the Maxime, but 
not ſo much as look towards it : for that he ſpeaketh of a fimple 
body, and of that which may naturally conſiſt therewith 3 but 

you popes that which befalleth a mixt body ; nor do you tell 


us of any thing that is new to the do&rine . of Ariſtotle, for _ 
| c 


te likewile granteth ro mixt bodies compound motions by ___. 

$4 6 8-Stay a little, Simplicius, & anſwer me to the queſtions 
[ ſhall ask you. You ſay that the Load-ſtone is no ſimple body, 
now | defire you to tell me what thole {ſimple bodies are, that 
mingle in compoſing the Load-ſtone. 

$1 e. 1 know not how to tell you th'ingredients nor fimples 
preciſely, but t ſafficeth that they are things elementary. - | 

$a v. So much ſufficeth me alſo. And of thele fimple ele- 
mentary bodies, what are the natural motions ? 

Sine. They are the two right and fimple motions, ſurſam 
and deorſun. 

Sack. Tell mein the next place? Do you believe that the 
motion, that ſhall remain natural to that ſame mixed body ,ſhould 
be one that may reſult from the compoſition of the two'fimple 
natural motions of the fimple bodies compounding , or that i 
may be a motion impoſſible to be compoled of them. 

S$1mp. Ibelieve that it ſhall move with the motion reſuking 
from the compoſition of the motions of the fimple bodies com- 
pounding, and that with a motion impoſſible to be compoſed of 
theſe,it is impoſſible that it ſhould move- Þ þ ibs 

Sacs. But,Simplicius,with rwo right and finple morions,you 
hall never be able to compoſe a ctreular motion , ſuch as are- che 
two, or three circular motions that the magnet hath : you ſee 
then into what abſurdities evil grourtded Principles, or , to'fay 
better, the ill-inferred conſequences of good Ptinciples carfy- a 
man 3 for you are now forced to ſay , that theMagnet is miix- 
ture compounded of ſubſtances elenientary arid eacleſtial, iPyon 
will maintain that the ſtraight motion 18 a peculiar to'the'Efe- 


menrs, and" the circulat to the cefleſtial botlies. Therefore 


you will more ſafely argue , you 'mwſt ſay , rhat of the initegral 
bodies of the Univerſe, thoſe that are by nature moveable; Udb-all 
nove circularly, and that therefore-the Magnet, 'ias a-part of the 
te primary, and integral ſubſtatice of our Clobe, pertaketlrof 
the fame qualicies with it. Arid rake 'notice of 'this'your faffacy, 
in calling the Magnet a mixt body , and the'Ferreftrial Globe a 
fimple body, which is ſenſibly perecived to be a thouſand times 
more compound : for, "beſides that ftcontaineth an hundte@an 
buridred matters, exceeding different” from otic another, it'con- 
taiheth great abundance of this which you call mixt,, 1:rietn 
of the Load-ſtone. This ſeems t6 int Juſt as if one ſhould:eall 
bread a mixt body, and * Pannada a fimple body; 'inwhich' there 
15 phat no ſmall quantity of bread, 'befides many ither things &di- 
ble. This ſcemeth to me a very admirable thing;amongſt others 

|; IL, 


Diatocur FIf. pA 


$73 


Ariftole grant 
4 compound motion 
to mixe bodies, 


The motion of 
mixe bodies ought 
&' be ſuch «s may 
reſul* from the 
compoſition of the 
motions *f the ſme 
ple bodies cong- 
pounding, 

Wh two right 
motions one cAnnoe 
compoſe circular 
POTN. 

Philoſophers are 
forced ro confeſſe 
that the Magme 
i compounded of 
celeflial ſubſtaye 
ces, and of elem 
1477, 


The errond bf 


thoſe who callthe 
Magnet 4 mixt 
body, and the ter« 
reſtrial Glebe 4 
ſimble body . 


_ * Ogliopotrida 
4 Spaniſh diſh of 
many ingredients 
boild rogethyr. = 


a ne AMA TE en = 


— wc wijf wt wie © 


Mi 


376 


The Diſcourſes 
of Peripateticks, 
ful of errours and 
tontr adult ITLIS 


eAn improba- 
bt effelt admired 
by GilÞerrus'ss the 
Zoadftowe. 


G. Gatitzus, his Syſteme. 


of the Peripateticks , who grant (nor can it be denied ) that gy; 
Terreſtrial Globe is, de fatto, a compound of infinite differen; 
matters ; and grant farther that of compound bodies the motion 
ought to be compound : now the motions that admit of com 
ſition are the right and circular : For the two right motions, a, 
being contrary, are incompatible together , they affirm, thatthe 
pure Element of Earth 15 no where to be found; they confeſle, 
that it never hath been moved with a local motion ; and yet they 
will intreduce in Nature that body which 1s not to be found, and 
make it move with that motion which it never exerciſed, nor ne. 
ver ſhall do, and to that body which hath, and ever had a being, 
they deny that motion, which betore they granted, ought natu- 
rally to agree therewith, 

S a1 v. I beſeech you, Sagredus, let us not weary cur ſelye; 
any more about theſe particulars, and the rather, becauſe you 
know that our purpoſe was not to determine relolutely, or to 
accept for true, this or that opinion, but only to propoſe for ow 
divertiſement ſuch reaſons, and anſwers as may be alledged on 
the one ſide, or on the other; and Simplicivs maketh this an- 
ſwer, in defence of his Peripateticks, therefore let us leave the 
zudgment in ſuſpenſe, and ,remit the determination into the 
hands of ſuch as are more known than we. And becauſe 1 think 
that we have, with {ufficieat prolixity, in theſe three dayes, dil. 
courſed upon the Syſteme of the Univerlc, ir will now be lſeaſo- 
nable, that we proceed to the grand accident, from whence our 
Diſputations took beginning, I mean, of the ebbing and flowing 
of the Sea, the cauſe whereof may, in all probability, be referred 
to the motion of the Earth, , Burt that, if you ſo pleaſe, we will 
reſerve till to morrow. In the mean time, that I may not forget 
it, I will ſpeak to one particular, to which I could have wiſhed, 
that: Gilbert had not lent an car ; I mean that of admitting, that 
in caſe a little Sphere of Loadſtone might be exaRly librared, it 
would revolve init ſelf; becauſe there is no reaſon why it ſhould 
do {o.; For if the whole Terreſtrial Globe hath a natural facul- 
ty of revolving about its own centre in twenty four hours, and 


that allits parts ought to have the ſame, 1 mean, that faculty of 


turning round together with their whole, about its centre in twen- 
ty four hours ;, they already have the ſame in effe&, whilſt that, 
being upon the Earth, chey turn round along with it: And the 
alligning them a revolution about their particular centres, would 
be to aſcribe unto them a ſecond motion much different from the 
firſt: for ſo they would have two, namely, the revolving in twen- 
ty four hours about the centre of their whole; and the turning 
about their own : now this ſecond i arbitrary, nor is there any 

red- 


Di avout IN. 


«aſon for the introducing'of it : Tf by plutking away 'a filece 
of Loadftone from the whole natural maſſe, It Were 'deprived 'of 
he faculty-of following it, asit did, "Whit was ited tNEreto, 
(> chat it is thereby deprived of the revolunttt {bent the univer- 
{al centre of che Terreftrial 'Globt, tr nilgtit haply, with ſomc- 
what greater probabilicy be thought by lome, that the ſaid Mag- 
net was to appropriate to it {e]f a new converſion about its parti- 
cular centre 3 bur if it do no lefle, when ſeparated, than when 
conjoyned, continue always to purſue its firſt, eternal, and natu- 
ral courſe, to what purpole ſhould we go about to obtrude upon 
it another new one et 

$ a6 &- underſtand you very well, and this puts me in mind 
of a Diſcouiſe very like to this tor the vanity of it, falling from 
certain Wuritcrs upon the Sphere , and I think, if I well remem- 
ber, amongſt othcrs from Sacroboſco, who, to ſhew how the E- 
lement of Water, doth, together with the Earth, make a. com- 
pleat Spherical Figure, and io between thema both compoſe this 
our Globe, writerh, that the ſ(ceing the {mall * particles of water 
ſhape themſelves into rotundity, as in the drops, and in the dew 
daily apparent upon the leaves of feyeral herbs, is a ſtrong ar- 
gument3 and becaule, according to the trite Axiome, there is 
the (ame reaſon for the whole, as fr the parts, the parts affeQing 
thar ſame figure it is neceffary. That the ſame is proper to the 
whole Element : and truth is , methinks it is a great overſight 
that theſe men ſhould not perceive {o apparent a vanity, and con- 
ſider that if their argument had run right, it would have follow- 
ed, that nor only the {mall drops, but that any whatſoever greater 
quantiry of water ſeparated from the wholeElement, ſhould bere- 
duced into a Globe: Which 1s not ſeen to happen; though indeed 
the Senſes may (ee, and the Underſtanding perceive that the E- 
lment of Water loving to form it ſelf into a Spherical Figure 
about the common centre of gravity, to which all grave bo- 
dies tend ( that is, the centre of the Terreſtrial Globe ) it 
therein is followed by all its parts , according to the Axiome ; 
ſo that all the ſurfaces of Seas, Lakes, Pools, and in a word, 
of all the parts of Waters conteined in veſſels, diſtend 
themſelves into a Spherical Figure , but that F 1gure 15 an arch 
of that Sphere that hath for its centre the centre of the Ter 
ay Globe , and do not make particular Spheres of them- 

elves. 

Satv. The errour indeed is childiſh ; and if it had4 
deen onely the ſingle miſtake of Sacroboſeo, I would cafily 
tave allowed him 19a it; but to pardon it alſo to his Com- 
wentators, and to other famous men , and even to Ptolomy 


B bb him-« 


$77 


The vain arp u- 
mentation of ſomd 
to prove the Ele- 
ment of Watey to 
be of « Spherical 
ſmper fictet« 


98 G. Garit=us, his Syſicme. 


himſelfe; this I cannot do , without bluſhing for their repy- 
tation. But it is ligh time to take leave, it now bei 
very late , and we being to meet again to morrow, 
at the uſual hour, to bring all the foregoing 
Diſcourſes to a final concluſion. 


- 
H—_———  ——— —— — -F pe oe " __ 
- _ _ _ —- 
= - 
, Pp, a 


GALILAUS 
Gailzus Lynceus, 
SYSTEME 
The Fourth Dialogue. 


_ CO _ —_—_— _—_—— 


379 


© OO —_— —_— 


INTER LOCUTORS. 
SAaLVIATUS, SAGREDUS, & SIMPL1C1US. 


know not whether your return to our 
accuſtomed conferences hath really been 
| later than uſual , or whether the deſice 
of hearing the thoughts of Salviatus, * 
rouching a matter fo curious , hath | 
made me think it ſo: But I have tar- 
ried a long hour at this window, expe- 4 
1 ing every moment when the Gondola 4 
would appear that I ſent to fetch you. 
Sal v. I verily believe that your imagination more than our 
tarriance hath prolonged the time: and to make no longer de- 
murce, it would be well, if without interpoſing more words, we 2 Howe is ſpars : 
Re Ep. ; eth the ebbing | 
came tothe matter it {e]f ; and did ſhew, that nature hath per- and flowing of the 


mitted (whether the bulinels iz rei veritate be fo, or elſe to play $*4'9 4pprove the i 
{EI | and Earth: mobility. i} 


300 


The tide, ard 
mbilny of the 
Farcth mutually 
confirm each oben. 


»All texrenc ef- 
fetts, indrfferemly 
confirm the mot10” 
or reſt of the 
Earth. except the 
ebbing and flowing 
of the Sea. 


The firft genes 
ral conclaſog of 
the tmpoſſibility of 
the ebbing and 
flowing the in,mo- 
bility of the terre- 
ftrial Globe being 
granted. 


The knowledge 
of the effect; con- 
tributes tc the 15s 
veſtigatoon of the 


cauſes, 


G. Gar1rtnus, his Syſteme. 


and ſport with our Fancies) hath, I lay, bath permitted that the 
motions4or every ether reſpe&,#xcept to relalve the gbbin 
flowing af the Sea,afſigned long fince to the carfh, of bo 

now at*liſt to anſwer exaMly to the-cau reof4 and, %s- 


were, with mutual a emulation, the ſaid ebbing ard flowing 
to appear in confirmation of the Terreſtra] motion? , the judices 
whereof have hitherto been taken from the coleſtial Phznomena, 
in" regard that of thoſe thinghktSappen on Earth, not any one 
was af- force to pgove gne gpinian morg than anothgr ,_ as weal- 
ready have at large proved ſhewing that all. che texrene occurs 
rence upon which the ſrabMFry of the Eartl'and mobllity of the 
Sun ard rirmament is comitfonly inferred, are to {ee to us per- 
formed in the ſame manner, thuugh we ſuppoled the mobilicy of 
the Earth, and the immobility bf them. 1 he Element of Wa- 
ter onely, as bcing moſt vaſt, and which 1s not au:cxed and con- 
catenared to the Terreſtrial Globe as all t#dcher ſolid parts are; 
yea, rather which by reaſon-'of Its fluidity Temainerh. apart ſur 
Juris, and free, is to be ranked amongſt thoſe lublunary things, 
from which we may collc& ſome hinte and intimation of what the 
Earth doth in relation to motion and reſt. After 1 had man 
and many a time examined with my ſelf the effe&s and accidents, 
partly (cen and partly underſtood from others, thar are to be ob- 
{ſerved in the motions of waters: and moreover read and heard 
the great vanities produced by many, as the cauſes of thoſe acci- 
dents, I have been induced upon no flight reaſons to omit theſe 
two concluſions ( having made.withal the neceſlary preſuppo- 
ials) that in calc the terreſtrial Globe be immoveable , the flux 
and & flux of the. Sea cannot be natural z, «and that, jn caſe thoſe 
muiton> be conferred upon the {aid Globe, which have been lon 
ſince aligned ro 1t, 1t 18 neceſſary that the Seca be ſubje toeb- 
bing and flowi.g, according to all that which we obſerve to hap- 
pen inthe lame. | 
Sacr. The Propoſition is very conſiderable , as well forit 
{e}f as for what followeth upon the ſame by way of conſequence, 
{o il:at I ſhall the more intenfly hearken to the explanation and 
confirmation of it. | 
Saurv. Becauſe in natural - queſtions , of which number this 
which we have in hand is one, the knowledge of the effe&ts is a 
means to guide us to the inveſtigation and diſcovery of the cau- 
les, and without which we. ſhould walk in the dark, nay with 
more uncertainty, for that we know not_whither we would go, 
whereas the blind,at leaſt,know where they deſire to arrive; there- 
fore firſt of all it is neceſſary to know the effeRs whereof we en- 
quire the cauſes : of which effe&s you, Sagredus, ought more 
abundantly and more certainly to be informed than I am, 
as 


D1aLtoGus. LV. 


15 one, that beſigles your being born, and having, for a_ long 
time, dwelt in Venice, where the Tides are very notable for their 
grearnclie, have allo ſailed into Syria, and, as an ingenuous and 
apprehenſive wit, muſt needs have made many Obſervations up- 
on this ſubze& : whereas I, that could onely for a time, and that 
very ſhort, obſerve what happened in theſe extream parts of the 
Adriatick, Gulph, and in our Seas below. about the Lyrrbene 
ſhores, muſt needs take many things upon the relation of o- 
thers, who, for the moſt parc, nor very well agreeing, and con- 
ſequently. being very unce:tain, . contribute more of confuſion 
chan conticmation to our {pcculations. Neverthelefle, from thoſe 
thar we are ſure of , and which are the principal, I think I am a- 
ble to attain to the true ard piimary cauſes not that I pretend 
tobe able to produce all rhe proper and adequate reaſons of 
thole effefts that are new unto me, and which conſequently I 
could never have thought upon. And that which I have to ſay, 
| propole only, as a key that opencth the door to a path never 
yet rrodden by any, in certain hope, that ſome wits more ſpecu= 
lative than mine, will make a turther progretle herin, and pene- 
trate much farther than I ſhall have done in this my firſt Diſco- 
very : And although that in other Seas, remote from us, there may 
happen ſeveral accidents, which do not happen in our Mediter- 
rancan Sea, yet doth not this invalidate the-reaſon and cauſe that 
1 ſhall produce, if ſo be that it verifie and fully reſolve the ac- 
cidents which evene in our Sea : for that in conclufion there can 
be but one true and primary cauſe of the effeds that are of the 
ſame kind, 1 will relate unto you, therefore, the effeRs that I 
know to be true, and afligne the cauſes thereof that I think 
to be trae, and you allo, Gentlemen, ſhall produce ſuch 
others as are known to you, belides mine, and then we will 
try whether the cauſe, by me alledged, may fatisfie them 
allo. 
| therefore affirm the periods that are obſerved in the fluxes 
and refluxes of the Sea-waters ro be three : the firſt and princi- 
pal is this great and moſt obvious one; namely,the diurnal,accor- 
ding to which the intervals of ſome hours with the waters flow and 
ebbe 3 and thele intervals are, for the moſt part, in the Mediter- 
rane from ſix hours to ſix hours, or thereabours, that is, they for 
ix hours flow, and for fix hours ebbe. The ſecond period is 
monethly, and it {eemes to take its origen from the motion of 
the Moon, not that it introduceth other motions , but only al- 
tereth the greatneſle of thoſe before mentioned, with a notable 
difference , according as it ſhall wax or wane, or come to the 
(Wadrature with the Sun. The third Period is annual, and is 
feen to depend on the Sunne, and onely altereth the diurnal 


-* fhotionsy 


381 


Three Period: 
of ebbings and 
flowings, arurnal, 


mones ly. and ana 
nual, 


| Variettes that 
1 Papen m the diuy- 
A | peroed. 


id! 


. 
| 
\ » A Sctrair, (9 
"| calc |. 
* Or Iva. 
* Or Crets, 
ad 
1M 
14 
Yi, T he canſ of the 


ebbivg ana flow'ng 
aledied by s c:5e 
14! rogern Pt 
Hh (ber. 


G. Gart1t mus, bi Syfeme. 


motions, by making them 'difterent in the @es of the $o!: 
ſtices, as to greatneſle, from what they are in the Equinoxes. 

We will ſpeak (in the firſt place, of the diurnal motion, as 
being the principal, and upon which the Moon and Sun ſeem t, 
exerciſe their power ſecondarily, 1n their monethly and annual 
alterations. Three differences are obſervable in theſe horary 
mutations ; for in ſome places the waters rile and fall, withour 
making any progreſlive motion 3 1n others, without riſing or fal- 
ling they run one while towards the Eaſt, and recur another 
while towards the Weſt; and in others they vary the heights 
and courle aiſo, as happeneth here 1n Venice, where the Tides in 
coming in rile, and 19 going out fall; and this they do in the ex- 
rermities of the lengths of Gulphs that diſtend from Weſt to 
Eaſt, and terminate in open ſhores, up along which ſhores the 
Tide at time of flood hath room to extend it elf: but if the 
courle of the Tide were iutercepted by Cliffes and Banks of 
grcat hcight and ſteepneſſe, there it will flow and ebbe without 
any progreſſive motion. Again, it runs to and again, Without 
changing height in the middle parts of the Mediterrane, as nota- 
bly happeneth in the * Faro de Meſſena, between Scylla and Ca- 
rybdus, where the Currents, by reaſon of the narrowneſle of 
the Channel, are very {wift ; but in the more open Seas, and 
abour the Iſles that ſtand farther into the Mediteri anean Sea, as 
the Baleares,Corſica,Sardignia,” Elba,Sicily towards the African 
Coaſts, Malta, * Candia, &kc. the changes of watermark arc 
very ſinall; bur the currents indeed are very notable, and eſpe- 
cially when the Sea is pent between Iſlands, or between them 
and the Continent. 

Now thele onely truc and certain effeAs, were there no more 
to be oblerved, do, in my judgment, very probably perſwade 
any man, that will coatain himſelf within the bounds of natu- 
ral caules, to grant the mobility of the Earth: for to make the 
v<licl (as ic may be called) of the Medicerrane ftand till, and to 
make the water contained therein to do, as it doth, exceeds my 
imagination, and perhaps every manselſe, who will but pierce 
beyond the riade in thele kind of inquiries. 

S1imvp. Thele accidents, Salviatus, begin not now, they are 
moſt ancient, and have been obſerved by very many, and ſeveral 
have artempred to aſligne, {ome one, ſome another cauſe for the 
lame : and there dwelleth not many miles from hence a famous 
Peripatetick, that alledgeth a caule for the ſame newly fiſhed out 
ot a certain Text of Ariſtotle , not well underſtood by his Ex- 
po{icors, from which Text he colle&erh, that the true cauſe of 
thele motions doth only proceed from the different profundiries 
of Sac + fo ene 1 + watery of oreateſt depth being wy in 

abun- 


Driartocne. IV. 


Sundance 1 and therefore more grave , drive back the Waters 
|: depth, which being afterwards raiſed , delire to de- 
icend , and from this continuat colluCtation or conteſt proceeds 
he ebbing and flowing. Again thole rhat reterre che lame to the 
Moon are many , {aying that ſhe hath particular Dominion over 
the Water 3 and at Jaſt a certain Prelate hath publiſhed a little 
Treatiſe » wher. in he ſaith that the Moon wandering too and 
£0 in the Heavens attraſteth and draweth towards it a Maſſe of 
Water, which goeth coatinually following it, {o that it is full Sea 
alway es in that part which lyeth under the Moon ; and becaule, 
char though ſhe be under the Horizon, yet nevertheleſſe the Tide 
recurncth, he ſaith rhat no more can be ſaid for the ſalving of that 
articular, ſave onely, that the Moon doth not onely naturally 
retain this faculry in her ſelf ; bur in this caſe hath power to con- 
ferit upon that degree of the Zodiack that is oppoſite unto it. 
Others , as I'belicve you know, do ſay that the Moon is able 
with her temperate heat to rareftic the Water , which being ra- 
ried, doth rhereupon flow. Nor hath there been wanting ſome 
that 

SaGr. I pray you Simplicius let us hear no more of them, 
for I do not think ic 15 worth the while to walt time in relating 
them , or to |pend our breath in confuting them 3 and for your 
part, if you gave your aſſent toany of theſe or the like foole- 
tes, you did a great injury to your judgment, which neverthe- 
lefſe I acknowledg to be very piercing. 

Sar v. But that ama little more flegmatick than you, Sagre- 
dus , will ſpend a few words in favour of Simplicizs , if baply 
he chiaks that any probability is to be found in thoſe things that 
be hath related. | tay cherefore : The Waters, Simplicixs, that 
have rheir exteriour ſup-rticies higher , rep?] thoſe that are infe- 
riour to them, and lower ; but lo do not thoſe Waters that are 
of greateſt protundity ; 2nd the higher having once driven back 
the Jower , they in a ſhort time grow quiet and* leyel. This 
your Peripatetick, muſt needs be of an opinion, that all the Lakes 
mn the World that are ia acalme, and thatall the Seas where 
the ebbing and flowing is inſenſible , are level in their bottoms; 
but 1 was ſo ſimple , that | perſwaded my (elf that had we no 0- 
ther plummet to ſound with, the Ifles that advance ſo high a- 
bove Water , had becn a ſufficient evidence of the unevenneſſe 
of their borromes. To that Prelate 1 could fay that the Moon 
runneth every day along the whole Mediterrane , and yet its 
Waters do not rife thereupon , ſave onely in the very extream 
bound; of it Eaſtward , and hzre to us at Venice. And for thoſe 
that make the Moons temperate heat able to make the Watet 
lwell, bid them put fire under a Kettle full of Water , and hold 


theit 


333 


The canſe of 
ebbing and 


the 
flowing aſcribed to 
the CMoon by 4 


certain Pre(ate. 


Hicronymus Bore 
rius and other Pee 
ripatericks refty it 
to the temperate 
beat of the Moon, 


aAnſwert to the 
vanities alledged 
4s Carſes of the eb+ 


bing and flowing, 


+ Or rather 
ſmooth, 


The Iſles are to- 
hens of the mune- 


venneſſe of the 
bettomes of ' Su4s, 


| | 


394 


Poetich wits of 
two kinds. 


Tr*#th bath not 
fo little light as 
not to be diſcover- 
ed amidſt the um- 
brages of fal- 
ſhoods. 


Ariſcotle Holdeth 
theſe effils to be 
miraculow , of 
which the cauſes 
#10 unknown. 


G. Gatltaus, bis Syſteme. 


their right band therein till that the Water by reaſon of the hear 
do riſe but one ſole inch , and then let them rake ir out, ang 
write off the tumefaftion of the Sea. Or at leaſt deſire them to 
ſhew you how the Moon doth to raretie a certain part of the 
Watcrs , and not the remainder; as for inſtance, thele here of 
Venice , and not thoſe of Ancona, Naples, Genova : the truth is 
Poctick Wits are of two kinds, ſome are ready and apt to 
invent Fables, and others diſpoſed and inclined to believe them. 
S1my. I bclievc that no man belicveth Fables, fo long as he 
knows them to be ſo; aud of the opinions concerning the cauſes - 
of ebbing and flowing , which are many , becauſe I know that of 
one ſivugle cffc& there 1s bur one (ingle cauſe that is true and pri- 
mary, I unde; ſtand very well, and am certain that but one alone 
at the moſt can be true, and for all the reſt I am ſure that they are 
fabulous, and falſe ; and its poſſible that the true one may not be 
among thole that have been hicherto produced 3 nay l verily be- 
lieve that itis not , for it would be very ſtrange that the truth 
ſhould have (o little light, as that it ſhould not be viſible amongſt 
the umbrages of ſo many falſhoods. But this I ſhall ſay with the 
liberty that is permitt. d amongſt us, that the introduQtion of the 
Earths motion, and the making it the cauſe of the ebbing and 
flowing of Tides, ſeemeth to me as yet a conjecture no lefle fas 
bulous than the reſt of thoſe that I have heard; and if there 
ſhould not be propoſed to me realons more conformable to natu- 
ral matters, I would without any more ado proceed to believe 
this to be a ſupernatural effe&, and therefore miraculous , and 
unſearchable to the underſtandings of men, as infinite others there 
are, that uinmediately depend on the Omnipotent hand of God. 
SaGr You argue very prudently , and according to the 
DoErine of Ariſtotle, who you know in the beginning of his 
mechanical queſtions referreth thoſe things to a Miracle, the 
cauſes whereof are occult. Bur that the cauſe of the ebbing and 
flowing is one of thoſe that are not to be found out, I believe 
you have no greater proof than onely that you lee , that amongſt 
all choſe that have hitherto been produced for true cauſes there- 
of , there is not one wherewith , working by what artifice you 
will, we arc able to repreſent ſuch an effe&; in regard that net- 
ther with the light of the Moon nor of the Sun , nor with 
temperate heats, nor with different profundities , ſhall one ever 
artificially make the Water conteined in an immoveable Veſlel 
to run one way or another, and to ebbe and flow in one place, 
and not in another. But if without any other artifice, but with 
the onely moving of the Veſſel, I am able punQually to repre- 


ſent all thoſe mutations that are obſerved in the Sea Water » why 
will you rcfuſe this reaſon and run to a Miracle ? 


S1MP»+ 


Driatocue. LV. 


vv. I willcuntoa Miracle ſtill, if you do not with ſome 
«her natural caules, belides thar of the motion of the Veſſels of 
he Sca- water difſwade me from it ; for I know that thoſe Veflels 
nove not, 10 regard rhat all the entire Ferreſtrial Globe is natu- 
ally immoveable. I | 

$1, v. But do not you think, thar the Terreſtrial Globe might 
ſupernaturally, that is, by the ablolute power of God, be madc 
moveable ? '$1ny. Whodoubts it ? 

Sauv. Then Simplicins, ſecing that to make the: flux and 
reflux of the Seca, 1t is neceſſary to introduce a Miracle, let us 
{uppole the Earth ro move miraculouſly, upon the motion of 
which the Sea moveth naturally : and this effect ſhall be alſo the 
more ſimple; and I may fay natural, amongft the miraculous o- 
perations, Hn that the making a Globe to move round, of which 
kind we ſee many others to move, 1s lefſe difficult than to make 
in mmenle maſſe of warer go forwards and backwards, in one 
place more {witrly, and in another lefſe, and to. rile ant fall in 
lome places more 3 1n tome lefle, and 1n {ome not at all': and to 
work all thee different effeAs in one and 'the {ame Veſlel that 
containeth it : beſides; that thele are l{everal Miracles, and thar 
is but one enely. And here it may be added, that the Miracle 
of making--rhe water ro move 1s accompamed with' another, 
namely , the holding of the Earth ftedfaſt againſt impetuoſiries 
of the water , able ro make it {wage {ometimes one way, and 
ſometimes another , if it were not miraculouſly kept to rights. 

$xaGk. Good Simplicizs, let us for the preſent ſuſpend our 
judgement about ſentencing the new opinion to be vain that Sal- 
vidtss is about ro explicate unto us, nor let us fo haſtily flye out 
into paſſion like the {colding overgrown Haggs : and as for the 
Miracle, we may as well recurre to it when we have done hea- 
mgthe Diſcourſes contained within the bounds of natural cau- 
les: though to ſpeak freely, all the Works of nature, or rather 
of God, are in my judgement miraculous. 

Sar v- And 1am of the {ame opinion; nor doth my ſaying, 
that the motion of the Farth is the Natural cauſe of the ebbin 
and flowing, hinder, but that the {aid motion of the Earth may 
be miraculous. Now reatſuming our Argument, I apply, and 
once apain affirm, that it hath been hithertounknown how it 
might be that the Waters contained in our Mediterranean 
*traights ſhould make thoſe motions, as we ſee it doth, if ſo be 
the (aid Straight, or containing \ elſe] were immoyeable. And 
that which makes the difficulty , and rendrerh this matrer inextri- 
cable, are the things which I amabour to ſpeak of, and which 
are daily obſerved. Therefore lend me your attention. 

We are here in Venice, where at this time the Waters are low, 
Cce the 


ut He rn ot Roe - —_ —_ 


335 - 


It u proved 
im "9ſſivle that 
there (hould natu- 
rally be any ebbiug 
and flowing ” the 
Earth being im- 
moveable, 


: Palms, 


+ Lies is a fair 
Port in the Vene- 
tian Gulph, lying 
N. E. from rhe 
Cy. 


ing within the bounds of Nature. 


G. Gatitxus, his Syſteme. 


the Sea calm, the Air tranquil ; ſuppoſe it to be young floog 
and that in the term of five or (ix hours the water dorife ten 
* hand breadths and more 3 that riſe is not made by the $f 
water, which was ſaid to be rarefied, but iris done by the acce. 
fion of new Water : Water of the {ame ſort with the former 
of the ſame brackiſhneſs, of the ſame denſity, of the ſame 
weight : Ships, S:mplicizs, float therein as in the former, wich- 
out drawing an hairs breadth more water 3 a Barrel of this ſecond 
doth not weigh one ſingle grain more or leſs than ſuch another 
quantity of the other , and retaineth the lame coldneſs without 
the leaſt alteration: And it 1s, in a word, Water newly and viſj- 
bly entred by the Channels and Mouth of the * Lio. Conſider 
now, how and from whence it came thither. Are there happly 
hereabouts any Gulphs or Whirle-pools in the bottom of the 
Sea , by which the Earth drinketh in and ſpueth out the Water, 
breathing as ic weie a great and monſtruous Whale ? Bur if this 
be ſo, how comes it that the Water doth not flow in the ſpace of 
ſix hours in Ancona, in * Raguſa, in Corfu, where the Tide is ve- 
ry ſmall, and happly unoblervable ? Who will invent a way to 
pour new Water into an immoveable Veſſel, and ro make that 
it riſe onely in one determinate part of it, andin other places 
not? Will you ſay, that this new Water is borrowed from the 
Ocean, being brought in by the Straight of Grbraltar ? This 
will not remove the doubt aforeſaid , but will beget a greater. 
And firſt tell me what ought to be the current of that Water, 
that entering at the Straights mouth , is carried in ſix hours to 
the remoteſt Creeks of the Mediterrane , at a diſtance of two 
or three thouſand Miles, and that returneth the ſame ſpace again 
in alike time at its going back ? What would Ships do that lye out 
at Sea? What would become of thoſe that ſhould be in the 
Straights-mouth 1n a continual precipice of a vaſt accumulation of 
Waters, thar entering in at a Channel but eight Mile: broad, is to 
give admittance to ſo much Water as in fix hours ovet-floweth a 
rract of many hundred Miles broad, 8 thouſands in length? What 
Tygre , what Falcon runneth or flyeth with ſo much ſwiftnels ? 
With the ſwifrneſs, I ſay, of above 400 Miles an hour. The cur- 
rents run (nor can it be denied) the long-wayes of the Gulph,but 
{o ſlowly, as that a Boat with Oars will out-go them, though in- 
deed not without defalking tor their wanderings. Moreover,if this 
Water come in at the Straight , the other doubt yet remaineth, 
namely,how'it cometh to flow here ſo high in a place ſo remote, 
without firſt riting a like or greater height in the parts more adja- 
cent? In a word, cannot think that either obſtinacy,or ſharpnels 
of wit can ever find an anſwer to theſe Obje&ions, nor conle- 
quently to maintain the ſtability of the Earth againſt them, keep- 


SAGR. 


Diartocus. L V. 
04G 8. I have all the while perfealy apprehended you 1n this; 


ind 1 ſtand greedily attending ro hear in what manner theſe won- 
ders may occur without obſtruQion from the motion already al- 
ſigned ro the Earth. NN ot ER DO Ih 
Sat v. Thele effeQs being to enſue in conſequence of the mo- 
tons that naturally agree with the Earch, it is neceſſary that they 
not onely meet with no impediment or obſtacle,but that they do 
follow eaſily, & not onely that they follow with facility,but with 
neceſſity,ſo as that it is impoſſible thar it ſhould ſucceed otherwiſe, 
for ſuch is the property & condition of rhings natural 8 true. Ha- 
ving therefore ſhewen the impoſſibility of rendring a reaſon of the 
motions dilcerncd in the Waters, & at the ſame time to maintain 
che immobility of the veflel that containeth themawe may proceed 
toenquire, whether the mobility of the Container may produce 
che required effe&, in the manner that 1t is oblerved to evene. 
Two kinds of motions may be conterred upon a Veſlel, where- 
by the Water therein contained, miay 4% i a Th of flu- 
Quatiog in it, one while towards one fide, and another while 
towards another 3 and there one while to ebbe, and another 
while to low. The firſt is, when firſt one, and then another of 
thoſe (ides is declined, for then the Water running towards the 
inclining (ide , will alternately be higher and lower , ſometimes 
on one (ide, and ſometimes on another. But becauſe that this 
riſing and abativg is no other than a receſſion and acceſſion to the 
centre of the Earth,ſuch a motion cannot be aſcribed to the Cavi- 
ties of the ſajd Earth, that are the Veſſels which contain the Wa- 
ters ; the parts of which Veſſel] cannot by any whatſoever motion 
aſſigned to the Earth , be made to approach or recede from the 
centre of the ſame: The other ſort of motion 1s, when the 
Veſſel moveth (without inclining in the leaſt) with a progreſſive 
motion, not uniform, but that changeth velocity, by ſometimes 
xccellerating, and other times retarding : from which diſparity 
it would follow, that the V Vater contained in the Veſſel its true, 
but not fixed faſt to it, as its other ſolid parts, but by reaſon of 
5 fluidity , as if it were ſeparated and at liberty , and not obli- 
ped to follow all the mutations of its Container, in the retardation 
of the Veſſel, it keeping part of the iztpetus before conceived , 
would run towards the the preceding part , whereupon it would 
of neceſliry come to riſe ; and on the contrary, if new velocity 
ſhould be added to the Veſſel, with retaining parts of its cardity, 
ſaying ſomewhat behind , before ir could habituate it ſelf to the 
new impets, it would hang back rowards the followin part 8 
Where it would come to rilc ſomething. The which IN we 


may plainly declarc and make out ta the Senſe by the example of 
one of thoſe ſame Barks yonder, which contiiually come from 
Ccc 2 


* Liz%a- 


387 


True and nat» 
ral ifs follow 
without difficulty, 


Two ſorts of 
motions of the con« 
taining Ve ſelynay 
make the contaie 


ned water to riſe 
and fall, 


The Cavities of 
the Earth cannot 
approach or fo far- 
they from. the cen 
re of the ſame. 


The progpeſſive 


and untven motion 
may make the wa- 
ter contained. in 4 


Veſſel to run te 
and fro, 


388 G. Gairizus , his Syſteme. 


+} A Town ly- * Liz%a- Fuſina,laden with freſh water,for the ſervice of the City 
ing S.E. of Fem* 1 et us therefore fancy one of thoſe Barks, to come from thence 
| with moderate velocity along the Lake,carrying the water gently 
of which ir is full : and then either by running a ground, or b 

ſome other impediment that it ſhall meer with, let it be notably 

retarded. The water thercin contained ſhall not, by that mean; 

loſe, as the Bark doth, its pre-conceived impetus, but retainin 

the ſame, ſhall run forwards towards the prow, where it ſhalj 
riſe notably, falling as much a ſtern. Bur if, on the contrary, 
| the ſaid Bark, in the midſt of its {mooth courſe, ſhall have a new 
| velocity, with notable augmentation added to it, the water con- 
1 tained b-fore it can habituare it ſelf thereto, continuing in its 
1 tardity , ſhall ſtay behinde y namely a ſtern, where of conſe- 
{| quence it ſhall mount, and abate for the {ame at the prow. This 
effe& is undoubted and manifeſt, and may hourly be experimen- 

ted; in which [ deſire that for the preſent three particulars may 

be noted. The flift 1s, that to make the water to rife on one 

fide of the veſſel, there is no need of new water, nor thatit run 

thither, forſaking the other fide, The tecond 1s, that the water 
in the middle doth not riſe or fall notably, unlefle the courſe of 
the Bark were not beforc that very {wifc, and the ſhock or other 
arreſt that held it exceeding ſtrong and ſudden, in which caſe its 

poſſible, that not only all the water might run forwards, but 

that the greater part thereof might iſſue forth of the Bark : and 

the ſame allo would enſue, whilſt that being under ſail in a 
(mooth courſe, a moſt violent zmpets ſhould, upon an inſtant, 

overtake it : But when to its calme motion there 1s added a mo- 

derate retardation or incitation, the middle parts (as I ſaid) un- 

obſervedly riſe and fall : and the other parts, according as they 

are neerer to the middle, riſe the lefſe ; and the more remote, 
more. The third is, that whereas the parts about the midſt do 

make little alteration in riſing and falling, in reſpe& of the wa- 
ters of the ſides ; on the contrary, they run forwards and back- 

wards very much, in compariſon of the extreams. Now , my 
Maſters, that which the Back doth, in reſpe& of the water by it 

contained, and that which the water contained doth, in re- 

{pe& of the Bark its container, is the (elf-ſame, to an hair, with 

that which the Mediterranean Veſlel doth, in reſpe& of the wa- 

ters 1n 1t contained, and that which the waters contained do, 1n 

The part: of te reſpeR of rhe Mediterranean Veſlel their container. It follow- 
terreſtrial _— cth now that we demonſtrate how, and in what manner it is true, 
py pe pt that the Mediterrane, and all the other Straits; and in a word, 
on, all the parts of the Earth do all move, with a motion notably 
uneven, though no motion that is not regular and uniforme, 1s 


thereby aſſigned to all the ſaid Globe taken colle&ively. 


OT  —_—_—_— nn _ 


Qi MP+ 


Diratocus IIL 


31 v. This Propoſition, at firſt ſight to me, thar am neither 
Geometrician nor Aſtronomer, hath the appearance of a very 
'eat Paradox; and if it ſhould be true, that the motion of the 
whole, being regular, that of the parts, which are all uniced to 
their whole, may be irregular, the Paradox will overthrow the 
Axiome that affirmeth, Eandemr eſſe rationem totius 9+ par- 
tiKM. 

S$ atv. I will demonſtrate my Paradox, and leave it to- your 
care, Simplicius, to defend the Axiome from it, or elle -to re- 
concile them; and my demonſtration ſhall be ſhort and fa- 
miliar, depending on the things largely handled in our prece- 
dent conferences, without introducing the leaſt ſyllable, in fa- 
your of the flux and reflux. | 

We have ſaid, that the morions aſſigned to the Terreſtrial 
Globe are two , the firſt Annual, made by its centre about rhe 
circumference of the Grand Orb, under the Ecliptick, accordin 
tothe order of the Signes, that is, from Welt to Eaſt ; the other 
made by the {aid Globe revolving about its own centre in twenty 
four hours; and this hikewule | Has Welt to Eaſt : though a- 
bout an Axis {omcwhat inclined, and not equidiſtant from that 
of the Annual convertion. From the mixture of thele two mo- 
tions, each of it (elf uniform, I lay, that there doch reſult an 
uncven and deformed motion 1a the parts of the Earth. Which, 
that it may the more ealily be underſtood, 1 will explain, by 
drawing a Scheme thereof. And firſt, about the centre A [ in 
Fig. 1. of this Dialogue] I will deicribe the circumference of 
the Grand Orb BC, in which any point being taken, as B, 
about it as a centre we will deſcribe this leſſer circle DEF G, 
repreſenting the Terreſtcial Globe 3 the which we will ſuppoſe 
to run thorow the whole circumference of the Grand Orb, with 
its centre B, from the Weſt towards the Eaſt, that is, from the 
part B towards C; and morcover we will ſuppoſe the Terre- 
ſal Globe to turn about its own centre B likewiſe from Weſt 
to Eaſt , that is, according to the ſucceſſion of the points 
DEFG, in the ſpace of twenty four hours. But here we 
ought carefully to note, that a circle turning round upon its 
own centre, each part of it muſt, ar different times, move -with 
contrary Motions : the which is manifeſt, conſidering that whilſt 
the parts of the circumference, about the point D move to the 
left hand, that is, towards E, the oppoſite parts that are about F, 
approach to the right hand, that is, towards G; ſo that when 
the parts D ſhall bein F, their motion ſhall be contrary ro what 
It was before. when it was in D. Furthermore , the fame time 
that the parts E, deſcend, if | may fo ſpeak, towards F, thoſe in 


G aſcend towards D. tt bcing therefore preſuppoſed, that 


there 


339 


Demonſtrations 
how the parts of 
the terreſtriall 
Globe accelerate 
and ritard, 


The parts of 4 
Circle . regularly 
moved about its 
own centre move in 
divers times with 
Contrary motions. 


———_ 
———C——— —_ 
——  — —  —_ 


790 


the tw) m1110ns 
annnal and diur- 
val, cauſeth the 
inequality in the 
mntron of the parts 
of the terreftrial 
Globe. 


T he moſt potent 
and primary cauſe 
of the ebbing and 
flowing. 


G. Gatit®us, his Syfleme; 


Th- mixture of there are ſuch contrarietics of motions in the parts of the Terre. 


ſtrial Surface, whilſt it turneth round upon its own centre, it js 
necefſary, that in conjoy ning this Diutnal Motion, withthe other 
Annual, there do reſult an ablolute motion for the parts of the 
ſaid Terreſtrial Superticies, one while very accelerate, and ano. 
ther while as ſlow ayain. The which is manifeſt , conſidering 
firſt the parts about D> the ablolute motion of which ſhall be 
extream ſwift, as that which proceedeth from two motions made 
both. one way, namely , towards the left hand; the firſt of 
which is part of the Annual Motion, common to all the parts of 
the Globe, the other is that of the ſaid point D., carried likewiſe 
to the left, by the Diurnal Revolution 3 lo that, in this caſe, the 
Diarnal motion increaſeth and accelerateth the Annual. The 
contrary to which happeneth in the oppolite part F, which,whi'ſt 
it is by the common annual motion carried, together with the 
whole Globe, towards the left, it happeneth to be carried by the 
Diurnal converſion allo towards the right : fo that the Diur- 
nal motion by that means detracteth from the Annual , where- 
upon the abſolute morion, reſulting from the compolicion of both 
the other, is much retarded. Again, about the points E and G; 
the abſolute motion becometh in a manner equal to the ſimple 
Annual one, in regard that little or nothing increaſerh or dimi- 
niſheth it, as not tending either to the left hand, or to the right, 


| but downwards and upwards. We will conclude therefore, that 


like as it is true, that the motion of the whole Globe, and of 
each of its parts, would be equal and uniforme, in caſe they did 
move with one ſingle motion, whether it were the meer Annual, 
or the fingle Diurnal Revolution, ſo it is requiſite, that mixing 
thole two motions together, there do reſult thence for the parts 
F the ſaid Globe irregular motions, one while accelerated, and 
another while retarded, by means of the additions or ſubſtraki- 
ons of the Dijurnal converſion from the annual circulation. So 
that, if it be true (and moſt true it is, as experience proves ) that 
the acceleration and retardation of the motion of the Vel- 
ſel, makes water contained therein to run to and again the long 
wayes of it, and to rife and fall in its extreames, who will make 
(cruple of granting, that the ſaid effe& may, nay ought to ſuc- 
ceed 1n the Sea-waters, contained within their Veſſels, ſubze&t to 
luch like alterations, and eſpecially in thole that diſtend them- 
{elves long-wayes from Weſt to Eaſt, which is the courle that 
the motion of thoſe ſame Vellels ſteereth ? Now this is the 
molt potent and primary cauſe of the ebbing and flowing, with- 
out the which no ſuch effe& would enſue. But becauſe the par- 
ticular accidents are many and various, that in ſeveral places and 
rimes are obſerved , which muſt of neceſliry have dependance 

on 


Driatocus IV. 


on other different concomitant caules, although they ought all 
to have connexion with the primary ; therefore ir is convenient 
that we propound and examine the {cveral accidents that may 
be the cauſes of ſuch different effefs. 

The fuſt of which is, that when ever the water, by means of a 
notable retardation or acceleration of the motion of the Veſſel, 
its container, ſhall have acquired a cauſe of running towards this 
or that extream, and ſhall be raiſed in the one, and abated in the 
other, it ſhall not neverthelefle continue, for any time jn that 
ſtate, when once the primary caule 1s cealed: but by vertue of 
ics own gravity and natural inclination to level and grow, even it 
ſhall ſpeedily return backwards of its own accord, and, as being 
grave and fluid, ſhall not only move towards Equilibrium ; but 
being unpelled by its own zmpetrs, ſhall go beyond it, riſing in 
the part, where before it was loweſt ; nor ſhall it ſtay here, but 
returning backwards ancw, with more reiterated reciprocations of 
ts undulations, it ſhall give us to know, that it will not from a 
xelocity of motion, once conceived, reduce it f{elf, in an inſtant, 
> the privation thereof, and to the ſtate of reſt, but will ſucceſ- 
fively, by decreaſing a lictle and a little, reduce it ſelf unto the 
ſame, juſt in the ſame manner as we ice a weight hanging at a 
cord, atter it hath been once removed from its ſtate of reſt, that 
is, from its perpendicularity, of its own accord, to return thither 
and ſertle it ſelf, but not till ſuch time as it ſhall have often 
paſt to one fide, and to the other , with its reciprocall vi- 
brations. 

The ſecond accident to be obſerved is, that the before- 
declarcd reciprocations of motion come to be made and repeated 
with greater or lefſer frequency, that is, under ſhorter or Jonger 
times, according to the differeat lengths of the Veſſels contaia- 
ing the waters3 fo that in the ſhorter ſpaces the reciprocati- 
ons are more frequent, and in the longer more rare : jult as in 
the former example of pendent bodies, the vibrations of thoſe 
that are hanged to longer cords are ſeen to be lefſe frequent, 
than thoſe of them that hang at ſhorter ſtrings . 

And here, for a third obſervation, it is to be noted, that not 
onely the greater or lefſec length of the Veſſel is a cauſe that 
the water maketh its reciprocations under different times ; but 
the greater or leſſer profundity worketh the ſame effe&. And 
it happeneth, that of waters contained in receptacles of equall 
length, bur of unequal depth, that which ſhall be the deepeſt, 
maketh its undulations under ſhorter times, and the reciprocati- 
ons of the ſhallower waters are leſſe frequent. 

 Fonrthly, there are two effe&s worthy to be noted, and di- 
ligently oblerved, which the water worketh in thoſe its vibra« 
tions; 


Swndry accidents 
that happen in the 
ebbings & flowings 

The fir#t Acct 


dent. 


The Water rai- 
ſed in one end of 
the Veſſel returu- 
eth of its ſeif ro 
Aqulibrium, 


In the ſhorter 
V:fſcli the undula- 


0 
requent. 


LT 
more 


The 


waAareys arc 


greater 


profundicy maketh 
the undulations of 
waters more fre- 
quent. 


2G2 G. Garit#®us, his Sylme; 


- 


wat» riſeth & tions 3 the one is its rifing and falling alternately towards the 
falrh hag ” one and other extremity 3 the other 151ts moving and running, tg 
Veſel;and u=»b fo ſpeak, Horizontally torwards and backwards. Which two dif. 
hers fro m the fyxent motions differently reſide in divers parts of the Water : 
Xn: for its extream parts are thole which moſt eminently-riſe and fall; 
thoſe 1n the'middle never abtolutely moving upwards and downs 
wards ; of the reſt ſuccetlively thole that are neereſt. to the ex< 
treams riſe and fall proportionally more than the remote : but on 
the contrary, touching the other progreffive motion forwards 
and backwards, the middle parts move notably, going and re- 
turning, and the waters that are 1n the exrream parts gain no 
ground at all; lave one]y in cale that in their riſing they over- 
flow their banks, and break forth of their firſt channel and re- 
ceptacle'; but where there is the obſtacle of banks to keep them 
in, they oncly rilc and'fall ; which yet hindercth not the waters 
in the middle from flucuating to and again 3 which likewite 
the other parts do in proportion , undulating more- or lefle, 

according as they are neerer or more remore from the middle. 
An acciden of TRE fiith particular accident ought the more attentively to be 
the Earth; mvtious Conſidered, in that 1 15 impoſlible to reprelent the effeR& there- 
impoſſible ro be re IF by ' an.exper ment or example ; and the accident 1s this. In 


duced to pratlice 


by art, the veflels by us framed with art, and moved, as the above- 
named Bark, one while more; and another while lefle (wiftly, 


the acceleration and retardation 1s imparted in the {ame manner 
co all the veſſel, and to cvery part of it ; ſo that whillt ». g. the 
Bark forbeareth to move, the parts precedent retard no more 
than the ſubſequent, but all equally partake of the ſame re- 
cardment 3 and the felf-ſame holds true of the acceleration, 
namely, that conferring on the Bark a new caule of grea- 
rer velocity , the Prow and Paop both accelerate in one and 
the {ame manner. But in huge great veſſels, ſuch as are the very 
long bottomes of Seas, albeit they alſo are no other than cer- 
tam cavities made in the {olidity of the Terreſtrial Globe, 
it alwayes admirably happeneth, that their extreams do not 
unitedly equall, and at the ſame moments of time increaſe 
and diminthh theit motion, but it happeneth that when one of its 
cxtreames hath, by vertue of the commixtion of the two 
Motions, Diurnal, and Annual, greatly retarded its velocity, 
the other extream is animated with an extream {wift motion. 
\V hich for the better underſtanding of it we will explain real- 
luming a Scheme like to the former ; in which if we do but lup- 
pole a rra& of Sea to be long ; v. g. a fourth part , asis the arch 
B C [ in Fig. 2.] becauſe the parts B are, as hath been already 
declared , very \wift in motion, by reaſon of the union of the 


two'friottons diurgal and annual, towards one and the ſame vb 
ut 


but the part C at theſame-time: is-retarded: in its motion ,: as be 


ing deprive& of the progreſſion dependant on the diurnal:mbtion:. 


If” we {ppofe, ſay,” #tra& of Sea-as long as the arch BC, we 


Wave already ſeen; tht irs extreams ſhall move in the ſame time- 


with great incequaiity* And extrcamly diftcrenw would the velo- 
ies of 4traft of: Sexbe that 15 1h length atemicirele,, and pla- 
<4 in the poſition-B O BY in-regard that the extreamiB would: 
54 in a inoſtdecelerare moriofi'} 'and-the other D, in a-moſt flow: 
ohe ; ant? the intereb@drate parts. 'towards-C., . would be'iwv a 
moderate motion: © And according as the 1aidtrrafts of 'Seuiſhall 
be ſhortet they (hall 'feffe participate of this extravagant. ACci- 
&nt;, of 'badoy in'Tome hours of the day with their parts diverſly 
feed by yelotity'aad'tardity of motion. Sb-that, if,as in thi firſt 
ale, we ({eeby expetienge: that the acceleration: and rerardation , 
chough equally imparted to all rhe parts of i the comeining Vellel, 
1;'the cautfe that the/watei'comramed;flucuates tov and again;what 
my we” think+would'happen in- a Veſſel ſo admirably diſpoſed; 
char retardation- and acecleration iof moriow 1s' very: unequally. 
oncributed ro'its payrs!? Certainly we mult needs grant that 
ereater'afhd* more wonderfyl cauſes of the -commotions- in' the 
Water ougtit' ro be-/looked for. 'And'though ic may ſeem im- 
poſſible to ſore; that in artificial Machines and Veſlcls we:ſhould 
be able tb/6«periment- the effeces/ of) ſuch ar accident ;-yert-ne+ 
vertheleſſe it is not abſolutely impoſſible ro be done ; and I have 
by me the model of an Engine, in+ which the effect of theſe admi- 
fable commixtions'of motions:may be-parricularly obſerved} But 
as to what” concerns our” preſent ' parpole , that which you may 
have hirherto comprehended with ' your imagination may ſuf- 
ice. | | | 

Sa G x. I'for my own'particular very well conceive that this 
admirable: accidenr ought neceflarily to evene 19 the Seraights of 
Sas , andeſpecally in'thofe rhat diſtend themſelves for a great 
length from VVeſt'to:Eaft ; namely according to the courſe of 
the motions of the Terreſtmnal Globe; and as it is in a certain 
manner unthought of , and without a. preſident among the moti- 
ons poſſible to be made by us, ſoitis not hard for me to believe, 
that effe&s may be derived from the ſame, which are not to- be + 
mitated by our artificial experiments. 

Satv. Theſe things being declared , it 1s time that we pro- 
ceed ro examine the particular accidents, which, together with 
their diverfities , are obſerved by experience in the ebbing'and 
flowing of the waters. And firſt we need not think it hard to 
pueſſe whence it happeneth, that in Lakes, Pooles;and alſo in the 
leffer Seas there is no notable flux and reflux ; the which hath 
two very ſoltd reaſons. The one is; that by- reafon of the ſhort- 

: D dd nefle 


393 


Reaſons renew- 
ed of the particn- 
lar accidents ob- 


ſerved in the eb- 
bings and flowings, 


= 
- 
- x ts” X 


394 


Second caves 
why tn ſmall Seas 
and in Lakes there 
are no ebbings and 
flowings. 


G. Gar 1t«us , his Syſteme. 


neſle of the Veſſel , in its acyuining 1n {everal hours of the q; 
ſeveral degrees of velocity , they are with, very little difference 
acquired by all its parts 3 tor as well the precedent az. the ſubſe. 
quent, that is to lay, both the. Eaſtern and. VVeſtern parts, dg 
accelerate and retard almoſt:.in- the ſame manner ;, agd witha! 
making that alteration by little and little, /and not by giying the 
motion of the contcining Veſſel a ſudden check, and retard. 
ment, :or a ſudden and great impulle or acceleration; both jr 
and all its parts , come to be gently and equally impreſſed with 
the ſame degrees of velocity ; from which uniformity i follow. 
eth, that allo the contcined water with but {mall reſiſtance agd 
oppolition, receiverh the {ame impreſlions , and by conſequence 
doth give but yery obſcure fignes of irs riſing or falling, or of its 
running towards one part or another. [The which effctt is likewiſe 
manifeſtly: to be ſecn in the lutle artificial Veſſels, wherein the 
contained water doth receive the ſelf ſame impreſſipns of yeloci- 
ty 3. when ever the acceleration and retargation is made by gentle. 
and uniform proportion. But in the Strazghts and Bays that for a 
great length diſtend themſelyes. from Eaſt to Weſt , the accele- 
ration/ and retardation is more notable and more uneven, for 
that one of its extreams ſhall be much retarded in motion, and 
the other ſhall at the ſame rime move very ſwiftly : The reci- 
procal libration or.levelling of the water proceeding from the im- 
pets that ir had conceived from the motion of its container, 
The which libration, as hath been noted , hath its undulations 
very frequent in ſmall Veſſels; from whence enſues, that though 
there do reſide in the Terreſtrial motions the caule of confer- 
ring on the waters a motion onely from twelve hours to twelve 
hours, for that the motion of the conteining Veſſels do ex- 
treamly accelerate and extreamly retard but once every day, 
and no-more 3 yet-nevertheleſſe this ſame ſecond cauſe depend- 
ing on the gravity of the water which ſtriveth to reduce it {elf to 
equilibration , and that according to the ſhortneſle of the Vel- 
{el hath ics reciprocations of one, two, three, or more hours, this 
intermixing with the firſt, which alſo it ſelf in finall Veſſels is 
very little , it becommeth upon the whole altogether inſcaſible. 
For the primary cauſe , which hath the periods of twelve hours, 
having not made an cnd of imprinting the precedent commoti- 
on, it is overtaken and oppoled by the other ſecond , depen- 
dant on the waters own weight , which according to the brevity 
and profundity of the Veſſcl, hath the time of its undulations of 
one, two, three, four z or more hours ; and this contending 
with the other former one, diſturberth and removeth it , not per- 
mitting it to come to the height , no nor to the half of its mot!- 
on ; and by this conteſtation the evidence of the ebbing 2a” 
S: oW- 


Diatoccus. 1 V, 


owing 18 wholly annihilated , or at leaſt very much obſcured. 
| patie by che continual alteration of the air ; which diſquieting 
the water, Permits us not to come to a Ccrtainty, whethc rany, 
rhough but (mall , encreaſe or abatement of half an inch, or 
if: , do relide in the Straights , or receptacles of watcr not a- 
love a degree or two IN length. 

| come 1n the ſecond place to refolve the queſtion , why, there 
not rcliding any vertue in the primary principle of commoving 


395 


The reaſon gi- 


ven, why the <= 


the waters, fave onely every twelve hours , thatis to lay, once #%g- «nd flewings, 


by the greateſt velocity, and once by the greateſt tardity of 
mation 3 the cbbings and flowings ſhould yet neverthelefle ap- 
pcar to be every (ix hours. To which is anlwercd , that this de- 
termination canaot any wayes be taken from the primary cauſe 
oacly ; but there 1s a necellity of introducing the ſecondary cau- 
les, as namely the greater or lefle length of the Veſlels , and 
the greater or lefſe depth of the waters in them conteined. 
Which cauſes although they have not any operation in the moti- 
ons of the waters, thoſe operations bel nging to the {ole prima- 
;y cauſe, without which no ebbing or flowing would happen, 
yet nevertheleſle they have a principal ſhare in determining the 
MCs Or periods of the reciprocations , and herein their influ- 
ence is ſo poweriul , that the primary cauſe muſt of force give 
way unro them. The period of fix hours therefore is no more 
prop-r or natural than thoſe of other intervals of times , though 
indeed its the moſt obſerved , as agreeing with our Mediterrane, 
which was the onely Sea that for many Ages was navigated : 
though neither is that period obſerved in all its parts 3 for 
that in ſome more anguſt places , ſuch as are the Helles 
ſpom ; and the Agean Sea , the periods are much ſhorter , 
and alſo very divers amongſt themſelves ; for which diver- 
tics , and their cauſes incomprehenlible to Ariſtotle , ſome 
ay , that after he had a long time obſerved it upon ſome 
ciffes of Negropont , being brought to deſperation , he threw 
himſelf into the adjoyning Exripxs , and voluntarily drowned 
hunſe}f. | 
[n the third place we have the reaſon ready at hand, whence 

it commeth to paſſe, that ſome Seas, although very long , as is 
the Red Sea, are almoſt altogether exempt from Tides , which 
happ:neth becauſe their length extendeth not from Eaſt to 
Weſt , but rather tranſverſly from the Southeaſt to the North- 
weſt ; but the motions of the Earth going from Weſt to Eaſt ; 
the impulſes of the water, by that means, alwayes happen to fall 
in the Meridians, and do not move from parallel to parallel ; 
inlomuch that in the Seas that extend themſelves athwart to- 
wards the Poles , and that the contrary way are narrow , thert is 
Ddd 3 ng 


for the moſt yart, 
are 


every fir 


howrt:. 


The cauſe why 
ſome Seas, though 


very long, ſuffer 
no ebbing a”d 
flowing, 


— n —— — — 


395 


Ebbings and 


flowings why 1vea- 


tri im the extve- 
mities of G ulphs, 
ard leaſt n the 
muddle parts- 


W, ) ” nAyrow 
tlaces the courſe 
of the waters us 
move ſwift than in 
larger, 


E A diſcuſſion of 


p15 abſtruce 
15 -bſecved 
ebbing and 


jw'g. 


G. Gailizus, his Syſteme. 


no cauſe of ebbing and flowing , ſave onely by the participation 
of another Sea , wherewith it hath communication , that is ſub. 
zed& to great commotions. | 

In the fourth place we ſhall very eafily find out the reaſon 
why the fluxes and refluxes are greateſt, as/to the waters riſin 
and falling in the utmoſt extremities of Gulphs, and leaſt in the 
intermediate pa:ts 3 as daily experience eweth here in Venice, 
lying in the farther end of the Adriatick, Sea , where that diffe. 
rence commonly amounts to five or fix feet ; but in the places 
of the Mcditerrane , far diſtint from the extreams , that mutati. 
on is very {mall , as in the Ifles of Corſica and Sardinni , and 
in the Strands of Rome aud Ligornc , where it exceeds nat half a 
foot ; we . oh underſtand allo, why on the contrary , where 
the riſings aud fallings are {mall , the courles and recourles are 
great: | ſay itis ancalie thing to underſtand the cauſes of theſe 
accidents , lecing that we meet with many manifeſt occurrences 
of the ſame nature in every kind of Vellel by us artificially com- 
polcd , in which the ſame effe&s are obſerved naturally to fol- 
low upon our moving it unevenly, that 1s, one while faſter, and 
another while ſlower: 

Moreover , conſidering in the filth place , that the ſame 
quantity of Water being moved, though but gently, in a ſpatious 
Channel , comming afterwards to go through a narrow paflage, 
will of neceſlity run,with great violence, we ſhall not finde it hard 
to comprehend the cauſe of the great Currents that are made 
in the narrow Channel that ſeparateth Calabria from Sicilia : 
for that all the Waters that,. by 'the ſpaciouſneſſe of the Ile, 
and by the Jonzck, Gulph, happens to be pent in the Eaſtern 
part of the Sea, though it do in that, by reaſon of its largeneſs, 
gently deſcend towards che Weſt, yet nevertheleſſe, in that it 
is pent up in the Boſphorxs, it floweth with great violence be- 
xween Scella and Caribdss, and maketh a great agitation. Like to 
which, and much greater, 1s {aid to be betwixt Africa and the 
great Ifle of St. Lorenzo, where the Waters of the two vaſt 
Seas, Indian and Ethopick,, that lie round it, muſt needs be 
ſtraighrned into a lefſe Channel between the ſaid Ifle and the 
Ethiopian Coaſt. And the Currents muſt needs be very great 
in the Straights of - Megallanes, which joyne together the 
vaſt Oceans of Ethiopia, and Del Zur, called alſo the Pacifick 
Sea. F | 

It follows now, in the ſixth place, that to render a reaſon of 
ſome more abſtruſe and incredible accidents, which are obſer- 
ved upon this occafion, we make a conſiderable refletion upon 
the two principal cauſes of ebbings and flowings, afterwards 


compounding and mixing them together. The firſt and ny 
; O 


Driatocue IV, 

of which is (as hath often been ſaid) the determinate accelera« 
tion arid retardation of the parts of the Earth, from whence 
the Waters have a determinate period put to their decurſions 
:owards the Eaſt, and return towards the Weſt, in the time of 
twenty four hours. The other 18 that which dependeth on the pro- 
per gravity of the Water, which being once commovyed by the 
primary Caule, ſecketh, in rhe next place, to reduce it ſelf to A- 
quilibrium, with iterated recIProcations 3 which are not deter- 
mined by one ſole and prefixed time ; but have as many varie- 
ties of times as are the different lengths and profundinies of the 
receptacles, and Straights of Scas; and by what dependcth on 
this ſecond principle, they would ebbe and flow, ſome in one 
hour, others in two, 1: tour, 1n fix, 1a eight, in ten, &c. Now if 
we begin to put together the tirſt caule, which hath its ſet Period 
from twelve hours to twelve hours, wich ſome one of the ſecon- 
dary, that hath its Period werb. grat. from five hours to five 
hours, 1t would come to paſle, that at ſometimes the primary 
cauſe and ſecondary would accord to make impulſes both one 
the ſame way 3 and in this conCurrency, and (as one may call 
it) unanunous conſpiration the flowings ſhall be great. At other 
times it happening that the primary impulſe doth, in a certain 
manner, oppole that which the ſecondary Period would make, 
and in this conteſt one of the Principles being taken away, that 
which the other would give, will weaken the commotion of the 
Waters, and the Sea will return to a very tranquil Srate, and 
almoſt immoveable. And at other times, according as the two 
aforeſaid Principles ſhall neither alcogether conteſt, nor altoge- 
ther concur, there ſhall be other kinds of alterations made in 
the increaſe and diminution of the ebbing and flowing. It may 
likewiſe fall out that, two Seas , conſiderably great and which 
communicate by ſome nartow Channel, may chance to have, by 
reaſon of the mixtion of the two Principles of motion , one 
auſe to flow at the rime that the other hath cauſe to move a 
contfary way 3 in which Caſe in the Channel, whereby they. diſ- 
imbogue themſelves into each other, there do extraordinary 
conturbations inſue, with oppoſite and vortick motions , 4nd 
moſt dangerous boilings and breakings , as frequent relations 
and experiences do aflure us. From! ſuch like diſcordant moti- 
ons, dependent not onely on the differenr poſitions and longi- 
tudes, but very much alfo'upon the different profundities of the 
Seas, which have the ſaid intercourſe there do happen at fome- 
times different cormmotions in the Waters, irregular, and that 
Can be reduced to no rules of obſervation, the reaſons of which 
have much troubled, and alwayes do trouble Mariners, for that 
they meet with them without ſeeing either impulſe” of winds, or 
| other 


_—_ —_— x 


399 


The cauſe why, 


i” ſome narrow 


(hannels, we ſee 
the Sea-waters 1141 
always one wAy. 


® Or current, 


G. Gaiit=us, his Syſcme; 


other eminent acrecal alteration that might occaſion the ſame : of 
which diſturbance of the Air we ought ro make great account 
in other accidents, and to' take it for a third and accidenta} 
cauſe, able to alter very much the oblervation of the «ffcs ge. 
pending on the {econdary and more eflential cauſes. And it ;; 
not to be doubted, but that impetuous windes, continuing tg 
blow, for example, from the Eaſt, they ſhall retein the Water, 
and prohibit the reflux or cbbing ; whereupon the ſecond and 
third reply of the flux or tide overtaking tht former, at the 
hours prefixed, they will ſwell very high ; and being thus bora 
up for ſome daycs, by the ſtrength of the Winds, they ſhall riſe 
more than uſual, making extraordinary inundations. 
We ought allo, and this ſhall ſerve for a ſeventh Probleme) 
to take notice of another cauſe of motion dependant on the 
great abundance of the Waters of great Rivers that diſcharge 
themſelves into Seas of no great capacity, whereupon in the 
Straits or Boſphori that communicate with thole Seas, the Waters 
are ſeen to run always one Way : asit happeneth in the Thraci- 
an Boſpnorus below Conftantinople , where the water alwayes 
runneth from the Black-Sea, towards the Propontis : For in the 
ſaid Black: Sea by reaſon of its ſhortnefſe , the principal cauſes 
of cbbing and flowing are but of ſmall force. But, on the con- 
trary , very great Rivers falling into the ſame , thoſe huge de- 
fluxions of water being to paſle and diſgorge themlelves by the 
the Straight, the *courſe is there very notable and alwayes to- 
wards the South. Where moreover we ought to take notice, that 
the {aid Straight or Channel , albeit very narrow , is not ſubje& 
to perturbations , as the Straight of Sc:{la and Carybdss ; for that 
t hat hath the Black-Sea above towards the North , and the Pro- 
pontzs, the Agean, and the Mediterranean Seas: joy ned unto it, 
though by a long craft towards the South ; but now, as we have 
obſerved , the Seas, though of never ſo great length, lying North 
and South , are not much ſubjce& to ebbings and flowings 3 but 
becaule the Sicilian Straight is ſituate between the parts of the 
Mediterrane diſtended for a long tra& or diſtance from Weſt to 
Eaſt, that 1s, according to the courſe of the fluxes and refluxes 
therefore in this the agitations are very great; and would be 
much more violent between Hercules Pillars , in caſe the 
Straight of Gibraltar did open lefle ; and thoſe of the Straight of 
Magellanes are reported to be extraordinary violent. | 
This is what, for the preſent, cometh into my mind to ſay unto 
you about the cauſes of this firſt period diurnal of the Tide, and 
its various accidents , touching which, if you have any thing to 
offer , you may let us hear it, that ſo we may afterwards pro- 
cced to the other two periods, monethly and annual. 


SIMP. 


Diatocue IV. 


$1 mx. In my opinion, it cannot be denied, but that Your dil. 
courſe carrieth with it much of probability, arguing, as. we ſay, 
ex ſuppoſttione , namely, granting that the Earth moyeth with 
the two motions aſligned it by Copernic#s : but if that motion 
be diſproved, all that you have ſaid is vain, and infignificant : 
and for the diſproval of that Hypotheſss, 1t is very manifeſtly 


Va 


399 


The Hypotheſis 
the Earth; = 


ity taken in fa- 
vouy of the Tide, 


kiaced by your Diſcourſe it ſelf. . You, with the ſuppoſition of «p;1/c4. 


the two Terreſtrial motions, give a realon of the ebbing and 
flowing 3 23nd then again, arguing circularly, from the ebbing 
and flowing}, draw the reaſon and confirmation of thoſe very 
motions 3, aud ſo proceeding to a more ſpecious Diſcourſe, you 
lay that the Water, az being a fluid body, and not tenaciouſly 
annexed to the Earth, is not conſtrained panQually to obey eve- 
ry of its motions, from which you afterwards infer its ebbing 
and lowing, Now I, according to your own method, argue 
the quite contrary, and lay 3 the Air is much more tenuous, and 
fuid thag.the Water,; and lefle annexed to the Earths ſyperfici- 
&, to which the Wager, if it be for nothing elſe, yet by reaſon 
of 1ts gravity that preſſeth down upon the ſame more than the 
light Air,  adbereth 3 therefore the Air is much obliged to fol- 
low the 'motions of -the Earth : and therefore were it {o,. that the 
Earth did move in-that manner, we the inhabitants of it, and 
carried round with like velocity by it, ought perpetually to feel 
a Winde from the Eaſt that beateth, upon us with intolerable 
force. And that (o it ought to fall out, quotidian experience aſ- 
ſureth us : for if with onely riding poſt, at the ſpeed of eight or 
ten miles an hour in the tranquil Air, the incountering of it with 
our face ſeemeth tous a Winde that doth not lightly blow upon 
us, what ſhould we expe& from our rapid courle of 8oo. or a 
thouſand miles an hour, againſt the Air, that is, free from that 
motion ? And yet, nutwithſtanding we cannot perceive any 
thing of that nature. | | | 
Sa Lv. To this objeQion that hath much of likelihood in it, I 
reply, that its true, the Air is of greater tenuity and levity ; and, 
by reaſon of its levity; lefſe adherent to the Earth than Water ſo 
mach more grave and *bulky ; but yet the conſequence 1s falſe 
that you a from thele qualitiesz namely, that upon account 
of that its levity, tenuity, and lefſe adherence to the Earth, it 
ſhould be more exempt than the Water from following the. 
Terreſtrial Motions ; fo as that to us, who abſolutely pertake of 
of them, the ſaid exemption ſhould be ſenſible and manifeſt ; 
nay, it happeneth quite contrary ; for, if you well remember, the 
caule of the ebbing and flowing of the Water afligned by us, 
conſiſteth in the Waters not following the unevenneſfſe of the 
motion of its Veſſel, but retaining the 7xprt#s conceived before; 


' without 


| The anſwer T7" 
the objetions 
made againf® the 
motion of the T er« 


reſt rial G lobe. 
t Corpulenta- 


| 


400 


The Water more 
apt to conſerve an 
imperrs conceived, 
then the Air. 


Light bodies eaſier 
to be moved than 
heavy. but leſs avt 
ro Conſerve the mo- 
g10n, , 


Its more rational 
that the Air be 
commoved by the 
rugged ſurface of 
the Farth. than 
by tre Celeftia! 
19401 101ne 


The revolution of 
the EF anrith £9n* 
med by 4 new 

nas to «kew 


from the e/1r, 


G. Garrtzus, his'Syfleme. 


without diminiſhing ot inereafing/ it according to the preciſe rate 
of its dithiniiſhing' or incteafingan its Veſſel: Becaule therefore 
that in'the conſervation and retention of the'imepetus” before con 
ceived, the diſobedience to a new augmentation or dinimwution of 
motion confiſterh, thar moveable that ſhall'be 'moſt apt for ſuch 
a retehtion, ſhall be zlſo moſt 'commodidus 'to-denivaſtrare the 
effe& thar fbllowerh in confequente of that retemioti, Now how 
much thei Water is diſpoſed to maintain” ſuch a'-conceived apits- 
tion though the caufes ceaſe that' impre(s-the ſame; the expeti- 
ence of the Seas extteamly diſturbed by impetuous Winds ſhew. 
eth us the Billows of which; though rhe Air be grown calm, and 
the Wind'laid, for a long time after continue in motion': As the 
Sacced'Poet pleaſantly fings, OV | 


Qual I altd Egeo, $tc;——— 


Andithar long continuing rough after & ſtorm, _— 
the gravity of the-water : For, as I have elſewhere ſaid, hpht bo« 
dies ate' mach eaſier to be moyed'rhan rheimore grave; but yet 
are ſornuch the leſs apt to conſerve' the notion imparted, when 
once the moving etufe ceaſeth,* 'Whence it! comes thavihe Aice, 
as being of it (elf very Yghit'and thin, is eaſily'mov'd by ' any very 
{mall forte, yet'it 19 withall-very' unable ro-hold on irs motion, 
the Mover onee/ccafing. Therefore, as to the Aire whithen\i> 
rons the Terreſtrial Globe, I wonld fay, that by reaſoq of its 
adherenice;it 18 no lefſe carried about therewith then the Warer'; 
and eſpecially that pare which'is contained 1n its veſſels; which 
veſſels are the valleys enclofed with Mountains. And: we 'may 
witty miteh more reaſon affirm/that this ſame part of the Air is 
carried round,' and born forwards by the rugged parth of the 
Earth, than that che higher is whirl'd about by the motion of the 
Heavens, as ye Peripateticks maintain. BF 
What'tath beer bitherro ſpoken, ſeems'to me a ſufficient an- 
{wer to the allegation of Simplitius; yet nevertheleſs: witha new 
inſtance-and {olutzon, founded upon an- admirable experiment, [ 
will \uperabutidantly ſatisfie him, and confirm to Segredus the 
mobility of the Earth. T have told you that the Air, and in par- 
ticular that part of it which aſcendeth nor-above the tops of the 
higheſt Moutitains, & carried round by the uneven' parts of the 
Farths ſurface : from whence it ſhould ſeem, that it muſt'of con- 
lequence come to patfe, that in caſe the ſuperficies of the Earth 
were not unevert , but {mooth and plain, no cauſe wonld' remain 
tor drawing the Air along with it, or at leaſt for revolvingit with 
fo muth uniformity. ''Now theſutface of this our Globe, 15 not 
dll 'craggy and rugged; but there'are exceeding great tizts ver) 


even, 


DriaLtoouse. LV. 


even, to wits the ſurfaces of very vaſt Seas, which being alſo fac 
:emote from the continuate ledges of Mountains which environ 
it, ſeem to have no faculty of carrying the ſuper-ambient Air 
along therewith : and not carrying it about, we may perceive what 
will of conſequence enſue in thole places. 

$1» y- I was about to propole the very ſame difficulty, which 
I chink is of great validity. 

$ a1.v. You ſay very well Simplicixs,for from the not finding 
in the Air that which of conſequence would follow , did this our 
Globe move round ; you argue its immoveableneſſe. But in caſe 
char this which you think ought of neceflary conlequence to be 
found, be indeed by experience proved to be {o ; will you accept 


ie for a ſufficient teſtimony and an argument tor the mobility of 
the {aid Globe ? $+fs 


$imy. Inthis caſe it 5 not requiſite to argue with .me alone, 


for if it ſhould fo fall out, and that I could not comprehend the 
cauſe thereof, yet haply it might be known by others. 

$ a L ve So thatby playing with you,a man ſhall never get,but 
be alwayes on the loſing hand ; and therefore it would be better 

to give over : Nevertheleſs, that we may not cheat our third man 
' wewill play on. We ſaideven now, and with ſome addition we 
reiterate it, that the Ayr as if ir were a thia and fluid body, and 
not ſolidly conjoyned with the Earth, ſcem d pot to be neceſſi- 
tated to obey its motion; unlefle fo far as the craggineſs of the 
cerreſtrial {uperficies, tranſports and carries with it a part there- 
of contigious thereunto ; which doth not by any great ſpace ex- 
cced the greateſt altitude of Mountains : the which portion of Air 
ought to be ſo much leis repugnant to the terreſtrial converſion, 
by how much it is repleat with vapours, fumes, and exhalations, 
matters all participating of terrene qualities , and conſequently 
apt of their own nature to the ſame motions. But where there are 
wanting the cauſes of motion, that is, where the ſurface of the 
Globe hath great levels, and where there is leſs mixture of the 
tercene vapours, there the cauſe whereby the ambient Air is con- 
ſtrained to give entire obedience to the terreſtrial converfion will 


401 


The vaporous 
parts}of the earth, 
partake of «ts mo» 
1005s, 


ceaſe in part ; ſo that in ſuch places, whilſt the Earth revolveth to- 


wards the Eaſt, there will be continually a wind perceived which 
will bcat upon us, blowing from the Eaſt towards the Weſt : 
and ſuch gales will be the more ſenſible, where the revolution of 
the Globe is moſt ſwift; which will be in places more remote from 
the Poles, and approaching to the greateſt Circle of the diurnal! 
convertion. But now de fatto experience much confirmeth this 
Phyloſophical argumentation 3 for in the ſpatious Seas,and in thei 
Parts moſt remote from Land,and ſituate under the Torrid Zone, 
that is bounded by the Tropicks, where thete are none of thoſe 

Eec fame 


&f Ru 


DTT ———_ 


A9D2 
Conſtant pales 
within the Tro- 
picks blow towards 

the VVeff. 


The courſe to the 
VYVeſt-India's ra- 
frexthe return dif- 
feewlr, 


Winds from Land 
make rough the 


Seas. 


Another obſcrta- 
tion taken from the 
Abtr in 63: fir mat- 
on of tre motion of 
the Earth. 


, Which Wind 
with our Eagltt: 
Mariners 1s call:d 


the Trad:;=wind. 


G. Gartit#us, his Syteme; 


Came terreſtrial evaporations , we finde a perpetual gale move 
from the Eaſt with ſo conſtant a blaſt, that ſhips by favour there. 

of ſail proſperouſly to the We$t-India's. And from the ſame 

coaſting along the Mex:can ſhore, they with the ſame telicity paſs 

the Pacifick Ocean towards the India's; which ro us are Eaſt, but 

to them are Weſt. Whereas on the contrary the Courſe from 
thence towards the Eaſt is difficult and uncertain, and not to he 
made by the ſame Khumb, but muſt vere more to Land-yarg, tg 
recover other Winds, which we may call accidentary and tumy]- 

tuary, produced from other Principles, as thoſe that inhabit the 
continent find by experience. Of which produGtions of Winds, 
the Cauſes are many and different, which ſhall not at this time be 
mentioned. And thele accidentary Winds are thole which blow 
indiffercntly from all parts of the Eatth, and make rough the Seas 

remote from the EquinoGiial, and environed by the rugged Sur- 
face of the Earth ; which is as much as to lay envicon'd with 
thoſe perturbations of Air, that confound that primary Gale. 

The which, in caſe theſe accidental impediments were removed, 

would be continually felt, and eſpecially upon the Sea. Now 
{ee how the effe&t of the Water and Air leem wonderfully to ac- 
cord with the Celeſtial obſervations, to confirm the mobility of 
our Terreſtrial Globe. 

Sack. Iallo fora final cloſe will relate to you one particular, 
which as I believe is unknown unto you , and which likewiſe may 
icrve to confirm the ſame concluſion : You Salviatus alledged, 
T har Accident which Sailers meet with between the Tropicks ; 
I mean that perpetual Cale of Winde that beats upon them from 
the Eaſt, of which I have an account from thole that have many 
times made the Voyage : And moreover (which is very obſer- 
vable) Lunderſtand that the Mariners do not call it a Wind, but 
by another * name, which I do not now remember , taken haply 
from 1ts {o fixed and conſtant Tenor ; which when they have met 
with , they tie up their ſhrouds and other cordage belonging to 
the Sails, and without any more need of touching them , though 
they bein a (leep,they can continue their courſe, Now this conſtant 
Trade-wind was known to be ſuch by its continual blowing with- 
out interruptions ; for it it were interrupted by other Windes, it 
would not have been acknowledged for a ſingular Effe , and 
different from the reſt : from which I wlll infer, That it may be 
that alſo our Mediterranean Sea doth partake of the like accident; 
bur it is not obſerved,as being frequently altered by the conflu- 
ence of other windes. And this I ſay, nor without good grounds, 
yea upon very probable conjeQtures whch came unto my know- 
ledge, from that which tendred it ſelf tomy notice on occaſion of 


the voyage that I made into Syria, going Conſul for this Nation 
tO 


Driarocur IV. 4; 


Aleppo, and this it is: That keeping a particular account anfl ., ©. 
al of the dayes of the PR and arrival of the Ships in phos 165 ty = 
the Ports of Alexandria, of Alexandretta, and this of Venice; in #4f 1” Weſt are 
comparing ſundry of them, which I did for my curioſity , I found pane hab | 42-ag 
that in exaQneſs of account the returns hither, that is the Vvoiages Maſt ts Eaft, 
f-om Eaſt ro Welt along the Mediterrane, are made in leſs time 
then the contrary courſes by 25. 1n the Hundred : So that we ſee 
chat one with another, the Eaſtern windes are ſtronger then the 
Weſtern. | & 

Sarv. I am very glad I know this particular, which doth not 

a little make for the confirmation of the Earths mobility. And 
although it may be alledged, That all the Water of the Mediter- 
-2ne runs perpetually towards the Straits-mouth , as being ro 
diimbogue into the Ocean, the waters ofas many Rivers, as do 
diſcharge themſelves into the ſame ; I do not think that that cur- 
rent can be ſo great, as to be able of it ſelfalone to make ſo no- 
able a difference : which is alſo manifeſt by obſerving that the 
water in the Pharo of Sicily xunneth back apain no lets towards 
the Eaſt, than it runneth forwards towards the Weſt. 

$a GR. I, that have not as Simpliczus, an inclination to ſati(- 
fie any one beſides my ſelf, am fatisfied with what hath been ſaid 
25 to this firſt particular : Therefore Salwiatus, when you think 
# fit to proceed forward, {1 am prepared to hear you. 

SL v. I ſhalldo as you command me, but yet I would fain 
hear the opinion alſo of Simplicivs, from whoſe judgement I can 
argue how much I may promiſe to my ſelf touching theſe dif- 
tourſes from the Peripetetick Schools, if ever they ſhould come 
co their ears. = 

$18y. Idefire not that my opinion ſhould ſerve or ſtand for 
: meaſure, whereby you ſhould judge of others thoughts; for 
1: | have often ſaid, I am inconfiderable in; theſe kinde of ſtudies, 
and ſuch things may come into the mindes of thoſe that are cnter- 
ed into the deepeſt paſſages of Philoſophy, as I could never think 
of ; as having (according to the Proverb) ſcarce kiſt her Maid : 
yet nevertheleſs, to give you my ſudden thoughts, I ſhall tell 
you, That of thoſe effeRs by you recounted,and particularly the 
laſt, there may in my judgement very ſufficient Reaſons be given 
without the Earths mobility, by the mobility of the Heavens one- 
ly 3 never introducing any novelty more, than the inyerfion of 
that which you your ſelf propoſe unto us. It hath been received 
by the Peripatetick Schools, that the Element of Fire; 'and alſo a 1:# demonſt 
great part of the Aire is carried about according to the Diurnal dba ermg, fred 

converſion from Eaſt to Weſt, by the contaR of the Concave of the perrerual mo- 
the Lunar Orb, as by the Veſſel their container. Now without #" 7% A 


| | om Eaſt toWe 
going out of your track, I will that we determine the Quantity of Ld ; Lroge 
Ece3 


the moron of Heaven, 


G, Garitnus, Þis S1yſleme. 


It is demonſtrated the Auc which partaketh of that motion ro diſtend lo low 25 


inverting the ar- 


the Tops ofthe higheſt Hills, and that likewiſe they would Aer 


monomef to the Earth, if thoſe Mountains did not impede them , yy; < 


the Air from Eaft 
ro VV, cometh 
from the motion of 


The motion of the 
VP ater dependeth 


on the motion of 


The finx and yt- 
flux may depend 
ow the diurnal me» 
tion of Heaven, 


_ - 
_ « 
I end 


agreeth with what you ſay : For as you affirm, the Air, which ;, 
inviconed by ledges of Mountains, to be carried about by the 
aſpcrity of the moveable Earth 3 we on the contrary ſay , Tha, 
the whole Element of Air is carried about by the motion of 
Heaven, that part only excepted which lyeth below thoſe bodies, 
which is hindred by the aſperity of the immoveable Earth, ang 
whereas you ſaid, That in caſc that alperity ſhould be removed 
the Air would alſo ceaſe to be whirld about; we ma fa ; 
That the ſaid aſperity being removed, rhe whole Aire would con- 
tinue its motion. Whereupon, becauſe the ſurfaces of ſpacious 
Seas are ſmooth, and even ; the Airs motion ſhall continue v 
thoſe, alwaics blowing from the Eaſt : And this is more ſenſibj 
perceived in Climates lying under the Line, and within the Tg. 
picks, where the motion of Heaven is {witter; and like as that 
Celeſtial motion is able to bear before it all the Air that is at 
liberty, {ſo we may very rationally affirm that it contributeth the 
ſame motion to the Water moveable, as bcing fluid ard not con- 
ne&cd to the immobility of the Earth : And with fo much the 
more confidence may we affirm. the ſame, in that by your con- 
feſſion,that motion ought to be very ſmall in reſet of theefficiew 
Cauſe, which begirting in a natural day the whole Terreſtrial 
Globe, pafſeth many hundreds of miles an hour, and eſpecially 
towards the EquinoQial z whereas in the currents of the open Sea, 
it moveth but very few miles an hour. And thus the vojages to- 
wards the Weſt ſhall come to be commodious and expeditious, 
not onely by reaſon of the perpetual Eaſtern Gale , but of the 
courſe alſo of the Waters; from which courſe alſo perhaps the 
Ebbing and Flowing may come, by reaſon of the different ſcitu- 
ation of the Terreſtrial Shores : againſt which the Water coming 
to beat, may alſo return backwards with a contrary motion, like 
as EXPErience ſheweth us 1n the courſe of Rivers 4 pA according As 
the Water in the unevenneſs of the Banks, meeteth with ſome 
parts that ſtand out, or make with their Meanders ſome Reach or 
Bay, here the Water turneth again, and is ſeen to retreat back 
a confiderable ſpace. Upon this I hold , That of thoſe effe&s 
from which you argue the Earths mobility , and alledge it as a 
cauſe of them, there may be aſſigned a cauſe ſufficiently valid, 
retaining the Earth ſtedfaſt , and reſtoring the mobility of 
Heaven. 

S a Lv. Itcannat be denied,but that your diſcourſe is ingenious, 
& hath much of probability, mean probability in appearance, but 
not in reality & exiſtence: It conſiſteth of two parts:In the firlt it 

| aſſignes 


DriatoGgur I'V. 
fionesa reaſon of the continual motion of the Eaſtern Winde) 
1nd alſo of a like motion in the Water. In the fecond, It would 
42 fromthe ſame Sourle the cauſe of the Ebbing and Flowing. 
The licſt part hath (as I have ſaid) tome appearance of probabr- 
liry » but yet extreamly leſs then that which we rake from the 
Terreſtriat motion. The ſecond is not onely wholly improbable, 
bat altogether impoſſible and falſe. And coming to the firſt, 
whereas it is fatd rhat the Concave of the Moon carrieth abour 
the element of Fire, and che whole Air, even to the tops of the 
higher Mountans. I anſwer firſt, that it is dubwous whether 
there be any element of Fire : But ſuppole there be, it is much 
Joubted of the Orbe of the Moon, as allo of all the reſt ; that is, 
Whether there be any ſuch ſolid bodies and vaſt; or clis, Whether 
beyond the Air there be extended a continuate expanſion of a 
ſubſtance of much more tenuity and purircy than our Air, up and 
down which the Planets go wandering, as now at laſt a good part 
ofthoſe very Phyloſophers begin torhink : But be it in this or in 
that manner, there is no reaſon for which the Fire, by a ſimple 


contrad to a ſuperficies, which you your ſelf grant to be ſmooth /*/ 


and terſe,ſhould be according ro irs whole depth carried round in 
1 motion different from its natural inclination ; as hath been de- 
fuſely proved,and with ſenfible reaſons demonſtrated by* II $ ag- 
iatore : Betides the other improbability of the fſajd motions 
cransfuſing it ſelf from the ſubtileſt Fire throughout the Air,much 
more denſe ; and from that alſo again to the Water. _ But tha 
a body of rugged and mountainous ſurface, by revolving in it 
elf, ſhould carry with it the Air contiguous to it , and againſt 
which its promontaries beat, is not onely probable but neceſſary, 
and experience thercof may be daily (een ; though without ſce- 
mg it,I believe that there is no judgement that doubts thereof. 
Asto the other part, {ſuppoſing that the motion of Heaven did 
carry round the Air, and allo the Water ; yet would that motion 
for all that have nothing to do with the Ebbing and Flowing, 
For being that from one onely and uniform cauſe, there can f 7 
low but one ſole and uniform effe&; that which ſhould be diſco- 
yered in the Water, would be a continuate and uniform courſe 
from Faſt ro Weſt and in that a Sca onely, which running com- 
paſs environeth the whole Globe. But in determinate Seas, ſuch 
a is the Mediterrane ſhut upin the Eaſt, there could be no fach 
motion. For if its Water might be driven by the coutſe of 
Heaven towards the Welt , it would have been dry many ages 
ſince : Beſides that our Water runneth not onely towards the 
Weſt, But returneth backwa:ds towards the Eaſt, and: that in or- 
Cinal Periods + And whereas you ſay by the example of- Rivers, 
that though the courſe of the Sea were Originally that onely 


frotti 


403 


A reaſon of the 
continual mor an of 
the Air and VV a- 
fry may be grven, 
waking the Earth 
movable, then by 
mak ing it immove- 
able, 


Itsimprobable that 
theelement of Fire 
d be carried 
round by the Con- 
Cave of the Moon, 


* A Treatiſe of our 
Anthor formerly 
cited, 


The Ebbing 4nd 
F lowing Cannot de- 
pend on the motion 


of Hyaven, 


© 2. 


7 
G. Gatitzus, #his:Syfteme. 


from Eaſt to Weſt, yet neverthelels the differcnt Poſition of the 
Shores may make part of the Water regurgitate, and return 
backwards : I grant it you, but it is neccfiary that you, take no 
tice my Simplicius, that where the Water upon that accoun; 
returneth backwards, it doth ſo there perpetually ; and where 
it runneth ſtraight forwards, it runneth there always in the (ame 
manner; for ſo the example of the Rivers ſhewes you: But in the 
caſe of the cbbing and flowing, you muſt.finde and give us (ome 
reaſon why it doth in the ſelf ſame place run one while one way 
and another while another;EffeQts that being contrary & iccegular 
can never be deduced from any uniform and conſtant Cauſe : 
And this Argument, that overthrows the Hypotheſis of the mo- 
tion contributed to the Sea from the Heavens diurnal motion, 
doth alſo confure that Poſition of thoſe who would admit the ſole 
diurnal motion of the Earth , and believe that they are able with 
that alone to give a reaſon of the Flux and Reflux : Of which 
effc& ſinceit isirregular, the cauſe mult of neceſſity be irregular 
and alterable. | 
S1n e- I have nothing to reply, neither of my own, by reaſon 
of the weakneſs of my underſtanding 3 nor of that of others , for 
that the Opinion 1s ſo new : But I could believe that if it were 
ſpread amongſt the Schools, there would not want Phyloſophers 
able to oppole it. 

Sacks Expect ſuchan occaſion; and we in the mean time 
if it ſeem good to Salwiatus, will proceed forward. 

Sar v. All that which hath been ſaid hitherto, pertaineth to 
che diurnal period of the ebbing and flowing;of which we havein 
the firſt place demonſtrated in general the primary and univerſal 
Cauſc , without which, no ſuch efte& would follow : Afﬀterw ds 
paſſing to the particular Accidents, various, and in a certain ſort 
rregular,that are obſerved therein : We have handled the ſecon- 
dary and concommitant Cauſes upon which they depend. Now 
follow the two other Periods, Monethly, and Annual , which do 
not bring with them ncw and different Accidents , other than 
thoſe already conſidered in the diurnal Period; but they ope- 
rate on the ſame Accidents, by rendring them greater and lefler 
in ſeveral parts of the Lunar Moneth, and in ſeveral times of 
the Solar Year ; as if that the Moon and Sun did each conceive 
it {elf apart in operating and producing of thoſe Effe&s ; a thing 
that totally claſheth with my underſtanding, which ſeeing how 
that this of Seas is a local and ſenfible motion , made in an 1m- 
menſe maſs of Water, it cannot be brought to ſubſcribe to 
Lights, to remperate Heats, to predominacies by occult Quali- 
ties, and to ſuch like vain Imaginations, that are ſo far from be- 
10g or being poſſible to be Cauſes of the Tide 3 that on the con- 

trary 


Dr1iaLOGUE. IV. 497 


ary, (hc Tide is the cauſe of them, that is, of bringing them 

"to the brains more apt for Joquacity and oltentation, than for 

the ſpeculation and diſcovering of the more abſtcuſe ſecrets of 

Nature 3 which kind of people, before they can be brought to 
' onounce that wiſe, ingenious, and modeſt ſentence, I know it 

not, (yffer ro elcape from their mouths and pens all manner of ex- 

travaganclies. And the onely obſerving, that the lame Moon, and 

the ſame Sun operate not with their light with their morion, with 

prear heat, Of with temperate, on the leffer receptacl.s oft Water, 

bur that co effe& their flowing by heat, they muſt be reduced ro 

licele lefſe than boiling, and in ſhort, we nor being able artificially 

0 imitate any way the motions of the Tide, ſave only by the mo- 

ion of the Velſel> ought it not to fatiftie every one, that all 

he other things alledged, as cauſes of thole efle&s , arc 

yaine fancies, and altogether eſtranged from the Truth. I 

ſay, therefore, that if it be true, that of one effe& there is but The alteration 
one ſole primary cauſe, and that between the cauſe and effeR, pie paring re 
there is a firm and conſtant connection ; it is neceſſary that when- cauſe. 

ſever there is {een a firm and conſtant alteration in the effe&, 

there be a firm and conſtant alteration in the cauſe. And be- 

cauſe the alterations that happen in tlfe ebbing and flowing in 

leveral parts of the Year and Moneths, have their periods firm and 

conſtant, it 15 neceſlary to ſay, that a regular alteration in thoſe 

lame times happeneth in the primary caule of the ebbings and 

flowings. And as for the alteration that in thoſe times happens The cauſe; « 
in the cbbings and flowings confiſterh onely in their greatneſs; 7g «ſigned of 
that is, 1n the Waters riſing and falling more or lefſe, and in A ons 
running with greater or lefle zmpetxs ; therefore it is neceſſary, 4! of the ebbige 
that that which is the primary cauſe of the ebbing and flowing, *"* f-wing: 
dothin thoſe ſame dererminate times increaſe and diminiſh its 

force. But we have already concluded upon the inequality and 

regularity of the motion of the \ efſels containing the Water to 

dethe primary caule of the ebbings and flowings. Therefore 
tis neceſſary, that that irregularity, from time to time, corre- 
[pondently grow more irregular, that is, grow greater and leſſer. 

Now tis requiſite, that we call to minde, that the irregularity, 

that is, the different velocity of the motions of the Vellels, to 

wit, of the parts of the Terreſtrial Superficics , dependeth on 

their moving with a compound motion, reſulting from the com- 

mixtion of the two motions, Annual and Diurnal, proper to the 

whole Terreſtrial Globe 3 of which the Diurnal converſion, b 

one while adding to, and another while ſubſtracting from , the 

Annual motion, is that which produceth the irregularity in the 

compound motion ; ſo that, in the additions and ſubſtracions; 
that the Diurnal revolution maketh from the Angual motion, 


con- 


A DES 


408 


The monethly 
and annual alter a- 
£199 of the tide Can 
drpond upon no» 
thing, ſave on re 
alteration of the 
additions & ſ1b- 
ſtrattions of the 
dinrnal period from 
the annual, 


 G, Gall LAUS, his IS viicme. 


conſiſteth the original cauſe of the irregular motion of the Vel. 
ſels, and conſequently of the Ebbing and Flowing : inſomuch 
that if theſe additions and ſubſtrations ſhould alwayes Proceed 
in the {ame proportion, 1n reſpect of the Annual motion the 
caule of the Ebbing and Flowing would indeed continue : bur 
yet ſo as that they would perpetually return in the ſelf {ame man. 
ner : But we are to finde out the cauſe of making the ſame Fh. 
brags and Flowings 1n divers times greater and leſſer : There. 
fore we muſt (if we will retain the identity of the cauſe) find the 
alteration in theſe additions and (ubſtractions, that make them 
more & lc( potent, producing thole efte&s which depend there. 
upon. But I ice not how that potency and unpotence can be intro. 
duced, unlefle by making the iame additions and ſubſtrations, 
one while greater, and anorher while leſſer ; 1o that the accelera. 
tion and the retardment of the compound motion, may be made, 
lometimes in greater, and lometimes 1n leſſer proportion, 

Sas. I feel my elf very gently led, as it were, by the hand, 
and though I finde no rubs in the way, yet nevertheleſle, like a 
blind man,. L {ee not whether your Cluc leadeth me, nor can | 
tnagine where luch a Journey will end. 

S a 1 v. Though there be a great difference between my flow 
pac't Philoſophy, and your more. nimble Reaſon, yet neverthe- 
lefſe, in this particular which we are now upon, 1 do not much 
wonder, if the apprehenſiveneſfe of your wit be a little obſcu- 
red by the dark and thick miſt that hides the mark, at which we 
aime : and that which lefſeneth my admiration 1s, the remem« 
brance of the many hours, many dayes, yea more, many nights 
that I have conſumed 1n this contemplation , and of the many 
times that, deſpairing to brang it to a perxod, I have, for an in- 
couragement of my felf, indeavoured to believe, by the exam- 
ple of the unfortunate Orlando, that that might not poſlibly be 
true, which yet the teſtimony of lo many credible men ſet be- 
fore my eyes: wonder not, therefore, if this once, contrary to 
your cuſtome, you do not foreſee what I intend : andif you will 
needs admire, I belive rhat the event, as far as I can judge un» 
expected, will make you ceaſe your wonderment. 

SAG 8K, 1 thank God, that he did not permit that deſperation 
of yours to end in the Exit that is fabled of the miſerable Or- 
/ando, nor in that which haply is no lefſe fabulouſly related of 
Ariſtotle, , that ſo neither my ſelf nor others ſhould be deprived 
of the diſcovery of a thing, as abſtruſe as it was defirable : 1 
belcech you, therefore, to ſatisfie-my eager appetite as {oon 3s 
you can. Th 

SaLv. lam ready to ſerve you : We were upon an 1nquiy 


in what manner the additions and ſubſtractions of the Terreſtn- 
a 


Diatocue IVY. 


i] converſion from the Annual mot10n, could be made, one 
while 10 a greater, and another while in a leſſer proportion ; 
viich diverticys and no other thing, could be afligned for the 
c2ulc of the alterations) Monethly and Annual, chat are ſeen in 
the geeatnelle of rhe Ebbings and Flowings. + I will now con- 
der how this proportion of the additions and ſubſtraQions of 
the Diucnal Revolutian, and Annual morion.may grow preater 
and lefſer thiee {everal wayes. One is by increaling and dimi- 
niſhing the velocity. of the Annual motion, retaining the additi- 
ons and ſubſtracions made by the Diurnal converſion in the 
{2mc greatnelle, becaule the Annual motion being abomt three 
cimes greatcry that 1s, more velocious than the Diurnal motion 
(conlidered likewile 1a the Grand Cicele ) if we increaſe it 
ancw » the additions and tubſtractions of rhe Diurnal motion 
will occaſion lcfle alteration therein : but, on the other fide, 
making it more flow, it will be altered in greater proportion, by 
chat ſame diurnal motion, uſt as the adding or {ubſtrafting 
four degrees of velocity from one that moveth' with twenty de- 
recs, altereth his courle lefle, chan thole very four deptees would 
do, added or lubſtracted from one that ſhould move onely-- with 
ten degrees. The {econd way would be, by making the additi- 
ous aud ſubſtractions greater and leſſer, retaining the annual mo- 
tionin the ſame velocity 3 which 1s as cafie to be underſtood, as it 
is manifeſt, that a velocity v.gr- of 20. degr.is more altered by the 
addition or {ubſtraction of 10.deg.than by the addition or fubſtra- 
Gon of 4- The third way-would bein cale thele two were joyned 
together,diminiſhing the annual motion; 8 increaſing the diurnal 
additions and {ubtiragions. Hitherto , as you ſee; it was no 
hard matter 10 attain, but yet it.proved to me very hard to find 
dy what means this might be effected:in Nature. Yet'iin the end, 
inde that ſhe doth admirably make uſe thereof, and in wayes 
almoſt incredible : 1 mean, admirable and incredible tro us, but 
not to her, who worketh even thole very things, which, to our' 
capacity, are of infinite wonder, with extraordinary facility and 
himplicity : and that which ic is hard for us to underſtand, is ca- 
lie for her to effet. Now to proceed, baving ſhewn that the 
proportion between the additions and fubſtragions of the Diur- 
nal converſion and Annual motion may be made greater and lef- 
(er, two wayes, (and I ſay two, becaule the third is comprized in 
thetwo firſt) 1 adde, that Nature maketh uſe of them both : 
and farthermore, I ſubjoyn, that if ſhe did make uſe but of one 
alone, it would be neceſlary to take away one of the two Perio- 
dical alterations. Thar of the Monethly Period would ceaſe, if 
the annual motionſhould not alter. And in caſe the additions 
and lubſtraftions of rhe diurnal revolution ſhould continually 
Fftf be 


409 


T bree wayes of 
altering the pro» 
portion of the ad- 
ditions of the drxcy< 
nal Revolution to 
the annual motion, 


That which to 
«us it hard tobe une 
derftood, © with 
N ture eaſie to by 
effeFed. 


If the Dinrnal 
motion ſhould not 
alter, the annual 
Period would ceaſe 


o 
+. 72 nt... 


The true /7y 0. 
theſis may diſpatch 
its revolutions in 4 
ſhorter tie , mn 
leſſer carcles than 
in greater 3 te 
which & provcd by 
two examyler. 

The firſt tx-+ 
ample, 


G. Gartit#®us, his Syfteme, 


be equal, the alterations of che annual Period would fail, 

Sack. It ſeems then , that the Monethly alteration of <<. 
bings and flowings dependeth on the alteration of the annual 
motion of the Earth? And the annual alteration of thoſe <<. 
bings and flowings do, it {cems, depend on the additions and 
ſubſraftions of the diurnal converſion ? - And here now 1 finde 
my ſelf worſe puzzled than before , and more out of hope of 
being able to comprehend how this intricacy may be, which js 
more inextricable, in my judgment, than the Gordian knot. Ard 
I envy Simplicius, from whole filence I argue that he doth ap. 
prehend the whole buſineſle , and is acquir of that confuſion 
which greatly puzzleth my brains. 

S 1» y. | believe verily, Segredus, that you are Put to a 
a ſtand; and 1 believe that 1 know allo the caule of your con- 
fuſion, which, if I miſtake nor, riſcth from your underſtanding 
part of thoſe particulars but even now alledged by Salviatxs, 
and buta part. It is true likewiſe that I find my lelf free fromthe 
like confution ; bur not for that caule as you think , to wit, be- 
cauſe I apprehend the whole, nay it happens upon the quite 
contrary account; namely , from my not comprehending any 
thing 3, and confuſion is in the plurality of things , and not in 
nothing, 

Sag rk. You ſee Salviatus, how a few checks given to Simpli- 
cins in the dayes: preceding , :have rendered him gentle, and 
brought him from the capriol to the amble. But I beſeech you 
without farther delay, put us both out of ſuſpence. 

SA. I will endeavour it ro the utmoſt of my harſh way of 
exprefling my ſelf, the obtuſeneſlſe of which, the acuteneſle of 
your wit ſhall ſupply. The accidents of which we are to enquire 
the cauſes are two : The firſt reſpeRerh the varieties that happen 
in the cbbings and flowings in the Monethly Period ; and the 0+ 
thr reJateth ro the Annual. We will firſt ſpeak of the Moneth- 
ly, and then treat of the Annual; and it 1s convenient that we 
reſolve them all according to the Fundamentals and Hypothefis 
already Jaid down, without introducing any novelty either in A» 
ſtronomy,or in the Univerſe , in favour of the ebbings and flow- 
ings ; therefore let us demonſtrate that of all the ſeveral acci- 
dents in them obſerved, the cauſes reſide in the things already 
known , and received for true and undoubted. I ſay therefore, 
that it 15a truly natural,yea neceſſary thing, that one and theſame 
moveable made to move round by the ſame moving virtue 1 a 
longer time , do make its courſe by a greater circle , rather than 
by a lcfſer ; and this is a truth reccived by all , and con 
firmed by all experiments, of which we will produce 2 few.” 


la the wheel-clocks, and particularly in the great ones, T- 
ra 


Diatoocues, IV. 


Jerate the time , the Artiſicers that make them accomodare a cer 
-1in_voluble ſaffe horozontally , and at each end of it they fa- 
ten rwo Weights of Lead, and when the time goeth too ſlow, 
by the onely removing thole Leads a little nearer to the centre 
of the ſtaffe , they render its vibrations more trequent®; and on 
the contrary to retard it, it is but drawing thoſe Weights more 
awards the ends 3 for fo the vibrations arc made more (eldome, 
and conſequently the intervals of the hours are prolonged. 

Here the movent vertue is the ſame , namely the counterpoiſe, 
che moveables are thole lame Weights of lead , and their vi- 
brations are more frequent when they are netrer to the centre, 
that is , when they move by lefler circles. Hanging equal 
Weights at unequal cords , and being removed from their per- 
pendicularity , lerting them go we ſhall ſee thole that are pen- 
Jent at the ſhorter cords, to make their vibrations under ſhorter 
times, as thoſc. that move by leffer circles. Again, ler ſuch a 
kind of Weight be faſtened to a cord , which cord let play upon 
a ſtaple faſtened in the Sceling , and do you hold the other end 
of the cord in your hand, and having given the motion to the 

ndent Weight , whilſt it 15 making 1ts vibrations , pull the 
end of the cord that you hold in your hand , ſo that the Weighe 
may riſe higher and higher : In its rifing you ſhall ſee the fre- 

ucncy of its vibrations encreaſe , in regard that they are made 
ſucceſſively by leffer and leffer circies. And here I defire you to 
take notice of two particulars worthy to be oblerved. One is 
that the vibrations of one of thoke plummets are made with ſach 
a neceſſity under ſuch determinate times , that it 1s altogether 
impoſſible to cauſe them to be made under other times , 'unleſſe 
tbe by prolonging , or abreviating the cord 3 of which you 
may alſo at rhis very inſtant aicertain your ſelves by experience; 
tying a ſtone ro a pack-threed , and holding the other end in 
your hand , trying whether you can ever by any artifice. be able 
towing it this way and that way 1n other than one determinate 
time, unlefle by lengthening ot ſhortening the ſtring , which 
you will find to be abſolutely impoſſible. The other particular 
truly admirable is , that the (af ſamie pendulum makes its vibra- 
tons with one and the ſame frequency , or very little , and as it 
were inſenſibly different , whether they be made by very great, 
or very (mall arches of the ſelf-ſame circumference. I mean that 
Whether we remove the pendulum from perpendicularity one,two, 
Or three degrees onel y , or whether we remove it 70. 809. nay to 
an entice quadrant, it being let go, will in the one caſe andin 
the other make its vibrations with the ſame frequency ; as well 
the former where it is to move by an arch of but four or fix de- 
g"ces, a3the ſecond , whert it is to paſle arches of x66. or more 

F it 2 de- 


Att 


The ſecond ex+ 
ample, 


Two particular 
notable accidents 
in the penduli and 
their vibrations. 


G. Gartitzus, his Syſteme, 


degrees. W hich may the better be ſeen, by hanging two weights 
ar wo ſtrings of equal length, and then removing them from Per- 
pendicularity,one a little way, and the other very far ; the which 
being ſer at liberty,will go & return under the {ame times, the one 
by archeNery ſmall,& the other by very great ones, from whence 
Admirable Pro- followeth the concluſion of an admirable Problem ; which js 
roy © _ That a Quadrant ofa Circle being given (rake a little diagram af 
the Quadra of « the ame, [in Fig. 3-] ) as for inſtance : A B ere to the Hojj. 
Circle andef theſe zon,ſo as that it reſt upon the plain rouching in the point B. and 
gy f 4% an Arch being made with a Hoop well plained and ſmoothed in 
whole Circle, the concave part, beading it according tO the curvity of the Cir- 
cumference A D B. So that a Bullet very round and ſmooth 
may freely run to and again within it (the rin of a Sieve is very 
proper for the experiment) I ſay, that the Bullet being put inany 
whatever place, ncer or fac from the lowelt term B. As for in- 
ſtance, putting it in che point C, or here 1n D, or 1a E; and then 
let goy it will in equal cimes, or infenfibly different arrive at the 
term B, departing from C, or from D,or trom E, or from what- 
ever other place 3 an accident truly wonderfull. We may add 
another accident no leſs ſtrange than this, which 15, That more- 
over by all the cords drawn Go the point B to the points C, 
D, E; and to any other whatſoever, taken not onely in the Qua- 
drant B A, bur in all the whole circumference of the Circle the 
ſaid moveable ſhall deſcend in times abſolutely equal ; infomuch 
that ix ſhall be no longer in deſcending by the whole Diameter 
ere& perpendicularly upon the point B, then it ſhall in deſcend- 
ing by B. C. although it do ſublend but one ſole degree, or a lel- 
ſer Arch. Let us add the other wonder, which is, That the mo- 
yons ok the falling bodies made by the Arches of the Quadrant 
A B; are made io ſhorter times than thoſe that are made by the 
cords of; thoſe ſame Arches ; ſo that the ſwiftcſt motion, and 
made þy a moveable in the ſhorteſt time, to arrive from the 
point A, to the term B, ſhall be that which is made, not by the 
right line A, B, (although it be the ſhorteſt of all thoſe that can 
de drawn berweea the points A. B. ) but by the circumference 
A B B. And any point being taken in the ſaid Arch; as for 
example : The point D. and two cords drawn A D, and D. B. 
the moveable departing from the qoint A, ſhall in a leſs time 
come to B, moving by the two cords A D and D B. than by the 
ſole cord A, B. But the ſhorteſt of all the times ſhall be that of 
the fall by the Arch A D B, And the ſelf ſame accidents are 
to be underſtood of all the other lefſer Arches taken from rhe 
lowermoſt term B. upwards. 
$ 4 68 No,more, no more ; for you ſo confund and fill me 
with Wonders, and diſtra$, my thoughts ſo many ſeveral way 


that 


Diatoout lV, 


«bat 1 fear 1 ſhall have but a ſmall part of jt left free and diſins 
gaged, to apply corthe principal matter that is treated of, and 
which of it (elf is but even too oblcure and intricate : So that 
[ jftreat YOu tO vouchlafe me, haviag once dilpatcht the buſineſs 
of the ebbings and flowings, ro do this honour ro my he (and 
ours) ſome other dayes, and to difcourſe upon the fo many other 
p;oblems that we have lefr in ſuſpence 3 and which op» 5 are 
no leſs curi9us and admirable, than this that hath been diſcutſed 
theſe dayes paſt , and that now ought tro draw to a con- 
PR Tart 
_ | y. I ſhall be ready to {erve you, but we muſt make more 
han one or two Sefltons ; if beſides the other queſtions reſerved 
:0 be handled apart, we wou'd diſcutſe thoſe many that pertain 
t0 the local MOtiON) as well of natural moveables, as of the reze&- 
od : an Argument largely treared of by our Lyncean Accade- 
mick. But turning to our firſt purpole, where we were about to 
declare, That the bodies moving circularly by a movent virtue, 
which continually remaineth the ſame, the times of the circula- 
tion: were pretixt and determined, and impoſlible tobe made 
longer or ſhorter, having given examples, and produced experi- 
ments thereof, {enfible, and feaſible, we may confirm the tame 
truth by the experiences of the Celeſtial motions of rhe Planets ; 
in which we ſee the ſame rule obleryed ; for thoſe that move b 
orearer Circles, confirm longer times in pafſing them. A moſt 
pertinent obſeryation of this we have from the Medicean Pla- 
nets, which in ſhort tres make their revolutions about Fupiter : 
Inſomuch that it is not to be queſtioned, nay we may hold it fot 
ſure and certain, that if for example, the Moon continuing to be 
moved by the ſame movent faculry, ſhould retire by lirtle and 
little in leſſer Circles , it would acquire a power of abteviatin 
the times of its Periods, according to that Pendulum, of which in 
the courle of its vibrations, we by degrees ſhortned the cord, that 
contraſted the Semidiameter of the circumferences by ir pafled. 
Know now that this that I have alledged an example of it in the 
Moon, is ſeen and verified eſſentially in fa&. Let us call to mind, 
thatit hath been already concluded by us, together with Copernz> 
£45, That it is not poſlible to ſeparate the Moon from the Earth, 
adout which it withour diſpute revolveth in a Moneth : Let us 
remember allo that the Terreſtrial Globe, accompanyed alwayes 
dy the Moon, gocth along the circumference of the Grand Orb 
about the Sun in a year, in Which time the Moon revolveth about 
the Earth almoſt thirteen times ; from which revolution ir follow- 
eth,that the ſaid Moon ſometimes is found near the Sun ; that is, 
When it is between the Sun and the Earth, and ſometimes 
much more remote , that is, when the Earth is fituate betweert 
the 


413 


The £&thi an- 
nual motion by the 
Ecliptick, unequal 
by means of the 


Moons motion, 


414 


G, Galitzus, b& Syſleme. 


the Moon and Sun ; necr, ina word, at the time of its conjun 
Ction and change 3 remore, in its Full and Oppoſition ; and the 
greateſt vicinity differ the quantity of the Diameter of the Lu. 
nar Orb. Now if it be true that the virtue which moveth the 
Earth agd Moon, about the Sun , be alwaycs maintained on 
the ſame vigour 3 and if it be true that the {ame moveable 
moved by the ſame virtue , but in circles unequal , do in ſhorter 
times, paſſe like arches ot lefler circles, ir. muſt needs be granted, 
that the Moon when it 15at a leſlc diſtance trom the Sun, that js 


41n the time of conjunGtion , paſletÞ greater arches of the Grand 


Orb,than when it is at a greater diſtance, that is inits Opppſition 
and Full. And this Lunar inequality muſt of neceſſity be imparted 
to the Earth alſo;for if we ſhall ſuppole a right line produced from 
the centre of the Sun by the centre of the Terreſtrial Globe, and 
prolonged az tar as the Orb of the Moon , this ſhall be the ſemi- 
diameter of the Grand Orb , 1n which the Earth, in caſe it were 
alone, would move uniformly,but it in the ſame femidiameter we 
ſhould place another body to be carried about , placing it one 
while berween the Earth and Sun , and another while beyond 
the Earth , at a greater diſtance from the Sun , it is neceſlary, 
that in this {econd cale the motion common to both, according 
to the circumference of the great Orb by means of the diſtance 
of the Moon , do prove alittle flower than in the other caſe, 
when the Moon is berwceen the Earth and Sun , that is at alefler 
diſtance. So that in this buſineſſe the very ſame happeneth that 
befals in the time of - the clock ; that lead which is placed one 
while farther (rom the centre , to make the vibrations of the 
ſtaffe or ballance lefſe frequent , and another while nearer, to 
make them thicker, repreſenting the Moon. Hence it may be 
manifeſt, that the annual motion of the Earth in the Grand 
Orb, and under the Ecliptick, is not uniform, and.that its ir» 
regularity proceedeth from the Moon, and hath its Monethly 
Periods and Returns. And becauſe it hath been concluded, that 
the Monethly and Annual Periodick alterations of the cbbings 
and flowings , cannot be deduced from any other cauſe than 
from the alrered proportion between the annual motion and the 
additions and {ubſtractions of the diurnal converſion 3 and that 
taoſe alterations might be made two wayes , that is by altering 
the annual motion , keeping the quantity of rhe additions un- 
altered, or by changing of the bigneſle of theſe , retcining the 
uniformity of annual motion. We have already found the firſt 
of theſe, depending on the irregularity of the annual motion 
occaſioned by the Moon , and which hath its Monethly Periods. 
It is therefore neceſſary , that upon that account the ebbings 
and flowings have a Monethly Period in which they do grow 

greater 


Diatocus. I V. 


ceaterand leſſer. Now you (ce that the caule of the Monethly 
Period refideth 1n the annual motion ; and withal you ſee how 
mach che Moon 15 concerned in this buſineſs, and how it is there- 
wich interrupted apart,withour having any thing to do with either, 
with Scas Or Wateis. | 4 

$,G x. It one that never had (cen any kinde of Stairs or La- 

der, were ſhewed a very high Tower, and asked if ever he hoped 
ro -imb to the top of it; I verily: believe that he would anſwer he 
dd not, not conceiving how one ſhould come thirher any way 
except by flying z but ſhewing him a ſtone of but a foot high, and 
asking him whether he thought he could get tothe top of that, 
[ am certain that he would aniwer he could ; and farther, that he 
would not deny, but that it was not onely one, but ten, tweaty, 
ind an bundred times eafler to chhmb that : But now if he ſhould 
de ſhewed the Stairs, by means whereof, with the facility by him 
granted, it 15 poſlible to get thither, whither he a little before had 
afficmed it was impoſlible to aſcend, I do think that Jaughing at 
himſelf he would confeſs his dulneſs ct apprehenſion. Thus, 
Salviatys, have you ſtep by ſtep fo gently lead me, that , nor 

wirhout wonder, 1 finde that 1 am got with ſmall pains to that 
height which I deſpaired of arriving at. Tis true; that the Stair- 
cale having been dark, 1 did not perceive that I was got nearer 
to, or arrived at the top, till that coming into the open Air I diſ- 

covered a great Sea, and ſpacious Country : And as in aſcending 
one ſtep, there is no labour; ſoeach of your propoſitions by it 
{elt ſeemed to me fo plain, that thinking 1 heard but little or no- 
thing that was new unto me, I conceived that my benefit thereby 
had been little or none at all : Whereupon I was the more ama- 
red at the unexpeRed exit of this diſcourſe, that hath guided me 
to the knowledge of a thing which 1 held impoſſible to be de- 
monſtrated. One doubr onely remains, from which 1 defire to 
be freed, and this it is ; Whether that if the morion of the Earth 
together with that of the Moon under the Zodiack are irregulac 
motions, thoſe irregularities ought to have been obſerved and ta- 
ken notice of by Aftronomers ,' which I do not know that they 
are: Therefore I pray you, who are better acquainted with theſe 
things than 1, to free me from this doubt ; and tell me how the 
cale ſtands. 


_ Salty, You ask a rational queſtion, and anſwering to the Ob- 


kQion, l ſay z That although Aſtronomy in the courles of many | 


415 


Many things 


y muy remain 4s yot 
ages hath made a great progreſs in diſcovering the conſtitution 
and motions of the Celeſtial bodies, yet is it not hitherto arrived 
at that height, but that very many things remain undetided, and 
aply many others allo undiſcovered. It is robe {uppoſed that the 
{t obſervers of Heaven knew no more but one motion common 


tg 


nnebſerved in As 


Fronemy. 


416 


Sarurn for ts 
ſlowneſs ,avd More 
cury for ts rare- 
neſs of a»pearimg 
were 1% thoſe 
that were laſt ob- 
ſerved, 


Particular fiyu- 
fures of the Orbs 
of the Planets not 
yet well reſolved, 


The Sun paſſ- 
eth one half of the 
Zodiack nine days 
ſooner than the 
«they. 


The Moons m'- 
txon Principally 
ſought m (}e ace 


£0 1nt of Eclipſes R 


G. Galiltzus, his Syſtere, 


to all the Stars, as is this diurnal one: yet I believe that in few 
dayes they perceived that the Moon was inconſtant in keeyin 

company with the other Stars , but yet withal, that many Years 
paſt,betore that they diſtinguiſhed all the Planets : And in Par. 
ticular, Lconceit that Saturn by its lownels, and Mercury by rea. 
{on of its {eldom appearing, were the laſt that were obſerved 
be wandiing anderrant. It 1s to be thought that many more 
years run out before the ſtatioi 8 and retrogradations of the three 
{uperiour Planets were known, as allo their approximations and 
receflions from the Earth,neceflary occaſiong of 1ntroducing the 
Eccentrix and Epicicles, thiugs unknown even to Ariſtotle , for 
that he makes no mention thereof. Mercury, and Venus, with 
their admirable apparitions 3 how long did they keep Aſtrono- 
mers in ſuſpence, before that they could reſolve (not to ſpeak of 
any other of their qualities) upon ther fituation ? Inſomuch 
that the very order onely of the Mundane bodies, and ,the inte- 
gral ſtcuure of the parts of the Univerie by us known, hath been 
doubxcd of untill the.time of Copernicas, who hath ar laſt giyen 
us Orice gf the true conſtitution, and real {yſteme, according to 
which thole parts are dilpolcd; 1o that at length we are certain 
that Mercury , Venus, and the other Planets do revolve about 
the Sun ard that the Moon revolveth about the Earth. But 
how each Planet goyerneth it ſelf in its particular revolution,and 
how preciſely the ſtruQure of its Orb is framed ; which is that 
which is. vulgaily called the Theory of the Planets, we cannot as 
yet undoubtedly relplve. Mars, that hath ſo much puzled our 
Modern Aſtronomers, is a Proof of this : And to the Moon her 
{elf there have been afligned ſeveral Theories, after that the ſaid 
Copernicus had much altered it from that of Ptolomy. And to 
deſcend to qur particular caſe, that is to ſay, to the apparent mo- 
tjon of, the Sun and Moon 3 touch ing the former, there hath been 
blerved a.certain great irregularity, whereby it paſſeth the two 
{emicixc]es of the Echptick, divided by the points of the Equi- 
noxes jn yery different times 3 in paſſing one of which, it ſpend- 
6th abquc nine daycs.more than in paſſing the other; a difference, 
as yqu;legzvery great and notable, But if in paſling (mall arches, 
luch for example as are the twelve Signs, he maintain a moſt re- 
gular motion, or elle proceed with paces, one while a little more 
iwift, and another more (low, as it is neceſſary that it dpzin calc 
the annual motion belong to the Sun onely in appearance , but 
1n reality to the Earth in company with the Moon, it is what hath 
not hitherto been obſerved, nor it may be, ſought. Touching 
the Mogn inthe next place, whoſe reſticutions have been prin- 
cipaliy, Jopkt into an account of the Eclipſes, for which it 15 ſuf- 
ficient to hayean exat knowledge of its motion about the Land, 


Diatocusr JV. 447 


- hath not been likewiſe with a perfe& curioſity inquired , what 
> Courſe 15 tNOFOW the particular arches of the Zodiack. That 
herefore the Earth and Moon in running through the Zodiack; 
thatis round the Grand Orb, do ſomewhat accellerate at the 
Moons change, and retard at its fall, ought not to be doubted ; 
©: chat the 1aid difference is nor manifeſt, which cometh to be 
\nobſerved upon tWo accounts ; Firſt, Becauſe ir hath not been 
look for» Secondly, Becauſe that its puſlible ir may not be very 
great. Nor is there any need that it ſhould be great, for the pro- 
ducing the effe that we lee in the alteration of the greatnels of 
ebbings and lowing F or not onely thole alterations, but the | 
Tides themſelves are but imall matters in reſpe& of the grandure rope _ 
of the ſubjze&s on which they work ; albeit that to us, and to our. things » comveri- 
rtleneſs they ſeem great. For the addition or {ubdufion of Ru ity x 
one degree of velocity where there are naturally 700, or 1000, welcciry of the mo- 
can be called no great alteration, either in that which conferreth *#»*f pa TOReY 
t, or in thar Which receiveth it : the Water of our Mediterrane co: bag 
carried about by the durnal revolution, maketh about 700 miles 
an hour, (which 1s the motion common to the Earth and to it, and 
therefore not perceptible to us)8& that which we ſenſibly diſcern 
ro be made in the ſtreams or currents, is not at the rate of full one 
mile an hour, (1 ſpeak of the main Seas, and not of the Straights) 
and this is that which altereth.che firſt, naturall , and grand mo- 
tion ; and this motion is very great in reſpe& of us, and of Ships - 
for a Vellel that in a ſtanding Water by the help of Oares can 
make v. g: three miles an hour , in that ſame current will row 
twice as far-with the ſtream as againſt it : A notable difference 
in the motion of the Boat, though but very (mall in the motion 
of the Sea, which is altered but its ſeven hundredth part. The 
like I ſay of its riſing, and falling. one, two , or three feet 3 and 
ſcarcely four or five in the utmoſt bounds of a ſtreight, rwo thou- 
land, or more miles long, and where there are depths of hundreds 
of feet; this alteration 1s much leſs thanif in one of the Boats 
that bring us freſh Water, the (aid Water upon the arreſt of the 
Boat ſhould riſe at the Prow the thicknel(s of a leaf. I conclude 
therefore that very ſmall alterations in reſpe& of the immenſe 
greatneſs, and extraordinary velocity of the Seas, is ſufficient to 
make therein great mutations 1n relation to our {mallnefs, and ro 
our accidents. 

Sack. I amfully fatisfied as to this particular 3 it remains to 
declare unto us how thoſe additions and ſubſtraQtions derived 
from the diurnal Vertigo are made one while greater , and ano- 
ther while 1cſſer 3 from which alterations you hinted that the an- 
nual period of the augmentations and diminutions of the eb+ 
bings and flowings did depend. | 

Ggg SAaLY; 


41s 


ite ;} intclligible , but the difficulty of the accident 1 


the additions and 
fubſtrall ions of the 
diurnal converſion 


from the annual 
motion, 


G.Garit#us, his $ yſlcme, 
Sarv. I will uſe my utmoſt endeavours to render my (ef 
t felf, and the 


great attention of mind requilite for the comprehending of it 
conſtrains me to be obſcure. The unequalities of the additions 
and ſubſtraQions, that the diurnal motion maketh to or frgn 
the annual dependeth upon the inclination of the Axis of the g;. 
urnal motion upon the plane of the Grand Orb, or, if you pleaſe 
of the Ecliptick 3 by means of which inclination the Equinogial 
interſe&eth the ſaid Ecliptick , remaining inclined and obliaue 
upon the ſame according to the ſaid inclination of Axis. And the 
quantity of the additions importeth as much as the whole diame- 
ter of the ſaid Equinoctial , the Earths centre being at the ſame 
time in the Solſtitial points 3 bur being out of them it importeth 
leſſe and lafſe , according as the ſaid centre ſucceſſively approa- 
cheth to the points of the Equinoxes, where thole additions are 
Igffer than in any other places. This is the whole buſinefle, but 
wrapt up in the obicurity that you ſee. 

Sack Ratherin that which 1 do no not ſee; for hitherto 1 
comprebend nothing at all. 

S atv. I have already foretold it. Neverthelefſe we will try 
whether by drawing a Diagram thereof , we can give ſome 
{mall light to the ſame; though indeed it might better be {et 
forth by ſolid bodies than by bare Schemes ; yet we will help our 
ſelves with Perſpective and fore-ſhortning. Let us draw there- 
fore , as before, the circumference of the Grand Orb, [as in 
Fig. 4-} in which the point A is underſtood to be one of the 
Solſticzals , and the diameter AP the common Section of the 
Solſticial Colure, and of the plane of the Grand Orb or Eclip- 
ack ; and m that {ame point A let us ſuppoſe the centre of the 
Terreſtrial Globe to be placed , the Axis of which C AB, in- 
clined upon the Plane of the Grand Orb, fallerh on the plane of 
the ſaid Colure that paſſeth thorow both the Axis of the Equino- 
Qual, and of the Ecliptick. And for to prevent confuſion, It 
us only draw the EquinoGal circle, marking it with theſe chara- 
ders D GE F, the common {e&ion of which, with the plane of 
the grand Orb,let be the line D E, ſo that half of the ſaid E- 
quinoQial D F E will remain inclined below the plane of the 
Grand Orb, and the other half DG E elevated above. Let 
now the Revolution of the ſaid EquinoGtial be made, according 
co the order of the points DGE F, and the motion of the cen- 
tre from A towards E. And becauſe the centre of the Earth 
beingin A, the Axis C B (which is ere& upon the diameter of 
the Equimotial D E) falleth, as hath been ſaid , in the Sollit 
tial Colnre , the common | Seion of which and of the 
Crand Orb, is the diameter P A, the ſaid line PA won 


ec 


Diatocuet IV, 


be perpendicular to the ſame D E, by reaſon that tlie Colure j; 
ore& upon the grand Orb 3 and therefore the ſaid D E; 
all be the Tangent of the grand Orb in the point A. 
& that in this Poſition the motion of the Centie by the arch 
A E; that is, of one degree every day difftereth very little ; yea, 
;; asif it were made by the Tangent D A E. And becauſe by 
means of the diurnal motion the point D, carried about by G, 
anto EF, encrealerh the motion of the Centre moved almoſt in the 
(ame line D E;, as much as the whole diameter D E amounts 
:nto; and on the other ſide diminiſheth as much , moving about 
che other {ſemicircle E F D. The additions and {ubducions 
in this place therctore, that is in the timic of the ſolſtice , ſhall be 
meaſured by the whole diameter D E. | 

Let us in the next place enquire, Whether they be of the (ame 
bigneſs in the rimes of the Equinoxes ; and tranſporting the 
Centre of the Earth to the point I, diſtant a Quadrant of a 
Circle fromthe point A. Let us ſuppole the ſaid EquinoRial 
to be GE F D, its common {ef&ion with the grand Orb D E; the 
Axis with the ſame inclination C B; bur the Tangent of the grand 
Ob in the point I ſhall be no longer D E, but another which 
ſhall cut that at right Angles; and ler it be this marked HIL, 
according to which the motion of the Centre I, ſhall make its / «4 
grels, proceeding” along the circumference of this grand Orb. 
Now in this ſtate the Additions and SubſtraQions are no longer 
meaſured by the diameter D E, as before was done ; becauſe that 
diameter nor diſtending it ſelf according to the line of the annual 
motion H L, rather cutring tt at right angles, thoſe terms D E, do 
neither add nor ſubſtra& any thing 3 but the Additions and 
Subſtractons are ro be taken from that diameter that falleth 
in the plane that is erre& upon the plane of the'grand Orb, and 
that incerſe&s it according'to the line H L 3 which diametet im this 
cale ſhall be this G F and the Adjediive, if I miay ſo (ay, (hall 
be that made by the point G, about the ſeniicircle GE F, and the 
Ablative ſhall be the reſt made by' the other {emicircle F D G. 
Now this diameter , as not being in the ſame line H L' of the 
annual motion, but rather cutting it, as we ſee in the point I, the 
term G being elevated above, and E depreſſed below the plane 
of the grand Orb, doth not determine the Additions and Sub- 
ſtrakions according to its whole length,but the quantity of thoſe 
lirſt ought to be taken from the part of the line H L, that is in- 
tercepted between the perpendiculars drawn 'upon it from rhe 
terms G F ; namely, theſe two GS, and F V : So that the mea- 
{ure of the additions is the line S V leſſer then'G F, orthenÞ E ; 
which was the meaſure of the additions in thee Solſtice A. And 

o{ucceſlively, according as the centre of the Earth (tial be con- 
| Ggg 3 ſtituted 


5 


420 


G, Garirtzus, hi Syſleme. 


ſtituted in othec points of the Quadrant A TI, drawing the Tan. 
ents in the ſaid points, and the perpndiculars upon the ſame fal. 
ing from the terms of the diameters of the Equino&ia] drawn 
from the erreCt planes by the laid Tangents to the Plane of the 
grand Otb ; the parts of the {aid Tangents (which {hall cont. 
nua!ly be leſſer towards the EquinoCtials, and greater towards the 
Sulſtices)ſhall give us the quantities of the additions and ſubſtra. 
ions. How much in the next place the leaſt additions differ from 
the greateſt, 1s ealie to be known,becauſc there is the ſame gif. 
ference betwixt them, as between the whole Axis or Diameter of 
the Sphere, and the part thereof that lyeth berween the Polar. 
Ciccles ; the which is leſs than the whole diameter by very near a 
twelfch part , ſuppoſing yet that we ſpeak of the additions and 
ſubſt:aftions made in the EquinoGial ; but in the other Para]. 

lels they are lefſcr, acco: ding as their diameters do diminiſh. 
This is all that 1 have to lay upon this Argument,and all perhaps 
that can fall under the comprehenſion of our knowledge, which, 
as you well know, may not entercain any concluſions, {ave onely 
thoſe that are firm and conſtant, ſuch as are the three kinds of Pe- 
riods of the ebbings and flowings ; for that they depend on cauſes 
that ace1nvariabl., ſimple, and cternal. But becauſe that e- 
condary and particular cauſes,able co make many alterations, in- 
termix with theſe that are the primary and univerſal ; and theſe 
ſccondary cauſes being part of them inconſtant, and not to be 
obl:rved ; as for example, The alteration of Winds, and part 
(ravugh terminate and fixed) unoblerved for their multiplicity, 
as are the lengths of the Straights, their various inclinations to- 
wards this or that part,the ſo many and ſo different depths of the 
Waters, who ſhall be able,unleſs after very long obſervations,and 
very certain relations, to frame ſo expeditious Hiſtories thereof,as 
that they may ſerve for Hypotheſes , and certain ſuppoſition to 
ſuch as will by their combinations give adequate reaſons of all the 
appearances, ard as I may ſay, Anomalie, and particular irregula- 
rities that may be dilcovered in the motions of the Waters? [ 
will content my felf with advertiſing you , that the accidental 
cauſes are in nature, and are able to produce many alterations3 
for the more minute oblervations, I remit them to be made by 
thoſe that frequent ſeveral Seas: and onely by way of a conclu- 
fion ro this our conference, I will propoſe to be conſidered, how 
that the preciſe times of the fluxes and refluxes do not onely 44 
pen to be altered by the length of Straights , and by the ditte- 
rence of depths; but I believe that a notable alteration may alſo 
proceed from the comparing together of ſundry tar&s of Sea, 
different in greatneſs ; and in polition, or, if you will , inclina- 
tion 3 which difference happeneth exaQly here in the dis. 
WIPN, , 


Diatocur. IV. 


Gulph,lcſſe by far than the reſt of the Mediterrane,and placed in 
(\ different an inclination, that whereas that hath its bounds that 
:nclolerh 1t on the Eaſtern part, as are the Coaſts of Syria, this is 
ſhur up 10 its MOTE Welterly part: and becaule the ebbings and 
Agwings are much greater towards the extremities, yea, becauſe 
the Seas riſings and fallings are there onely greateſt, it may pro- 
bably happen that the times of F lood at Venice may be the time of 
low Water in the other Sea, which, as being much greater, and 
Jiſtended more direaly from Weſt to Eaſt, cometh in a certain 
ſort to have dominion over the Adriatick : and therefore it 
would be no wonder, 10 cale the eff::&s depending on the pri- 
mary cauſes, ſhould not hold true in the rimes thar they ought, 
and that correſpond to the periods 1a the Adriatick, as it doch 
:n the reſt of the Mediterrane. Bur theie Particularities require 
long Obſervations, Which I neither have made as yet, nor ſhall I 
ever be able to make the lame for the tucure. 

$ a 6 8. You have, in my opinion, done enough in opening us 
the way to ſo lofty a ſpeculation, of which, if you had given us 
no more than that firſt general Propofition that ſeemeth to me to 
admit of no reply, where you declare very rationally, that the 
Veſſels containing the Sea-waters continuiug ſtedfaſt , it would 
be impoſlible, according to the common courie of Nature, that 
thoſe motions ſhould follow in them which we ſec do follow ; 
and that, on the other fide, granting the motions alcribed, for o- 
ther reipe&ts, by Copernacus to the Terreſtrial Globe, theſe ſame 
alterations ought ro enſue in the Seas, it I ſay you had told us no 
more, this alone in my judgment, fo far exceeds the vanities in- 
troduced by ſo many others , that my mcer looking on them 
makes me nauſeare them , and LI very much admire, that among 
men of ſublime wit, of which nevertheleſs there are not a few, 
not one hath ever confidered the incompatibility that is berween 
the reciprocal motion of the Water contained, and the immobi- 
ly of the Veſſel containing, which contradiGon leemeth to me 
now {0 manifeſt. 

Sa1v. It is more to be admired, that it having come 1ato the 
thoughts of ſome to refer the cauſe of the Tide to the motion of 
the Earth, therein «ſhewing a more than common apprehenſion, 
they ſhould, in afterwards driving home the motion cloſe with 
no fide; and all, becauſe they did nor ſee that one fimple and 
unitorm motion, as v.gr. the {ole diurnal motion of the Terre- 
ſtrial Globe, doth not ſuffice, but that there is required an unc- 
Ven motion, one while accelerated, and another while retarded : 
for when the motion of the Veſlels are uniforme, the waters 
contained will habituate themſelves thereto, without ever ma- 
king any alteration. To ſay alſo (as it is related of an ancient 

Mathe- 


Alt 


One ſonple motie 
on of the ferry” ſÞr 8 
al Globe ſu fficeth 
not to produce the 
Ebbing & Flowing 


Seleucus the CM a- 
thematician cenſn- 


red, 


Kepler 5+ with 
reſpeft blamed. 


Sig.Czſare Mar- 
lilius obſerveth the 
Meridian to be 
moveable, 


G. Garltnus, bis Syſteme. 


The opinion of Mathematician) that the motion of the Earth meeting w 


ith the 
motion of the Lunar Orb, the concurrence of them oc: aſtoneth 


the Ebbing and Flowing, 15 an ablolute vanity , not onely be. 
cauſe it is not expreſt, nor leen how it ſhould (o happen, but th. 
falſity is obvious, for that the Revolution of the Earth is not con. 
trary to the motion of the Moon, bur is towards the ſame way. 
So that all that hath bcen hitherto laid, and imagined by orhers, 
15, in my judgment, altogether invalid. But amongſt all the 
famous men that have philolophated upon this admirable efte& 
of Nature, 1 more wonder at Kepler than any of the reſt, who 
being of a free and piercing wit, and having the motion aſcri- 
bed to the Earth, before him, hath for all thac given his ear and 
aſſent to the Moons predominancy over the Water, and to oc- 
cult properties, and (uch like tritles. 

Sacr- Iamof opinion, that to thele more ſpaculative per- 
ſons the ſame happened, that at preſeut betalls me, namely, the 
not underſtanding the intricate commixtion of the three Periods 
Annual, Monethly, and Diurnal ; And how their cauſes ſhould 
ſeem to depend on the Sun, and on the Moon, without the Suns 
or Moons having any thing to do with the Water; a bulineſſe, 
for the full underſtanding of which 1 ſtand in need of a little 
longer time to conſider thereof, which che novelty and difficulty 
of it hath hitherto hindred me from doing but I deſpair not, but 
that when I return in my ſolitude and filence ro ruminate that 
which remainerh in my fancy, nor very well digeſted, I ſhall 
make it my own. We have now, from theſe four dayes Dil- 
courſe, great atteſtations; in favour of the' Copernican Syſteme, 
amongſt which theſe three taken : the firſt, from the Stations and 
Retrogradations of the Planets, and from their approaches, and 
receflions from the Earth; the ſecond, from the Suns revolving 
in it ſelf, and from what i obſerved in its ſpots ; the third, from 
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea do ſhew very rational and 
concluding. 

SALv. To which alſo haply, in ſhort , one might adde a 
fourth, and peradventure a fitth 3 a fourth, I ſay, taken from 
the fixed ſtars, ſeeing that in them,upon exa& obſervations, thoſe 
minute mutations appear, that Copernicus thought to have been 
inſenſible. There ſtarts up, at this inſtant, a fifth novelty, from 
which one may argue mobility in the Terreſtrial Globe, by 
means of that which the moſt Illuſtrious Signore Ceſare, of the 
noble Family of the Marſiliz of Bologna, and a Lyncean Aca- 
demick, diſcovereth with much ingenuity, who in a very learned 
Trad of his, ſhewerh very particularly how that he had obſerved 
a continual mutation, though very flow in the Meridian line; 
of which Treatiſe, at length, with amazement , peruſed by war 


- 


Diatoeur. LV. 


{ hope he wall communicate Copics to all thoſe that are Students 
of Natures Wonders. 

3. Gr. This is not the firſt time that I haye heard ſpeak of 
che exquilite Learning of this Gentleman , and of his ſhewing 
tim(clt a zealous Patron of all the Learned, and if this, or any 
ocher of his Works ſhall come to appear in publique, we may be 
:forchand aſſured, that they will be received, as things of great 
x7 | y, Now becaule it is time to put an end to our Diſcour- 
ſes, it remaineth, that I intreat you, that if, at more leaſure go- 
ing over the things again that have been alledged you meet 
withany doubts, or {cruples not well reſolved, you will excuſe 
mv overſight, as well for the novelty of the Notion, as for the 
weaknefſe of my wit, as alſo for the grandure of the SubjeR, 
as alſo finally, becauſe I do not, nor have pretended to that aſ- 
ſent from others, which I my ſelf do not give to this concceit, 
which 1 could very eaſily grant to bea Chymera, and a meer 
paradox ; and you Sagredus, although in the Diſcourſes paſt 
you have many times, with great applauſe, declared, that you 
were pleaſed with ſome of my conjeQures, yer do I believe, that 
that wasin part more occaſioned by the novelty than by the cer- 
tainty of them, but much more by your courteſie, which did 
think and deſire, by its aſſent, to procure me that content which 
we naturally uſe to take in the approbation and applauſe of our 
own matters : and as your civility hath obliged me to you ; ſo 
am |allopleaſed with the ingenuity of Simplicius. Nay, his 
conſtancy in maintaining the Doctrine of his Maſter, with fo 
much ſtrength & undauntedneſs,hath made me much to love him. 
AndasI] amto give you thanks, Sagredxs, for your courteous af- 
tecon ; ſo of Simplicius, T ask pardon, if I have ſometimes 
m.ved him with my too bold and reſolute ſpeaking : and let him 
be aſſured that I have not done the ſame out of any inducement 
ol ſiniſter affe&ion, but onely to give him occaſion to ſet before 
ns more lofry fancies that might make me the more knowing. 

S11p. There is no reaſon why you ſhould make all theſe ex- 
cules, that are needlefſe, and eſpecially to me , that being accu- 
ſtomed to be at Conferences and publique Diſputes, have an 
bundred times ſeen the Diſputants not onely to grow hiot and an- 
£r) at one another, but likewiſe to break forth into injurious 
words, and ſometimes to come very neer to blows, As for the 
palt Diſcourſes, and particulatly in this laſt, of the reaſon of 
the Ebbing and F lowing of the Sea, I do not, to ſpeak the truth, 
very well apprehend the fame, but by that ſlight Idea, what c- 
Ver It be, that I have formed thereof to my ſelf , I confeffe that 
Your conceit feemteth to me far more ingenuous than any of all 


thoſe 


423 


PO 2 SINE, 
- 


" ” and added. AA 


44 


G, Garitzus , bis Syſleme. 


thoſe that I ever heard beſides, but yet nevertheleſlc | eſicem je 
not true and concluding : but keeping alwayes before the 
of my mind a ſolid Doctrine that I have learn't from a 

learned and ingenuous perion, and with which it is neceſlary tg 
ſit down ; I know that both you being asked, Whether Cod, b 

his infinite Power and Wiſdome might confer upon the Element 
of Water the reciprocal motion which we obſerve ia the ſame _ 


any other way, than by making the containing Veſſel to moye L 


CYec 
moſt 


"know, I lay, that ay will an(lwer, that he might, and knew how 


to have done the ſame many wayes, and.thole unimaginable ;, 
our ſhallow uaderſtanding : upon which 1 forthwith conclude, 
that this being granted, it would be an extravagant boldnefſ.. 
for any one to goe about to limit and contine the Djyine 
Power and Wildome to ſome one particular conjecture of 
his own. 

SAL v. This of yours is admirable, and truly Angelical Do. 
&rine, ro which very exaRly that other accords, 1n like manner 
divine, which whilſt it giveth us leave to diſpute, touching the 
coaſticrution of the World, addeth withall (perhaps to the end, 
that the exerciſe of the minds of men might neither be diſcou- 
raged, nor made bold) that we cannot find out the works made 
by his hands. Let therefore the Dilquiſttion permitted and or- 
dain'd us by God, aſliſt us in the knowing, and ſo much more 
admiring his greatneſſe, -by how much lefle we* finde our (elves 
too dull to penetrate the profound Abyſſes of his infinite Wiſ. 
dome. 

SaGr. And this may ſerve for a final cloſe of our four dayes 
Diſputations, afrer which, if it ſeem good to Salviatns, to take 
{ome time to reſt himſelf, our curioſity muſt, of neceſſity, grant 
him the ſame, yet upon condition, that when it is lefſe incommo- 
dious for him, he will rerurn and fatisfie my deſire in particular 
concerning the Problemes that remain to be diſcuſt, and that I 
have ſet down to be propounded at one or two other Conferen- 
ces, according to our agreement : and aboye all, I ſhall very 
impatiently wait to hear the Elements of the new Science of our 
Phe ions about the natural and violent local Motions. And 
in the mean time, we may, according to our cuſtome, ſpend an 
hour in taking the Air in the Gondols that waiteth for us. 


FINIS, 


Fra: 3 
C 


— — 
—  — 


Pl ace this Plate 


at the endl of 
the. fourth 


Dialogues 


e =» 4 - Pay -— _ = Q 


TABLE 


Of the moſt Obſervable 


PERSONS d MATTERS 


Mentioned in the FixsT Paxr of 


The Firſt Tome. 


A 


ABSTiACT- 
Hings are exaRtly the ſame 1n AbiraF, as 
T in Concrete, 185 


A1RE- 

The part of the Ajre inferiour to the Higher 
Mountains doth follow the Motion of the 
Earth, 124 

The motion of the Ajre apt to carry with it 
light things, but not heavy. 124 

The Aire alwayes touching us with the ſame 
part of it, cannot make us feel it, 228 

15 more reaſonable that the Arre be commoved 
by the rugged ſurface of the Earth , than by 
the Celeſtial Motion, 400 

I is demonſtrated , inverting the Argument, 
that the perpetual Motion of the Azrefrom 
Eaſt to Weſt , commeth from the Motion 
of Heaven, 403 

ANIMALS: 
Animals, Vide, The Motion of Animals, 


The caulc of the Wecarineſſe that attends the 
Motion of Animals, 244 


AroOLLONIUS. 
4ze!l:nius and Copernicus demonſtrate the Re- 
trogradations of Venus and Mercury, 311 


Arguing, A rguments>& Argumentations 


Somcin Arguing fix in their minds the Conclu- 
lion believed by them , and then adapt their 
Reaſons to that, 250 

One 


One ſingle Experiment or ſound Demonſtrati- 


on , overthroweth all Arguments mecrly pro» 
bable. 


log 


A pleaſant Example ſhewing the inyalidity of 


ſome Phiſical Argumentations. 


| 363 
ARrliSTARCHUS. 


Reaſon and Diſcourſe in 4rillarchu and C oper- 


nicus prevailed over manifeſt Senſes 3ot 


ARISTOTLE. 


Ariſtotle maketh the World perfe& , becauſcir 
hath the Thrceefold Dimenſion. > 
Ariſt, his Demonſtrations to prove the Worlds 
Dimenſions to be three, and ng@ more. 3 
Ariſtotle his Definition of Nature cither imper- 
fc or unſcaſonable. 7 
Artſtotle accomodates the Rules of Architeure 
to the Frame of the World, and not the 
Frameto the Rules. 8 
Ariſtotle cannot equivocate, being the Inventer 
of Logick. 23 
Ariſtotle his Paralogilme in proving the Earth 
to be in the centre of the World, 2 
Ariſi,Paralogiſme another way diſcovered. 24 
Ariſtotle his Diſcourſe to prove the Incorrupti- 


bility of Heaven. 26 
Ariſtotle proveth that Circular Motion bath no 
Contrary. 26 


Ariſiotle detective in aſſigning the Cauſes, why 
the Elcmcnts are Generable and Corrup- 
tiblc. 31 

Ariſiotle would change his opinion, did he {ce 
the Noveltics of our Age. 37 

[ Hbb] Ariſt. 


- = p = TE X b 


ated mts De ed HAD a6 


w% - —maed. HO —_ Ss ae. 7 


The Table. 


Arif. picferres Senſe before Ratiocination. 42 
Ariſlotle aftirmcth the Heavens altcrable, rather 
thcn otlicrwile, by his Dodtrine, 42 
Requifites to fit a man to Philoſophate well in 
the way of Ariſtotle. 92 
$yme of Ariſtotles Scetators impaire his Repu- 
tation , in going about to cnhanſcit, 9g? 
Thc {crvile Spirit ot ſome of Ariſt. tollowcrs. 95 
Too cloſe an adherence to Ariztuile 1s blame- 
ablc. | 
Ariſlotle and Ptolomy argue 1gainſt the Diurnal 
Motion aſcribed to the Earth. 97 
A Propoſition that Ari{/»tl? filched from tlic 
Ancients, and ſomcwhat altcred. 99 
Ariſtotle his Arguments tor the Earths Quic- 
ſcencc and Iinmobility, 197 
Ariſtotle were he alive , would cither retute his 
Adverſarics Arguments , or cl{c would altcr 
his Opinion, 113 
Ariitot/es tirit Argument againſt the Earths Mo- 
tion, is deteftivein two things. 121 
The Paralogilme oft Arifotle and Ptolomy 1n 
ſuppoiing that for known, which is in que- 
ſtion. 121 
Ariſtotle admittcth that the Fire moveth direct- 
ly upwards by Nature, and round abour, by 
Participation. 122 
A15//0:1-and Ptolomy ſeem to confute the Earths 
Mobility againſt thoſe whothinkthar it, ha- 
ving alongtime ſtood ſtill, began to move 1n 
the time of Pythagoras. 168 
Ariftotle his crrour in aftrming falling Grave 
Bodics to move according to the proportion 
ot their gravitics. 199 
Ariſtotle his Demonſtrations to prove the Earth 
is finite, are all nullified, by denying it to 
b.- movcable, 294 
Ariftotle makcth that Point to be the Centre of 
the Voiverle , about which all the Celeſtial 
Spheres do revolve 294. 
A queſtion is put,if Ar. were forced to reccive 
one of rwo Propofitions, that make againſt 
his Do&rinc , which he wovid admit. 294 
eAriitotle is Argument againit the Ancicnts, 
who hcId thatthe Earth was a Planer, 344 
Ariftotle taxcth P'ato of being over-{tudious of 
Geomer:y, 361 
Ariftetle lv. !dethi choſe Eficts tobe miraculous, 


of winch the fouls are unknown. 34 
ASTRONOMER 
4/1, nomersConfured by Anti-Tycho. 38 


The principal cope 0t ſiroromers 1$ tO give 
arcaſon ot Appe2:ances and P;.»nomena, 308 
Aftronomrs all agree that the greater Magni- 
tudcs, 


tudcs of the Orbes j F 
als Fw Dana the cauſe of thetardity 
eAſtronomers perhaps have not knows an 
Appearances ovght to follow, upon th T at 
nual Motion of the Earth, Ce An- 
A\#tronomers having omitted to inſtance wh 338 
terations thoſe 2re , that may be Fry 
from the Annual Motion of the Earth _ 
2 


thereby teſtific that they never riot. 
derſtood the ſame, Points wn, hy: 
243 


ASTRONOMICAL. 


Aſlronomical Obſervations wreſted by Anti-Ty 
cho to his own purpoſe. whe 
Afronomical Inſtruments are very ſubje& C 
Crrour, 166 


ASTRONOMY. 


Aſtronomy reſtored by Copernicus upon the 
Suppoſitions of Ptolomy 208 
Many things may remain as yet unobſcrved in 
Aſtronomy Al5 


AUCUYATORIAN, 


An Aucapatorian Problem for ſhooting of Birds 
flying. 157 


Ax1ont, or Axiomes. 


Inthe Axiome, Fruſtra fit per plura, &c, the addi. 
tion of que bene is ſuperfluous, 106 
Three Axiomes that are ſuppoſed manifeſt, 230 
Certain Axomes commonly admitted by all 
Philoſophers, 361 


B 
Bovpy and Bodies. 


Contrarics that corrupt , rcſidenot intheſame 
Body that corruptcth, 39 
Gravz Bopr, IttheCeleſtial Globe were 
perforated, a Grave Body deſcending by that 
Bore, would paſle and aſcendas far beyond 
the Centre, as it did deſcend. 203 
The motion of Grave Bodies, Vide Motion. 
The Accelleration of Grave Bodies that delcend 
naturally , increaſeth from moment to 
moment, 205 
We know no more who moyeth Grave Boas 
downwards, than who moycth the Stars 


round ; nor know we any thing of hcl 
| | Courles 


The Table, 


Courſes, more than the Names impoſed on 
chem by our elves. ET NL 52, MEN 
The great Maſſe of Grate Bodies being tran(= 
-rrcd out of their Place, the ſeperatcd parts 
«ould follow that Maſlc. 221 
.x$11E BoDr; Every Penfile Body carricd 
* 1 inthe Circurference of a Circle , ac- 
auircth of it (clf a Motion in it ſclt contrary 
ty the lame. 362 
Ce18511at Bopirs neither heavy nor 
1oht according to Ariſtotle. OR. 
Lee/tial Bodies are Generable and Corruptible 
becauſe they are Ingencrable aud Incorrup- 
idle, <5, IM 
Amongſt Celzſt, Bodies there is no contrariety.29 
(::ftial Boates rouch, but are not touched by the 
Elements. . =-:30 
Rarity and _ in Ce/eftial Bodies , differcnt 
from Rarity and Denſity in the Elements. 30 
/«'+/t;al Bodies deſigned to ſerve the Earth, necd 
© no morcbut Motion and Light, 
(:[;al Bodies wantan interchangeable Opera- 
10n on cach other. 46 
(2-0ial Bodies altcrable in their externe parts.46 
Fertc& Sphericity why aſcribed to Celeſtial Bo- 
dies by Peripateticks, 69 
All Celeit;a/ Badies have Gravity and Levity.q93 
EretntarRY BoDiEs; Their propenfi- 
onto follow the Earth, hath a limired Sphere 
of Activity. 213 
[16ur Bopiss caſicr to be moyed than heavy, 
but leſſe apt to conſerve the Motion. =4oo 
luvixous BopDirs; Bodiesnaturally Ly- 
nuowarc different from thoſe thatare by na- 
ture Obſcurc. 34 
Thereaſon why Lumixow Bodles appear ſo much 
the more cnlarged, by how much they are 
lefler. 304 
Manitcſt Experience ſhews thatthe more Lumi- 
ew Bodies do much morc irradiate than the 
leſle Lucid. 306 
S1*?Ls Bopyrts have but one Simple 
Motion that agrecth with them. 494 
SPHERICAL BODIES; In Spherical! Bodies 
Deoſum is the Centre, and Sw/um the Cir- 
kerence, 479 


y 


Lou 


BONE 5s. 


The ends of the Bones arcrotund, and why, 232 | 


BuoONARRUOTT I. 


rect} a Statuary of admirable ingenuity. 
Re 86 


C &- 


C 


Canon. 


A ſhameful Errour in the Argument takenfrom 
the Czno2-Bullets falling from the Moons 
Concave. : 197 

An exa& Computation of the fall ofthe (anon- 
Bullet from the Moons Concave , to the 
Centre of the Earth, 198 


CGCELKSYIAL 
Celeſital Subſtances that be Vnalterable , and 
Elementary that be Alterable , nccellury in 


the opinion of Ari/tot/e, 2 


CENTRE. 


The Sun more probably inthe Centreof the V- 


niverſc , thanthe Earth. 22 
Natural inclination of all the Globes of the 
World to 20 tothcir Centre, 22 


Grave Bodies may more rationally be affirmed 
to tend towards the Centre of the Earth , than 
of the Vniverlc, 25 


CuYMmisre< 


Chymiſis interpret the Fables of Poctsty be Se- 
crets for making of Gold, LS LINA 


CikcLe, and Crrcalar. 


[t isnot impoſſible with the Circumference of a 
{mall Circle few times reyolved, to meaſure 
and deſcribe a line bigger than any great C/r= 
cle whatſoever. 222 

The C:rcular Line perfect, accordingto Ariſterte, 
and the Right imperfect, and why. b) 


CLakAMONTIUS. 


The Paralogiſme of Claramont:us, 24 6 
The Argument of C/aramontius recoileth upon 
himſclt. 245 
The Mcthod obſerved by Claramontias inconfu- 
ting Aſtronomers , and by Salviatus in rc- 


futing him, 233 
CLoup 

Clouds no lefle apt than the Moon to be illumi; 

nated by the Sun, 75 

Gon: 


Concituston and Concluſions. 


The certainty ofthe Con:luſion helpeth by a reſo- 
lutive Method to finde the Demonſtration. 37 
The Book of Concluſio: s, frequently mentioned, 
was writ by Chriſtopher Scheiner a Jeſuit, 
195, & 323, 


CONTRARIES. 


Contraries that corrupt , reſide not in the ſame 
Body that corruptcth. 30 


COYERNICA Ns 


Anſwers to the three firſt Objedtions againſt the 
Coperntcan S$\ſlem. 30 
The Copernican Syſtem difficul to be underſtood, 
but cafic to be eftected. 354 
A plain Scheme a $99-00mg the Copernican Sy- 
feme and its conſequences, 354 
The proſcribingot the Copernican Dottrine , af- 
tcr{o long a Tolleration, and now that itis 
more than ever followed , ſtudied and con- 
firmed , wonld be an affront to Truth. 
The Cepern. Syſtem admirably agreeth with the 
Miraclc of Foſhaah in the Litcral Senſe. 456 
If Divines would admit of the Copernican Sy- 
ſtem,thcy might ſoon find outExpoſitions for 
all Scriptures that ſecm to make againſt it. 459 
The Copernizar Syſtem rejeed by many,out of a 
devout reſpect to Scripture Authoritics. 461 
The Copernican Syſtem more plainly aflerted in 
Scripturc than the Pro/omaick, 469 


COPERNICAN $. 


Copernicans arc not moved through ignorance of 
the Arguments on the Adverſe part, 110 
Copernicans were all firſt againſt that Opinion, 
bur the Peripatcticks were never on the 
other ſide, 110 
Coperztcans too freely admir certain Propofiti- 
ons fortruc, whichare doubtful. 159 
He that will bea Copernican mult deny his Sen- 
ſes, 228 
A Great Mathcmatician made a Copernican, by 
looking into that Doctrine , with a purpoſe 
to contutc it. 443 


CopuRkNicus. 


Copernicus eſtecmeth the Earth a Globe, like to 

a Planer, I 
Objc&ions of two Moderne Authours | Schei- 
 ncrandClaramongius ] againſt Cop ernons,195 
C oper- 


The T able. 


CopernicusIis Opinion overthrows th 
of Phyloſophers. 22 
A grofle Errour in the Oppoſer of Cota 
and wherein it appears, 234, 235, & , 2 
A ſubtle and withal ſimple Argument A 
(opernicns, | "4 
Coptrnicus his Opponent had but little ugg? 
himzas appcars by anothergroſle Erroy; , 
Its queſtioned whither he underſtood the thirg 
Motion aſſigned to the Earth by Copery, , 36 
Copernicus erroneouſly aflignes the ſame Opera- 
tions to different Natures. 133 
A declaration of the improbability of Copernicux 
his Opinion. 30t 
Reaſon and Diſcourſe in Copernicus and Ariſtar. 
chus prevailed over Senſe. O1 
Copernicus ſpeaketh nothing of the ſmall Yariati- 
on of Bigneſle in Venus and Mars. 302 
Copernicus perſwaded by Reaſons contrary to 
Senſible Experiments. 306 
Copernicus reltored Aſtronomy upon the Suppo- 
ſitions of Ptolomy. 303 
What moved Copernicus to eſtabliſh his Sy. 
ſ{teme, 30$ 
Itsa great argument in fayour of Copernicur, that 
he obviates the Stations and Retrogradati- 


ec T:10Y 1u 


ons of the Motions of the Planets. 309 
Inſtances Ironically propounded by Scheiner 
againſt Copernicus. 323 


Copernicus underſtood not ſome things for want 
of Inſtruments. 33$ 
The grand difficulty in Copernicus his Dodtrine, 
is that which conccrns the Phenomena of 
the Sunand fixed Stars. 343 
Copernicusthe Reſtorcr of the Pythagorean Hy- 
potheſis, and the Occaſion of it. 429 
Copernicus founded not his Doctrine onReaſons 
depending on Scripture , wherein he might 
have miſtaken their Senſe , but upon Natu- 
ral Concluſions and Aſtronomical and Ge- 
omctrical Demonſtrations: 431 


Cornkurr1isr tr, and Corruptibility, 


The perfe&ionof Figure operates in Corraptibie 
Bodies , but notin Eternal. 69 

The Diſparagers of Corruptitility ought to be 
turncdinto Statua's- 

Corruptilility admits of more and cfſc, ſo doth 
not Incorruptibility. 63 


CouNnciLls. 


The Councils refuſe to impoſe Natyral Conclu- 
ſions as matters of Faith, 450 


D 1 4* 


The T able; 


D 


D1IAaMOND 5s: 
pawns ground to divers fides, and why, 63 
D1iDvacus 


Mdacur & Stxndea reconcileth Texts of Scripture 
withthe Copernican Hypotheſis. 468 


DgrFrFINn1iTIoONS. 


'# contain virtually all the Paſſions of 


the things defined, 87 
E 


E aRTH. 


The Eerth Spherical by the Conſpiration of its 
to goto its Centre, 21 

[tis eaſter to prove the Earth to move, than that 
Corruptibility is made by Contrarics. 27 
The Earth very Noble, by reaſon of the Mu- 
tations made therein. 45 
The Zarch unprofitable and full of Idleneſle , 
ts Alterations being taken away. 45 
Tie Eerth more Noble than Gold and Jewels, 


45 
The Celeſtial Bodics deſigned to ſerve the Earth, 


xedno more but Motion and Light. 45: 


The Generations and Mutations that arc in the 
terth, are all for the Good of Man. 47 
Fom the Earth we {ce more than halt the Lu- 
nar Globe, v3 
yen Reſemblances between the Earth and 
Moon. 48 to 53 
The Zarth unable to refle@ the Suns Rays. 54 
The Earth may recipracally operate on Ccleſti- 
a Bodies with its Light, 80 
Affinity between the Erb and Moon , by rea- 
on of their Vicinity. 8t 
The Motions of the Earth imperceptible to its 
Inhabitants. 97 
The Earth can have no other Motions than 
thoſe which to us appear commune to all the 
reſt of the Univerſe , the Earth excepted. 97 
The Diurnal Motion ſcemeth commune to all 
the Univerſe, the Earth oncly excepted, 97 
Ariſtotle and Ptolomy argue againſt the Earths 
Diurnal Motion. | 97 
Diurnal Motion of the Earth. Vide Diur- 

ae Motion. | 
ven Arguments to prove the Diurnal Moti- 
on 


on to belong to the Earth. 99 to to; 
The Earth a pendent Body , and equilibrated 
ina fluid Medium, ſccms unable to refiſt the 


Rapture of the Diurnal Motion. 103 
Two kinds of Arguments againſt the arch: 
Motion, 108 


Arguments of Ariſtotle, Ptolomy, Tycho, and 
other perſons , againſt the Eats M. tion, 
107 & 108 

The firſt Argument againſt the Farths Motion 
takea from Grave Bodics fallins from on 

: Oo 

high to the Ground. 198 
Which Argument is confirmed by rhe Expcri- 
ment of a Body lect fall trom the Round-top 
of a Ships Mat. 108 
The ſecond Argument taken from a Project 
ſhot very high. | 108 
The third Argument taken from the Shot of a 
Canon towards thc Ealt , and towards the 

_ Weſl, 108 
This Argument is cor. {irmcd by two Shots to- 
 wardsthe 1th and South , andiwo others 


towards th ? 1d Veſt. 109 
The fourth At; aun taken from the Clouds 
and from Birds. 1 


A fifth Argument taken from the Aire which 
we feel beat upon us when we run an Horſe 
at full {pced. I14 

A ſixth Argument taken from the whirling ot 
Circular Bodies , which hath a faculty to 


extrude and diſſipate. 11,4 
The Anſwer to Ariſtotles firſt Argument. 1 15 
The Anſwer to the ſecond Argumcnt. 117 


The Anſwer to the third Argument.125 to 15 9 
An Inſtanceof the Diurnal Motion of th- Farr, 
taken from the Short of a Picce of Ordinancc. 
erpendicularly , and the Anf ers to the 
ame, {hewing the Equivoke. 153,154 
The Anſwer tothe Argument of the Shots oft 
Canons made towards the North and 
South. 158 
The Anſwer to the Argument taken from 
the Shots art point blank towards the Ealt 
and Weſt, 159 
The Anſwer to the Argument of the flying 
- of Birds contrary to the Motion of the 
Earth. 165 
An Expcriment by which alone is ſhewn the 
Nullity of all the Arguments produccd a- 
gainſt the Motion of the Earth. 165 
"The Stupidity of ſome that think the Earth bc- 
an to moye , when Pythagoras bcgan toat- 
nds that it did ſo. 167 

A Gcomctrical Demonſtration to prove thc 
Impoſlibility of Extruſion , by mcans of 
the Earths Vertigo , in Anſwerto the (ixth 
[1i# |] Ar- 


Fr "x 


"Ws » = 
"uy At oo» + 


| 
} 
4 


The Table. 


The Axis of the Earth continyeth - 
rallcl troit ſelf , and deſcribeth - Cyling 
cal Supcrhicies , inclining to the Orh _ 

The Orb of the Earth never inclineth Rap, 

AB | 3 


Argument. 176 
Granting the Diurnal Vertigo of the Earth , and 
that by ſome ſudden Stop or Obſtacle it were 
Arrcſted , Houſes, Mountains themſelves, 
and perhaps the whole Globe , would be 
ſhaken 1n picces. 190 
Other Arguments of two Modern Authours 
[Schciner and. Claramontius ] againſt the 
Copernican Hypotheſis of the Earths Mo- 
tion. 195 
The firſt Objection of the Modern Authour 
[ Schciner] in his Book of Concluſions, 195 
The Argument of [ Claramontius ] againſt the 
Earths Motion , taken from things falling per- 
endicularly , another way anſwered, 223 
The Earths Motion collected from the Stars. 
229 
Argumcuts againſt the Earths Motion , taken 
ex rerum natura. | 230 
A Simple Body as the Farth , cannot move with 
three ſcycral Motions. 231 
The Eath cannot move with any of the Moti- 
ons aſſigned it by Copernicus. 231 
Anſwers to the Arguments againſt the Earths 
Morion , token #x rerum natnrs, 231 
Four Axiomes againſt thc Morion,of the Earh, 
23010232 
One onely Principle might cauſe a Plurality of 
Motions in the Earth. 233 
The ſame Argument againſt the Plurality of 
Motions in the Earth, anſwered by Exam- 
plcs of the like Motions in other Celcſtial 
Bodics, 236 
A fourth Argument [ of Claramontius] againſt 
the Copcrnican Hypothefis of the Earthy 
Mobility. 239 
From the Earths obſcurity , and the ſplendor of 
the fixcd Stars, it is argucd that it is movye- 
able, and they immovcable, 239 
A fifth Argument | of Claramontius ] againſt 
the Copernican Hypothcfis of the Eartbe 
Mobility. 240 
Another diffcrence between the Farth and Ce- 
leſtial Bodics , taken from Purity. and im- 


purity. 240 
It ſcems a Soleciſme , to affirme that the Earth 
isnotin FHleaven, 241 


Granting to the Earth the Annual , ir muſt of 
neccſhty alſo haye the Diurnal Motion afſ- 
gned to it. 3 00 

Ducourics more than childiſh , that ſerveto 
kecp Fools in the Opinion of the Earrhs Sta- 
bility. 301 

Thc Difficulties removed that ariſe from the 
Earth; moving about the Sun, not ſolitari- 
ly , but an conſort withthe Moon, 307 

| CONLECT WILL LiW BEVEL El 


ODA - -- 


'CS Pa- 


immutably the ſame. =Y 


The Earth approacheth or recedeth 45 
fixed Stars of the Ecliptick the ee _ 
the Grand Orb, 10y 

If inthe fixed Stars one ſhould diſcover any "eu | 
tation , the Motion of the Ear Nl 
undeniable. ® would be | 

Neceflary Propoſitions for the better concet 
ving of the Canſcquences of the Earths Mo. 
tion, | R 

An admirable Accident depending on the Le 
inclining of the Farth, Axis, 2 

Four ſeveral Motions aſſigned tothe Earth, _ 

The third Motion aſcribed tothe Earth, is ra. 
thera reſting immoyeable. 36 

An admirable internc vertueſor faculty] of Ku 
Earths Globe , to behold alwayes the ſame 
part of Heaven, 363 

Nature, as iu ſport , maketh the Ebbing and 
odaigs. of the Sea to prove the Earth; Mo. 

ility. 

All Terrene Eff: &s indifferently talc 
Motion or Reſt of the Earth , except the Eb. 
bing and Flowing of the Sea. 339 

The Cavities of the Earth canhtiot approach or 
recede fromthe Centre of theſame. 38; 

The Hypotheſis of the Earrhs Mobility taken 
in fayour of the Ebbing and Flowing op. 
poſed. : 399 

The Anſwers to thoſe Obje&ions made againſt 
the Earth: Motion. 399 

The Revolution of the Farth confirmed by a 
new Argument taken from the Aire, goo 

The vaporous parts of the Earth partake of its 
Motions. 20: 0 

Another obſervation taken from the Ayr, in 
confirmation of the motion of the Earth, 03 

A Reaſon of the continual Motion of the Air 
and Water may be given by making the 
Ea»th moveable, rather then by making ir 
immovcable. 405 

The Earths Mobility held by ſundry great Phi- 
loſophers amongſt the Antients. 437 & 468 

The Fathers agree not in expounding the Texts 
of Scripture that are alledged againſt the 


Ezrths Mobility. 450 
The Earth Mobility defended Dy many a- 
mongſt the Modern Writers. 478 
The Eh ſhall ſtand ſtill after the Day of 
Judgement. 480 
The Earthis another Moon or Star. $6 


The Earths ſeveral Motions , according to Cor 
Pernicys- 


—_ ww 


The I able. 


ICUS- 491 
wank ſecundum totum 15 Immutable; though 
not Immoveablec . A91 
The Earths Natural Place. = 492 
The Earths Centre keepeth het in her Natural 
Place. . 493 
The Earth, in what Senſe it may 48/o/atth be {aid 
to be in the loweſt part of the World. 496 


Ez81nG and Ebbings, 


The firſt general Concluſion of the impoſkbj. 
lity of Ebbing and Flowing the Immobility of 
the Terreſtrial Globe being gramed. 38o 

The Periodsof Ebbings and Flowings, Diurnal, 
Monethly, and Annual. 381 

Varictics that happen in the Diurnal Period of 
the Ebbings and Flowings. 222 

The Cauſes of Ebbings and Flowings alledoed 
by a Modern Phyloſopher. 382 

The Cauſe of the Ebbins and Flowing aſcribed 
to the Moon by a certain Prelate. 383 

The Cauſe of the Ebbine, &r. referred by Hye- 
ronimus Borrius and other Peripateticks , to 


the temperate heat of the Moon, 383 
Anſwersto the Vanities alledged as Cauſes of 
the Ebbing and Flowing. 383 


Is proved impoſſible that there ſhould natu- 
ally be any Ebbing and Flowing , the Earth 


deing immoveable, 386 
Tie moſt potent and primary Cauſc of the E4- 
tins and Flowing. 390 
kndry accidents that happen in the Elbings 
2nd Flowings. 391 


Iabns renewed of the particular Accidents 
dſcrved inthe Ezbings and Flowings. 393 
ond Cauſes why in ſeveral Seas and Lakes 
there are no Ebbings and Flowings. 394 
Thx Reaſon why the Ep7ngs and Flowings for 
the moſt part, are every Six Hours, 395 
Th: Cauſe why ſome Seas though very long, 
luffer no Ebbing and Flowing. 395 
Wins a1d Flowings, why greateſt inthe Ex- 
temities of Gulphs, and lcaſtin the middle 
parts, 396 
\Diſcufſfionof ſome more Abſtruce Accidents 
obſcrved in the Ebbing and Flowing. 396 
The Ebbing and Flowing may dependon the Di- 


: urnal Motion of Heaven. 4O 
[tc Ebbing and Flowing cannot depend-on the 
Motion of Heaven. 405 


The Cauſes of the Periods of the Ebbings and 
Flowings Moncthly and Annual, at large 
ned 407 

he Monethly and Annual alterations of the 
8 and Flowings , can depengl on no- 
EL OP ting, 


thing, ſave onthealteration of the Additions 
and SubtraCtions of the Diurnal Period from 
the Annual, 408 
Three wayes of altering the proportion of the 
Additions of che Duwrnal Revolution! to 
the Annual Motion of the £bbing and Flow- 
ing. 409 
Ebbings and Flowings are petty things , in 
comparifon of the vaſtneſle of the Seas, and 
the Velocity of the Motion of the Terreſtrial 
Globe. 417 


Errtcr and Effects, 


Of anew Ffe# its neceſſary that the Cauſe be 


likewiſe new, 370 
The Knowledge of the Efe&s cor.tribute to the 
inveſtigation of the Cauſes. 380 
True and Natural Ef##: follow without difh- 
culty. 387 
Alterations in the E/:#s argue alteration inthe 
Caulc. 407 


EttmenrTs, and their Motions, Vide 
Mor 1 ox. 


ENCYCLOPEDIA. 


Subtiltics fufficiently inſipid, ironically ſpoken, 
' andraken from a certain Encyclopedia, 153 


E xXetERIMENT $» 


Scalible Experiments are to be preferred before 
Humane Argumentations. 21,33, 42, 
Itis good to be yery cautious in admitting Ex- 
periments for true , to thoſe that never tryed 
them. 162 
Experiments and Arguments againſt the Earths 
Motion , ſeem ſo far concluding , as they lye 
under Equivokes | 162 
The Authority of Senſible Experiments and ne- 
ceſſary Demonſtrations in deciding of Phy- 


{ical Controverſies. 436 
E y x. 

The Circle of the Pupil of rhe Eye contracteth 

and enlargeth. 339 


How to finde the diſtance of the Rays Con- 
courſe trom the Pupil of the Eye. 329 


F 


t AIT H- E 
Fajbþ more infallible than cirher Scale, or 


—_— . 7 
{4 


— A a. 


The T able. 


Reaſon. A75 


FikE. 


1412 moyeth dire&ly upwards by Nature , and 
round about by Participation , according 
to Ariſtotle. 122 

It is improbable rhat the Element of Fire ſhould 
be carricd round by the Concave of the 
Moon, 405 


Ficuke and Frgures. 


1 jeure is not the Cauſe of Incorruptibility , but 
of Longer Duration. 
The perfe&ion of F/gure appeareth in Corrup- 
tible Bodies, but not in the Eternal. 69 
If the Spherical Figure conferred Eternity , all 
things would bcEternal. 69 
It is more difficult to finde Figures that touch in 
a part of their Surface , then in one ſole 
point. 185 
The Circular Figure placed amongſt the Poftu- 
lata of Mathcmarticians. 1386 
Irrcgular Figures and Formes difficult to be in- 
troduccd. 187 
Superficial figures increaſc in proportion dou- 
ble to their Lines. 304 


FLEXURE Se. 


The neccſſity and uſe of Flexures in Animals, 
for varying of thcir Motions. 232 


FosCARINI. 


Foſcarinz his Reconciling of Scripture Texts 
with thc Copernican Hypotheſis. 473 


CENERABILITY:. 
Generabilily and Corruptibility are oncly a- 
moneſt Contrarics, according to Ariſt. 26 
Generability and Altcrability are greatcr pcif Ei- 


ons in Muncane Bodics, thenthe Cunt ry 
Qualitics. 44 


GEomETRIL CAL, and Geometry. 


Geometrical Demonſtrations of the Triple Di- 
mCcnſ1on, 4 
Geometrical Exactneſle necdlefle in Phyſical 
Proots, 6 
Ariſtotle raxeth Plato for bcing too ſtudious of 
> CEE Geome- 


Geomelry. 


Peripatctick Phyloſophers condemne the a, 


dy of Geometry , and why, 461 


CGilBEKT. 


The Mapnetick Phyloſophy of Will. Giber,, 46 
The Mcthod of Gilbert in his Philoſophy, 367 


GLroset- 


Our G/obe would have been called Stone, inftead 
ot Earth , if that name had beengiven itin 
the beginning, 367 


Cov. 


God and Nature do employ themſelves incaring 
for Men, as if they mindednoth ng elle. 333 

An Example of Gods care of Man-kind , tiken 
from the Sun, 3 


33 
God hath given all things an inviolable Law to 
obſerve, on 


GREAT. 


Great and Small , Immenſe, &c, arc Relative 
Terms. 394 


GRavirTy. 


Grave ; Vide Body, 

Gravity and Levity , Rarity and Denſity , are 
contrary qualities. 39 

Things Graye had being before the Common 
Centre of Gravity, 221 

Gravity and Levity of Bodies defined, 4g3? 


G UN and Gunnery. 


The Reaſon why a Gun ſhould ſeem to' carry 


farther rowards the Weſt than towards the 
Eaſt. - 366 
The Revolution of the Earth ſuppoſed , thc 
Ball in the Gun erected perpendicularly, doth 
not move by a perpendicular , bur an incli- 
ncd Line, 155 
It is ingenuouſly demonſtrated, rhat,the Earths 
Motion ſuppoſcd , the Shot of Great Gun 
ought to vary no more than inits Reſt, 161 
The Experiment of a Running Chariot to find 
out the difference of Ranges in Gu-nery, 148 
A Compuration in Gunnery , how much the | 
Ranges of Great Shot ought to vary from 
the Mark , the Earths Motion | beirg 
Grantcd, p: : 169 | 


The Table. 


-- 


H 


HEravexN: 


re:ce4 an Habitation for the Immortal 
Gods. | 26 
7700s [Immutadility evident to Senſe, 26 
2:1 Immutable , becauſe there never was 
any Mutationſcenin it, | 3 
Oe cannot (faith Ariftotle) ſpeak confident- 
lv of Heaven , by reaſon of its great di- 
ſtance. ; 42 
The ſubſtance of the Heavens impenetrable, ar- 
cording to Ariſtotle. 54 
The Subſtance of Heaven Intangible. 55 
Many thinzs may be in Heaven, thatarc Inviſi- 
ble tO US, 33 
Thcre are more Documents in the Open Book 
of Heaven , than Vulgar Wits are able tg 
PenctratCc. 4 
Yeven and Earth cver mutually oppoſed to each 
othcr. 480 
Which arcrcally the Greater Lights in Heaven, 
1nd which the leſſer. 484 
Fzienis not compoled of a fifth Eſſence, differ- 
112 from the Matter of infcriour Bodics.,494 
Fezren is no Solid or Denſe Body , but 
hare, 494 
Chriſt at his Incarnation truly deſcended from 
Heaven , and at his Aſcenſion truly aſcended 
Into Heaven. 496 
{the Firſt, Second and Third Heaven, 497 
Fre, in the Senſe of Copernicus , is the ſame 
with the moſt tenuous ther , but different 
fom Paradice , which excells all the Hea- 


ns, 499 


HELL. 


WH # is inthe Centre of the Earth, not of the 


; World, 480 
' HtLl1X. 

' 

. W ihe Fix about the Cylinder may be {aid to be 
; a dimplc Line. 7 
s 


HyYPpOTHE SI 5% 


The trne HypothzFs may diſpatch its Revoluti- 
ons in athert<r time inlefler Circles, than 


n greater , the which is proved by two 
Examples, 419 


Jz $7, 


| 
SR 
A Feſt put upon one that offered to (cl! a cer- 


tain Sccrct of holding Corrc{pondence at a 
aps 
- Thouſand Miles diſtance, 


| 7 
A Fettof a certain Statuary, 94 
Imross1BILITY and Impoſſibilities. 
Nature attempts not Impe/ſibrliti rs, 10 


To (eck what would follow upon an Impr/ſſibi- 
lity is Folly. 22 


IncorruertiBILITY. 


Incorruptibility cſteemed by the Yulgar , out of 
their fcar of Dcath. 4 


INFiNILTY. 
Of Tfinity the Parts arc not one grcater than 


another , although they arc comparatively 
uncqual, 105 


Ins rrRumEtatT and Inſtruments. 


Inſtraments Aſtronomical very {ubjc& to Er- 


rour, 263 
Copernicus underſtood not ſome things for 
want of Inftraments, 338 


A proof of the ſmall credit that is to be given 
ro Aſtronomical Infruments in Minutc Ob- 


{crvations, 351 
Ptolomy did not confide in an Infrument made 
by Archimedes, 52 
Tiſtruments of Tycho made with great FE x- 
Pence, 352 
What In/ſiruments arc moſt apt for cxa&t Obſer- 
vations. 352 


INvENTORS. 


The Firſt Inventore and Obſervers of things 
ought to be admired, 379 


Josnua mn: 


The Miracle of Jo/Þuah in commanding the Sun 
ro ſtand ſtill , contradifts the Prolomaick 


Syſtem. 456 
Foſhuahs Miracle admirably agrceth with the 
Pythagorick Syſtcme. 457 


Vovuvy [ = 0 8, 


_— 
<=. Jn |. 


A I_ 


4 — 


- oAkrw.a mus 25. nw. 


w . _ 


The Table: 


lkoNn. 


Its proved that Iron conſiſts of parts more ſubtil, 
purCc and compact than the Magner, 370 


Jur 1 TER 


Jzpirer and Saturn do encompaſſe the Earth, 


and the Sun. ; 258 
Jupiter augments lefle by Irradiation , than the 
Dog-Star. 393 


K 


KreypLER. 1 


The Argument of Kepler in favour of Coper- 


nicus. = 242 
An Explanation of thetrue Senſe of Kepler , and 
his Defence, 243 
The feizncd Anſwer of Kepler couched in an 
Artificial Irony. 244 
Kepler is, with re{pc, blamed. 422 
Keplers reconciling of Scripture Texts whith the 
Copcrnican Hypotheſis, 461 
K no w, kc. 


The having a perfet Knowledge of nothing, 
maketh ſome beleeve they underftand all 


things. 84 
Gods manner of Knowing different from that of 
Man, 87 


The grear Felicity for which they are to be en- 
vicd , who perlwade themſelves that they 


Know evcry thing. 164 

Our Knowledge is a kind of Reminiſcence, ac- 

cording to Plato, I69 
LiGur. 


Light rcfleted from the Earth into the 
Moon. 52 
The Reflex Light of uncyen Bodies is more uni- 
verſal than that of the ſmooth , and why. 62 
The more rough Superficies make greater Re- 
fletion of Light thanrhe lefſe rough. 65 
Perpendicular Rays of Light illuminate more 


than the Oblique, and why. 65 
The more Oblique Rays of Leh illuminate 
leſle, and why, 65 
Light or Luminous Bodies appear the brighter 
ta an Obicure Ambient. 74 
Lins, 


LixE. 


The Reght Line and Circumference of an inf 
nite Circle arc the ſame thing, ” 


LawYER<. 


Contentious Lawyers that are retained in an i!} 
Cauſe, keep cloſe to ſome expreſſion Falle; 
from the adverſe party at unawares. 324 


LooktInG-GCrassts. 


Flat Looking-Glagts caſt forth their RefleQion to. 
wards but one place , but the Spherical cye- 


ry way. 29 
LyncEan. 


The Lyncean Academick the firſt Diſcoverer of 
the Solar ſpots, and all the other Celcſtial 
Novelties, 312 

The Hiſtory of his proceedings for a long 
time, about the Obſervation of the Solar 


Spots, 313 
MaGcNner- 
Many propertics in the Magnet. 367 


The Maguet armed takes up more Iron, than 
when unarmed, 369 
The true cauſe of the Multiplication of Vere 
inthe Magnet, by means of the Arming, 370 
A ſenſible proof of the Impurity of the May- 


net, 371 
The ſeveral Natural Motions of the May- 
net. 374 


Philoſophers are forced to confefſle that the 
Maznet is compounded of Celeſtial Subſtan- 
ces, and of Elementary, 375 

The Error of thoſe who call the Magnet a mixt 
Body, and the Terreſtrial Globe , a ſimple 


Body, 3 73 
An improbable Effet admiredby Gilbertus in | 
the Magnet, 376 


Macntrticx Philoſophy. 


The Magneiick Philoſophy of William Ge 
304 


MaGNnNITUuUD hk: 


The Magnitude of the Orbs and the Velocity 


of the Motions of Plancts anſwer proporti- | 
CE Te oy Ran onably, * 


The T able; 


onabty » as if deſcendedfrom the fame 
bs 

CC, 
Lane; Maenitudes and Numbers are incom- 
prehen(1vIC by our Vnderſtandings. 332 


Mars. 


yas neceflarily includeth within its Orb the 

Earth, andalſothe Sun. 298 

413 its Oppoſition to the Sun , ſeems ſixty 

times bigger than towards rhe LIT 
29 

© des an hot aflault upon the Coperni- 

can Syſteme. 302 


MarsSILL US 


Signor Ceſar Marſ{ilius obſerveth the Meridian 
to be moveable. 422 


MEtDLcCEAN. 


The time of the Mecdicean Planets converſi- 
ons. Lo1 

The Medicean Planetsare as it were four Moons 
about Fupzer. 307- 


MEDITERRA N: 


Mederranean Sea made by the Seperation of 
Abila and Calpen. 35 
The Voyages in the Mediterran from Eaſt to 
Weſt are made in ſhorter times than from 
Weſt ro Eaſt. 493 


McErcury. 


The Revolution of Mercury concluded to be 
about the Sun, within the Orb of Venus.298 
Mwewry admitteth not of clear Obſeryari- 
ons, 307 


M o 0 N. 


The Moos hath no Generation of things, 
like as we have , nor is it inhabited by 
Men, 47 

Inthe Moox may bea Generation of things dif- 
ferent from ours. 47 

There may be Subſtances in the Moon , very 
vifierent from ours. 48 

The hrft re{cmblance berween the 'Moon and 
Earth, which is thar of Figure , 1s proved, 
by tlicir manner of being illuminated by the 
Sun, 48 


The ſecond reſemblance is the Moone being 
p#* 


Opacous, as the Eerth. + af 
The third reſemblance is the Moons being Denſe 
and Mountainous as the Earth. 49 
The fourth reſemblance is the 1 being Gdi- 
ſtinguiſhed into two different parts for Cla- 
rity and Obſcurity , as the Terteſtual Globe 
into Sca and Land. 49 
The fifth reſemblance is Mutation of Ficurcs in 
the Earth, like thoſe of the a/oox, and made 
with the ſame Periods. 49 
All the Earth ſeeth halfe onely of the Moon, 
and halte onely ot the Moon fſecth all the 
Earth G1 
Two Spots in the Moon , by which it is percei- 
ved that She hath reſpe@ to the Centre of 
the Earth in her Motion. 52 
Light refleted from the Earth into the Moon. 3 
The fixth reſemblance is that the Earth and 
Meon interchangeably illuminate, "BY 
The ſeyenth reſemblance is that the Earth and 
Moon interchangeably Eclipſe. 53 
The Secondary Clarity of the Moon cſtzemed 
to be its Native Light. 54 
The Surface of the Moox more {leck then any 
Looking- Glaſſe. 5») 
The emincnciesand Caviticsin the Moon,arc illu- 
ſions of its Opacousand Per{picuous parts. 5 5 
The Moons Surface is ſharp, as is largcly pro- 
ved. 57 
The Moor , if itit were fleck like a Spherical 
Looking-Glaſſe , would be 1uvitivie. 60 
& 62 
The apparent VUnevenneſles of the Moons Sur- 
face aptly repreſcited by Mother of 
Pearl. 70 
Theapparcnt Vnevenneſles of the Moen cannot 
beimitated by way of more and lefle Opa- 
City, and Perſpicuity 71 
The various AſpeRts of the eMoon imitable by 
any Opacous matter. 71 
Sundry Phznomena from whence the Meony 
Montuoſfity is argued. 7L 
The Moon appears brightet by night , than by 
day. 2 
The Ra beheld in the day time, is like Al 2 
little Cloud. | 
Clouds are no leſle apt than the Moon tobe 
luminared by the Sun, 73 
A Wall illuminated by the Sun, compared td 
the Moon, hines noleſſethan ir. 73 
The third refleCtion of a Wali illuminates more 
than the firſt of the Moon. 74 
The Light of the 2foon weaker than that oz the 
Twy-light. 74 
The ſecondary Light of the ſoon caufcd by the 
Sun, according to ſome. Fe 


73 
il- 


The ſecondary ; Light of the Moon appears 
inform ot aRing, 2. e. bright inthe extreme 
Circumfcrence, and not inthe midſt , and 


why. 77 
The ſecondary Lightof the Avon, how it 15to 
be obſerved. 78 
The Accs Diſcus in a Solar Eclipſe can be ſeen 
oncly by Privation. 78 
Solidity of the Meoens Globe argued from its 
being Mountainous. 81 
The ſecondary Light of the Aon clearer before 
the ConjunRtion than attcr. $2 
The obſcurcr parts of the 4199 arc Plains, and 
the more bright Mountains. 83 
Lone Ledges of Mountains about the Spots of 
' the Movn. 83 


There are nor generated in the Moon things 
like to ours , but if there be any Produdti- 


ons, thcyare very different. 83 
The Moon not compoled of Water and 
Earth. ' $3 
Thoſe Aſpets of the Sun neceſſary for our 
Productions, arc not ſo inthe Moon. B83 
Natural Daycs in the Moor are of a Moneth 
lotg. 84 


To th: Mon the Sun declincth with a difference 
of ten Degrees, and to the Earth of Forty 
{cyen Dcgrces. 84 

Therc arc no Rains inthe Moon, 84 

Thc Moon cannot {cpcrate trom «the Earth, 295 

"The Moons Orbe cnvironeth the Earth, but not 


the Sun, 299 
The Meon much cilturbeth the Order of the 
other Planets. 362 
The Mons Motion principally ſought in the 
Account of Eclipſcs. 416 
Thc Mooz is an Atrhercal Earth, 492 


MorT1ion and Motions. 


Motion of Projets. Vide Projefs. 
The Conditions and Attributes which differ the 
Celeſtial and Elementary Bodies depend on 
the Motions aſhgned them by Ariſtotle, 25 
Peripatcticks improperly athgn rhoſc Motionsto 
the E\cmcnts for Natural with which they 
never were moved, and thoſe tor Preternatu=- 
ral with which they alwayes move. 33 
Motion, as to tic things that move thereby, 1s as 
it it ncvcr were, and (o farre operates, as It 
rclates to things depr ved of Motion, 98 
Mo:7-u cannot bz made without its movcable 
Suvjc Et, I 04 
Motion and Reſt principal Accidents in Na- 
tur Cc. I12 
Two thirgs neceſſary for the peipctuating of a 
Mo - 


The T bl. 


Moon ; an unlimited Space; and an ; 
mptibleMoveable. 
Diſparity in the Motions of a Stone falling from 
the Round Top of a Ship , and from the 
Top of a Tower. 12 
The Motion of grave Pendula might be perpe. 
tuated , impediments being removed. hg: 
Whence the Morion of a Cadent Body is _ 


leted, 22 
The Motor of the Eye argueth the Motion of the 
Body looked on. 22 


Different Motions depending on the Fladun 
on of the _s 226 
Our Mot:on may beeither interne, or externe 
and yet we never perccive or feelit, 2 29 
The Motion of a Boat inſcnfible to tholc that are 
within it, asto the Senſe of Feeling. 12g 
The Motjon of a Boat ſcnſible to Sight joyned 
with Reaſon. 229 
A ſtmple Body, as the Earth, cannot move with 
three ſeveral Motions. 231 
Motion and Reſt arc more different than Right 
Motion and Circular, | 237 
One may more rationally alcribe to the Earth 
two intern Principles to the Right and Cir- 
cular Mction , than two to Motion and 
Reſt. 237 
The diverſity of Morzons helpeth us to know 
the Diverſity of Natures, 237 
Bodics cf the ſame kind z hayc Motions that 
agrce in kinde. 229 
The greatneſſeand ſmallnefſe of the Body make 
a difference in Motion and not in Reſt, 243 
Every penile and librated Body carticd round 
in the Circumfcrence of a Circlc acquireth 
of ic {clf a Motion in it ſelf cqu-l to the 
ſame. \ 362 
Two forts of Merion in the containing Veſlel 
may make the containing Vater to riſe and 


tall. 387 
An Accident in the Earths Mztzen impoſſible to 
be imitated, 392 


Azsolute Motion : Things ſaid to 
move according to certain of their parts, 
and not according to their whole , may not 
be ſaid to moye with an Abſolute Metron, bur 
per atcidens, 491 

Axinalr Motion: The Diverſity of the 
Mot/ons of Animals, depend on their Flex- 


ures, 232 
The Flexures in Animals arc not made for vary- 
ing of thcir Motions. 237 


The Motions of Animals arc of oneſort. 232 
The Mortzons of Animals arc all Circular. 233 
Secondary Motion of Animals dependent on the 
firit. Fe. 

ob oh 


The T able. 


Animals would not grow weary of their Mo- 
tian > proceeding as that which is affigned 
:othe Terreſtrial Globe. 24 

rhe Cauſe of th2 wearineſle rhar attends the 
AMatton of Anima:s. | 244 

The 4ſ0tion of an Animal is rather to be called 
Violent than Natural. 24 

\xxuar Motion: The Annual Action 

* ofthe Earth muſt cauſe a conſtant and ſtrong 
Winde. dy | 228 

TheErrour of the Antagoniſt of Copernicus is 
manifcſt, in that he declareth thatthe Annual 
and Diurnal Motion belonging tothe Earth, 
are both one way , and not contrary. 235 

The Annual Morion of the Earth mixing with 
the Motions of the other Planets, produce 
extravagant Appearances. 296 

Reſt, Annual Motron, and the Diurnal , ought 
tobe diſtributed betwixt the Sun, Earth, and 
Firmament. | 300 

Granting to the Earth the Annual , it muſt of 
neceſſity have the Diurnal Adotzon aligned to 
It, 200 

The ſole Annual ot7on of the Earth, cauſeth 
preat inequality in the Motions of the Pla- 
nets. 10 

ADemonſtration of the incqualitics of the three 
luperiour Planets dependent on the Annual 
Motion of the Earth. 310 


The Annual Motion of the Earth moſt apt to 


render a reaſon of the Exorbitance of the 
hye Plancts. 312 


\yument of Tycho againft the Annual Mort: 
#, from the invariable Elevation of the 
bole, 338 

Upon the Annual Motzon of the Earth, alterati- 
on may enſue in ſome Fixed Stars, not in the: 
Pole. | 341 

The Parallogiſme of thoſe who believe that in 
the Annual Morzor great alterations arc: to 
be made about the Elevation of the” Fixed 
Stars , isconfuted, | 341 

Enquiry is made what mutations, and in what 
YNars, are to be diſcovered by means of the 
Farths Annual Motto7., 342 

aſtronomers having omitted to inſtance whar 
altcrations thoſe are that may be derived 
from the Annual Motion of the Earth , do 
thereby teſtifie that they never rightly un- 
derſtood the ſame. 343 

Tix Anuual Moro» made by.the Centre of the 
Earth under the Ecliptick , and the Diurnal 
Metios made by ths Earth about its own 
Centre, 344 

Ojcdions againſt the Earths Annual Motion 
ken from the Fixed Stars placed in the E- 

cliptick 


cliptick, 245 
An Indice or Obſcrvationin the Fixed $itars ki 
tothat whichis ſecninthe Planers, is an A: - 
eument of the Earths Annual Morzcn. 247 
The Suns Annual Motion how it comorth to 
paſte, according to Copernicus, 355 
Thc Annual and Diurnal Merz: arc confiftcnt 
in the Eaith. 262 
Three wayes of altering the proportion of the 
Additions of the Diurnal Revolutigcn to tlc 
Annual Moron. 409 
The Earths Annual Motiop thorow the Feliprick 
pncqual, by reaſon of the Moons NMotzo-:, 413 
The Cauſcsof the incquality of the Additions 
and Subſtractions of the Diuraal Conyerſi- 

* on fromtlic Annual Mot7or. 41s 
CirxcutranrR MortioOn: Circular od Rivht 
Motion arc ſimple, as procccding in {imple 
Lines, 6 
The Circular Moron is never acquired Natural- 
ly , unlefle Right Moto preccde it, 18 
Circular Mozion perpctually unitorme. 18 
In the Circular Matioz cvery point in the Cir- 
cumfercnce 1s the beginning and end, 206 
Circular Motron onely is Unitorime, 20 
Circular Mo;ion may be continucd pcrpetu- 
ally. 20 
Circular Mot/on onely and Reſt are apt to cog- 
{crve Order, 20 
To the Circular Motion no other M-t:on is con- 
. trary. 26 
Circular Motions arc rot contrary , according 
to Ariſtotle, I 00 
The Moetjoz of the Parts of the Farth returning 
$0 their Whole , may be Circular. 237 
The Velocity in the Circuiar Mor/on encreaſcth 
according to the cncicale of 1he Diameter 
of thc Ciiclc. 242 
Circular Mo:on is truly fimple and perperu- 
al. : 495 
Circular Motion bclongeth to the Whole Bo- 
dy, aud the Right te its Parts, 496 
Circular and Right Motlon are coincident, and 
may conliſt rogether in the ſame Body. 496 
Counon Moriox: A notable Inſtance 
of Sagrcdus, to thew tin non-op crating of 
Common Motzo:, 151 
An Expcriment that ſhewcth how the Com- 
mon Motzon is impcerceprivlc, 224. 
The concurrence of the Elements in a Com- 
mon Moz/en imports no more than tacir con- 
currence in a CommonRelt. 239 
Common Metzon 1s as if it never were. 223,349 
ComuPektssiva Mortior: Compreſſive 
Motion is proper to Gravity , Extentive t&© 
Levity. 492 

-<þ CZ 0 &a*® 


The IT able. 


Contrany MoTions: An Experi- 
ment which plainly ſhews that two Con- 
trary Mortons may agree in the ſame Move- 
ablc, 363 

The parts of a Circle regularly moved about its 
own Centre z move in diverſe times with 
Coitary Motions, 389 

Dr5sc:xD1ixG Mortrox 3 The Inclination of 
Grave Bodics to the Motion of Deſcent, 1s c- 
qual to their rcliftance to the Aotzon - of 
Alccnt, I91 

The Spaces paſt in the Deſcending Motion of 
the falling Grayc Body , arcas the Squares\g&f 
their times, 195 

The Melon of Deſcent belongs not to the Ter- 
reſtrial Giobe , but to its parts. 362 

Drivxxar Motion : The Diurnal Motion 
ſeemcth Commune to all the Vniverſe , the 
Earth onely exccpred. 97 

Diurnal 4-150 2 why it ſhould more probably 
belong to the Earth than to the Reſt of the 
Vniverle. 98 

The tit Diſcourſe to prove that the Diurnal 
Motion belongs to the Earth. 99 

The Diurnal Motion cauſeth no Mutation among 
Celeſtial Bodies , but all changes haverelati- 
on to the Earth. 100 

A ſecond Confirmation that}the Diurnal Aort- 
on belongs to the Earth. 100 

A third Confirmation that the Diurnal Motion 
belongs to the Earth. ol 

Afourth, fifth, and {ixth Confirmation that the 
Diurnal Me:{on belongs to the Eatth. 1o3 

Alſeventh Confirmation that the Diurnal AMos- 
tion belongs to the Earth. 103 

If the Diuraal aMvoiicn ſhould alter , the Annual 
Period would ceaſe, 409 

Locari MoTtTiox : Local Moticn of three 
kinds, Right, Circular, and Mixt, 6 

An cntirc and new Science of our Academick 
[ Galileo } conccrning Local Motion, 198 

Mixt MoTtiox : Of Mixt Motion we ſce not 
the part that is Circular , becauſe we pertake 
thercot. 218 

Ariſtotle granteth a Mixt 4o#t0n to Mixr 
Bodics. 375 

The Motion of Mixt Bodics ought to be ſuch as 
may reſult trom the Compoſition of the Mo- 
tions of the ſimple Bodies compounding. 375 

Nartvrat MoTtiox : Accelleration of the 
Natural Motion of Graves is made according 
to the Odd Numbcrs beginning at Vni- 
ty. 198 

Natural aotion changerh into that which is 
Preter-Natural and Viglcnt. 212 

PrRoGRiSSIvVE Mortiox © 


The Progreſſive 
Mo- 


Mection may make the Water j 

run to awd, wk Mons BN 
Ricut MorTriox : Sometimes Simple _ 

ſometimes Mixt, according to Ariſtotle 'L 
Right Motion impoſſible in the Worldex,q 


Ordinate, 4 
Right Motion Narurall y Infinite, on 
Right Motion Naturally Impoſſible, 19 


Right Aotion might poſſibly have 
, Firſt Chaos. x f. d en » A 
12het Motica is uſeful to reduce in 
—_— out of Order, " TY 
Right Morios cannot naturally be Perpety 
Right Motion aſſigned to woe Bodies, C by 
duce them to perfe Order, when remvyed 
from their Places. 2 
"__ "52068 of Grave Bodies manifeſt to 
Mme, 2 
Right Motion with more reaſon aſcribed to the 
Parts, than to the whole Elements. 33 
Right Motion cannot bz Eternal , and conle- 
quently cannotbe Natural to the Earth. 117 
Right Motzon ſcemeth to be wholly excludedin 
Naturc. 147 
With two Right Motions one cannot compole 
Circular eMotions, 375 
Right Motion belongeth to imperfeR Bodies, 
and that are out of their Natural Places. 49; 
Right Metton is not Simple. 495 
Right Aſotionis cvcr mixt with the Circular, 495 
S1myertzs Motion peculiar onely to Simple 
Bodies. 494 
T:nrnEsTRIAL MoTIon Collected from the 
Stars. 229 
The Parts of the Terreſtrial Globe accelerate 
and retard intheir Mot/on. 388 
One ſingle Terreſtrial Motion ſufficeth not to 
produce the Ebbing and Flowing. 421 
Untven MoT10ON may make the Water in 
a Veſſel to Run to and fro. 287 
The Mixture of the two Motions Annual and 
Diurnal , cauſeti: the unevennefle in the 
Morios of the parts ot the Terreſtrial 


Mo v £- 
Its queſlionable whether deſcending Bodics 
Move in a Right Line. 21 


Ariſtotles Argument to prove that Grave Bodics 
Move with an inclination to arrive at the 


Centre. + 
Grave Bodies Movetowards the CentrC of the 
Centre of the Earth per Accidens. 22 


Things forſaking the place which was naturalto 


them by Creation, are ſaid to Move violently 


The Table. 


;nd naturally tend to return back to the 
2 


MoveEaAarlet, Cc. 


\ 1veable being in the ſtate of Reſt (hall not 
move unleſle it have an inclination ro lome 
ticular Placc. ; BIG 11 
The Moveable acccllerates its Motion in going 
:owards the Place whither it hath an inclina- 
It 
the Moveable departing from Reſt gocththorow 
all the Degrees of lardity, II 
The Moveable doth not accelerate fave only as 
it approacheth near to its terme of Reſt. 1 2 
Tointrodnce in a Moveable a certain Degree of 
Vclocity, Nature made itto movein a Rizhr 


Linc, 12 
The eMoveabie departing from Reſt paſſeth 
throughall the Degrecs of Velocity without 
ſtaying1n any. ISS | EDT 
The Grave Moveable deſcending , acquireth 

[mpetus ſufficient to re-carry it eo the like 
height, | 1 3 
The Impetus of Meveables equally approaching 

tothe Centre are po 14 


Vpon an Horizontal Planc the Moveable lyerh 
ſtil, args = | 
A ſingle Moveable hath but one only Natural 
Motion, and all the rcſt are by participa- 
tion, OS | 103 
A Line deſcribed by a Moveable in its Natural 
Deſcent, the Motion of the Earth abour its 
own Centre bcing preſuppoſed, would pro- 
bably be the Circumference ofa Circle. 145 
A Moveable falling from the top of 'a Tower 
movcth inthe Circumference of a Circle.146 
A Moveable falling from a Tower moveth 
neither more nor leſſe, then if it had taid 
alwayes there. 146 
A Moveable falling from a Tower movcth with 
an Vniforme not an Accelerate Motion. 146 
The Cadent Moveab/e, if it fall with a Degree of 
Velocity acquired in a like time with an 
Vnitorm Motion, it ſhall paſſe a ſpace double 
to that paſſed with the Accelerate Mo- 
tion. | 202 
Admirable Problems of Movealles deſcending 
by the Quadrant of a Circle, and thoſe 


deſcending by all the Chords of the whole 
Circle. 412 


Munoane. 


Muxdexe Bodies were moved inthe beginning 


n a Right Line, and atterwards circularly, 
cording to Plate, It 


N a- 


N 
Narturat. 


T hat which is Violent cannot bc F terna'l, 2d 
that which is Eternal cannot bc Natural. 115 


NaTtusr Ey and Natures. 


Nature attempts not things impoſſible to be 
effected, Eg: 10 
Nature never doth that by many things which 
May be done by a few, 99 
Nature firlk made things as ſhe pleaſed, and 
afrerwards capacitated Mans underſtanding 
for conceiving of them. 238 
From Common Accidents one cannot know 
different Natures, 238 
Natures Order is to make theleſſer Orbes to Cir- 
culate 1n ſhorter times, and the bigger in 
longcr. 243 
That which to u$is hardro beunderſtood;is with 
Nature cahie ro be cffeed, 403 
Nature keeping within the bounds aſſigned her, 
little carcth that her Methods of opperating 
fall within the reach of Humane Capacity.43 3 
Natures Ations no leſs admirably diſcover God 
to us than Scripture DiQions, 


434 

Ntrves. 
The Original of the Nerves according to Ariſto- 
tle, and according co Phyſitians, 9! 
The ridiculous Anſwer of a Phyloſopher deter - 
tnining the Original of the Nertez. 91 


O 


OB3JEcT s- 


Objes, the more Vigorous they arc in Light, the 
more they do ſcem to cncreale. 305 
That Remote 0bjeZ» appear ſo ſmall is the 
Defe& of the Eye, as 1s demenſtrared, 337 
In 0bje&s far Remote and Luminous, a ſmall 
acceſſion or reccflion is iraperceptible. 350 


Or1iN1loNs. 


It's all one, whether Opinions are new to Men, or 
Mecn new to Opinions. wy 


OKrs<ex, and Orber- 


The greatcr Orbes make their Converſions in 
greater 


greater times, Io1 & 331 
Ir's more rational, that the Orbe Containing and 
the Paits coutained do move all about one 
Ccntrc, than about divcrs, 245 


, 1 
PASSIONS. 
Infinite P./ions arc perhaps but one onely. 87 


PexnDuLum, and Penduls. 


* 
Pendula might have a perpetual Motion, impedi- 
ments being removed, 203 


The Pendulum hanging ata longer thread maketh 
its Vibrations morc {cldome than the Pendu- 
lum hanging at a ſhorter, 206 

The Vibrations of the ſame Pendulum arc made 
with thc ſame frequency , whether they be 
{mall or grear. 206 

The cauſe which impedcth the Pendulum, and 
reducecrh it to rcſt, 206 

The thread or Chain to which the Pendulum is 
faſtened makethan Arch,and dothnot ſtretch 
it ſelt ſtraight our in its Viorations, 207 

Two particular notable Accidents inthe Penduls 

\ andthcir Vibrations, 411 


PrERIPATETICK, Oc. 


Teripatetick Phyloſophy unchangeable, 42 
A brave rcſolution of a certain Peripatetick 
Philoſopher to prove the Right Line to be the 
(hortcſt of all Lincs. 1832 
The Paralogiſme of the ſaid Peripatetick who 


rovecth [2notum per ignotius. 193 
The Diſcourſes of Perjpateticks full of Errors and 
Contradictions. 376 


The [cripateticks perſccutcd Galileo out of envy 
to his happy Diſcoveries in Phyloſophy. 427 
The Teripatetichs in defe of Reaſons repair to 
' Scripture for Arguments againſt their 
Adverſarics. 429 


PuyYLOSOPHERS 


It is notjuſt,thatthoſe who never Phylolophate, 
(hould uſurp the title of Phy/ofdpbers, 96 


PuYLOSOPH Yo 


The Diſputes and Contradiftions of Phyle/ophers 
may conduce to th. benehr of Phyloſophy. 25 
A cunning way to gathec Phyleſophy out of any 
Book whatlocyer, 93 
Pr 4a- 


The Table; 


Prtaxers. 


The approximation and receſſion of the three 


ſuperiour Planets importeth double 
diltance. the Suns 


The difference of the T/anets appa Poet 
tude lefle in Saturn thanin br 
in Jupiter than in Mars, and why. * Ape: 

The 4 ro, DircQion , and Rerrogradation (; 
the Planets is known in relation t 
Stars. | 0 the fixeq 

The particular Strutures of the Orbe; or? 
Planetsnort yet well reſolved. boy 

The Planets places may more 'Eertain! 
aſhgred by this DoQtrine, than by that - 
Ptolomics great Almageſt, 469 


Prtaro. 


Plato held, that Humane underſtanding pertook 
of Divinity, becauſe it underſtood Num. 
bers. 3 

Plato his Enigma , and the Interpretation of 


POL x. 


The invariable Elevation 'of the Pole urged as ag 
_ Argumentagainſt the Annual Motion, 338 
AnExample to prove that the Altitade of the 
Poleought not to vary by means of the Earths 
Annual Motion. 340 


Powstk. 


Ofan infinite Power one would think a greater 


part ſhould rather be imployed than a 
lefler, Iog 


PraiNciPeLes. 


By denying Principles in Sciences, any Paradox 
may be maintained. 28 


Contrary Principles cannot naturally reſide in 
the ſame SubjeR. | 211 


PrxoJEc r, (c. 


The Proje&, according to Ariſtotle, is notmo- 
ved by virtue impreffed , but by the Me- 
dium. 130 


Operation of the Medium in continuing the 
Motion of the Troje#. 13! 


Many Experiments and Reaſons againſt the 
Motions of Projefts afligned by Ariſtotle. 132 
The Mcdiumdorh impede and not conferrethe 
Mo- 


Motion af ſrojeffr. = | 134 
\n ;dmi;able accident 1n the Motion of Pro- 
This 135 


&/adry curious Problems touching the Motion 
of Projects . : | 7 
44275 COMLNNC their Motion by a Right Line 
| that follows the direion of the Motion 
made together with the Projicient » Whilſt 
they wcre conjoyned therewith, { 154 
Th; Motion impreſſed by the Projicient is onely 
ina Right Line. 170 
The P;oje moveth by the Tangent of the Cir- 
cz of the Motion prececding in the inſtant 
of Seperation. 172 
A Grave TrejecF aſloon as it is ſeperated from 
the Projicient » beginneth to decline. 172 
The Caule of the Projeion encreafeth not ac- 
cording to the Proportion of Velocity en- 
cicaſed by makingthe Wheel bigger. 189 
The Virtuc which carrieth Grave Proje&s up- 
wards , is no leſlc Natural to them than 
the Gravity which movcth them down- 
wards, 211 


PrortOmMmy, Oc. 


laconvenicaces that are in the Syſtem of Pro- 
lmy. 309 
Plomies Syſtem full of defects. 476 
Ihe Learacd both of elder and later times diſ- 
latighed with the Peolomaick Syſtem, 477 


PyYTHAGORASs, Orc. 


Lagorick Miſtery of Numbers fabulous. 3 
;/azoras offercd an Hecatombe for a Geo- 
metrical Demonſtration whichhe found. 38 
Pyhagoras and many other Ancients cnumera- 
cd, that hcld the Earths Mobility, 437 &' 468 


R 
Rays. 


Shining Objects ſcem fringed and environcd 
with 2dycntitious Rays, 304 


Rt 8ST. 


tet, Vide Motion, 
Ze the Infinite degree of Tardity, 


$; 


REFROGRADATIONS: 


Ktrogradatios more frequent in Saturn, leſflc 


The Table. 


ire quent in Jupiter, and yet leſle in Mars, 
and 


; : Jil 
The R:wrogradations of Venus and Mercury 
demoimfuared by Apcllonius and Copcr- 
NICUS, 31T 


5 


SATURN. 


Saturz for its flowneſſe , and Mercury for its 
latC appearing, were amongſt thole that were 


4aſt oblcrved. Ars 
SCARCITY. 


Scarcity and Plenty enhanſe and debaſe the pric 
of all things, 


C 
> 


I 


SCHEINER-. 


Chriſtopher Scheiner the Jefuit his Book of C on- 
clutons confutcd. 78 Oo 195, & ſeq. & 23 
A Canon Buller would ſpend more than fix 
daycs in falling from the Concave of thc 
Moon to the Center of the Earth, according 
to Scheiner. 195 
Chriſtopher $cheiner his Book entituled «Ape!s 
poſt Tabulam cenſured, and diſproved. 313 
The Objetions of Scheiner by way of Intcrro- 
gAtLON, | 236 
Anſwers to the Interrogations of Scheiner. 336 
Queſtions put to Scheiner , by which the weak- 
nefle of his is made appear, 336 


SCiENCLES-» 
In Natural Scie-.c2s the Art of Oratory is of no 
uſc, ; 4 (> 


In Natural Scrences it is not neceſſary to ſeck 
Mathematical evidence. 2.06 


SCRIPTURE, CN 


. The Caution we are to uſe in determining thc 


Senſe of S$ripture in difficult points of Phy- 
lofophy. 
Scripture ſtudiouſly condeſcendeth to the ap- 
rchenſion of the Vulgar. » 432 

In dicufling of Natural Queſtions , we ought 
not to begin at Scripture , but at Sentible 
Experiments and Necellary Dcmonſtira- 
tions. 432 


77 


The intent of Scripture is by its Authority tc 
recommend thoſe Truths to our bcelicte, 
which being un-intclligible , could no othct 
wayes be rendered crediblc. 24 


COILED 


df 7 Y F 


= en I hd => 


The Tabk; 


Scripture Authority to be preferred, evenin Na- 
tural Controverſies to ſuch Scicnces as are 
net confined to a Dcmonſtrative Me- 
thod, 434 

The Pen-men of Scripture, though read in A- 
ſronomy , imtcntionally forbear ro teach us 
any rhing of the Nature of the Stars. 43$ 

The Spirit had no intent at the Writing of the 
Scripture , to teach us whether the Earth mo- 
veth or ſtandcth (till, as nothing concerning 
our Salvation, 436 

Inconvenicncics that ariſe from licentious u- 
ſurping of Scripture, to ſtufke out Books that 
treat of Nat. Arguments. 438 

The Litcral Scnfc of Sc ipture joyned with the 
univerſal conſent of the Fathcrs, is to be re- 

_ ceived without farther diſpute. 444 

A Text of Scripture ought no lefle diligently 
to be reconciled with a Demonſtrated Pro- 
poſition in Philoſophy , than with another 
Text of Scripture founding to a contrary 
Senlec, 446 

Demonſtrated Truth ought to aſſiſt the Com- 
mentator in finding the true Senſe of Scrip- 
ture, 446 

It was neceſlary by way of condeſcenſion to 
Vulgar Capacities , that the Scripture ſhould 
ſpeak of the Reſt and Motion of the Sun and 
Earth in the ſame manner thatit doth. 447 

Not onely the Incapacity of the Vulgar, but 
the Current Opinion of thoſe times, made 
the Sacred Writers of the Scripture to ac- 
commodate themſclycs ro Popular Eſteem 
more than Truth. 447 

The Scripture had much more recaſon to affirm 
the $.n Moveable , and the Earth Immovc- 
able , than otherwiſe, 448 

CircumſpeRion of the Fathers about impoſing 
poſitive Scnſcy on Doubttul Texts of Scryp- 
fare. 45k 

Tis Cowardice makes the Anti- Copernican fly 
to Scripture Authoritics, thinking thercby to 


affright their Adverſarics. 455 
Scripture {peaks in Vulgar and Common Points 
after the manncr of Mcn. 462 


The intent of Seri; ture is to be obſerved in Pla- 
ccs that {ccm to aftirme the Earths Stabi- 
lity. 464 

Scripture Authoritics that ſeem to affirm the Mo- 
tion of the Sun and Stability of the Earth, 


divided into {1x Cliſles. 478 
Six Maximcs to be obſcrycd in Expounding 
Dark Tcxts of Scyiptmre. 481 


Fcripture | exts ſpeaking of things inconvent- 
ent to be underſtood in thcir Literal Senſe, 


are to be interpreted one of the tour wayes 
named, 


named. 


Why the Sacred Scripture ac . $1 
to the Senſe of the Vole, m——h > 
7 


S | &« 


The Seas Surface would ſhew at 2d; 
— than the Land. plrrars ny” . 
e Seas Refletion of Light much 
that of the Earth. ! NY = 
The lfles are tokens of the uneve 
Botroms of Seaz, gs af 


SELEUCUS. 


Opinipn of Seleucus the Mathematician cen. 
ſured, 423 


S ENSHheo 


He whodenieth Senſe, deſervesto be deprived 
of it. 21 
S-(e ſheweth that things Grave move ad Me. 
dixm , and the Light to the Concave, 21 
It is not probablerhat God who gave us ou 
Senſes, would haye us lay them aſide, and 
look for other Proofs for {ich Natural Points 
as Senſe (cts before our Eyes. 434 
Fenſe and Reaſon lefle certain than Faith; 475 


SILVER. 


Silver burniſhed appears much more obſcure 
thanthe unburniſhed, and why. 64 


SIMPLICIU $. 
Simplictus his Declamation. 41 
SOCRATES. 


The Anſwer of the Oracle truc ia judging So- 
crates the Wiſeſt of his time. $5 


SORITE $- 
The Forked Sylogiſme called Z44i%, 29 
SPEAKING» 


We cannot abſtrat our manner of Speaking 
from our Senſe of Sceing. 461 


SPHERE. 


The Motion of 24 hours aſcribed to the oe 
Jpher # 


The T able. 


Spbere » diſorders the Period of che Inferi- 


102 

The Splev althou2h Material , toncheth the 
Material Plane but in one point onely, 182 
183 


efinition of the Sphere. 

Ne cairacion that the gprere toucheth the 
Plane but in one point. 183 
why the Sphere 1n abſtract touchcth the Plane 
onely in one poInt , and not the Material in 
Concrete. BI 184 
Conta& in a Single Point is not peculiar to the 
tet Sphere onely , but belongeth to all 
Curved Figures. | 185 
In a Moveavle Sphere it {cemeth more reaſona- 
ble that its Centre be ſtable, than any of its 
parts. 329 


SenrrE of AGivity. 


The Sphere of Adivity greater in Celeſtial Bo- 
dies than in Elimentary. 59 


STARRY SPHERE. 


Wearineſſe more to be feared in the Starry Iphere 
than in the Terreſtrial Globe. 245 
bythe proportion of Jupitcrand of Mars the 
Starry Sphere is found to be yet more re- 
mote, 331 
Vanity of thoſe mens diſcourſe > who argue 
the Starry Sphere to be too yaſt in the Coper- 
nican Hypotheſis. 335 
The whole Starry Sphere beheld from a great di- 
ſtance, might appear as ſmall as one ſingle 


tar, 335 
SPHERICAL: 


The Spherical Figure is eaſicr to be made thari 
any other, 186 
pherical Figures of ſundry Magnituades , may 
be made with one ſole Inſtrument; 187 


SpPIRIT- 


The Spirit had no intent to teach us whether 
the Earth moveth or ſtandeth till , as no- 
thing concerning our Salvation; 436 


SOLAR SPOTS: 


oy eencrate and diffolye in the face of the 

UNs 33 

Sundry Opinions touching the So!ar Spots. 39 

An Argument thar waa pr proveth the So- 
(0) 


ar $pots to g:nerate anddiflolye, 49 
/ A 


A conclufixe Demonſtration to prove that tl:* 
Spots are contiguous to the Botly of tlic 
Yun, 41 
The Motion of the Spsts towards the Circym- 
cumtercnce of the Sun appears flow, 41 
The Figure of the Spore towards the Circumte- 
rence of the Suns Ditcus , appcar narrow, 


and why, 41 
The So/ar Sp2ts are not Spherical, but Oat, like 
thin platcs. 41 


The Hiſtory of the proceedings of the Acade- 
mian for a long time about the Ob{crvation 

. of the Solas $pors, 312 
A conccit that ſuddenly came into the ming of 
our Acadcmian concerning the great conle- 
quence that followeth upon the Motion of 

_ the Solar Spots, 31 

Extravagant Mutations to be obſerved inthe 
Motions of the Solar Spots forcfcen by the 
Academ'ck, in caſe the Earth had the Annu- 

_ al Motion. 314 
The firſt Accident to be obſerved in the Moti- 
on of the Solar Spots, and conſequently al] 

_ thereſt, explained, 315 
The events bcing oblcrved were anſwer. blc to 
_ the Predictions touching rheſe Spo:s. 318 
Though the Anuval Motion affigncd to the 
Earth, an{wcreth to the Phanomena of the 
Solar Spots, yet doth it not follow by conver- 
lion, that from the Phxnomena of the Spots 
one may inferre the Annual Motion to be- 
long tothe Earth. 319 
The Pure Pcripatctick Philoſophers will laugh 
at the Spots. and thcir Phxnomena , as the 
Illuſions of the Chriſtals in the Telc- 
319 
494 


ſcope. 
The Solar Spots of Galileo. 


Srar and Stars, 


The Sr5 infinitely ſurpaſſe the reſt of Heaven 


in Denſity. 39 
It is no leſle impoſſible for a Srav to corrupr, 

thanthe wholc Ter: cſtrial Globe, 37 
New Stars diſcovercd in Heaven. 33 


The ſmall Body of a Star fringed about with 
Rays , appearcth very much bigger than 
plain, naked, and in its native Clarity. 6t 

An caſie Experiment that (heweth the cncreale 
in the Stars, by mcans of the Adventiuous 

Rays. 335 

A Star of the Sixth Magnitude ſuppoſed by Iy- 
cho and Scheiner an hundred and (ix Millions 

_ of times bigger rhan needs. 326 

A common errovur of all Aftronome*1s touching 


the Magnitude ot the S249. | 326 
Y cntts 


The T abte. 


Venus rc: dercth the Errour of Aſtronomers 
in determining the Magnitudes of Stars in- 
CXculcublc, | 326 

Away to mcaſurc the the apparent Diameter 
of a ſtr, 327 

By Geptiv.nzy Heaven of ſome Star One might 
Conc th know what infiucnce it hath upon 
nn 334 

Enquiry is made what Mutations , and in what 
Seri, is to beinade by mcans of the Annual 


Motion 6{ tac Earth. ' 342 
Thc Stars necrer tro us make grcatcr Givcrſitics 
than thc morc xcmote, 349 


FixteD STARS» 


Great diſparity amongſt the Motions of the 
Particular t/x24 Stars if their Sphere be 
movcabvlc. I02 

The Motfons of the Fix:4 Stars would acccle- 
rare and rctad in {cvcral timcs, it the Starry 
wcrc moveable, I02 

The Probable Situation of the Fixed Stars. 299 

Suppoling the Annual Motion of the Earth, it 
tullow<th that one Fixed Star 15 olgger than 


the wholc Grand Orbe. 324 
The apparent divcrfity of Motion in the Pla- 
ncts, is infenfible in the Fixed Stars, 325 


Suppoling that a Fixed Star of the Firſt Mazni- 
tude is no bigger than the Sun, the diverſ1- 
ty which is fo grcat in the Planets , 1s al- 


molt inl{cnſible in the Fixed Stars, 325 
1he Diameter of a Fixed Star of the Firit Mag- 
nitude, andone of the Sixth, RS 


The diftanceof a Fixed Star of the Firſt Magni- 
rude, the Star beirg {uppoſcd to be equal to 
the Sun. 326 

In the Fixed Stars the divcrfiry of Aſpet cauſed 
by the Grand Orb, js little more than that 
cauſed by the Earth in the Sun. 326 

The Computation of the Magnitude of the 
Fixed Stais in rcp. ot the Grand 
Orbc, 26 

The Apparcnt Diameter of a Fixed Star of the 
[Firſt Magnitude , not more than five Se- 
conds, 328 

By another Suppoſition taken from Aſtrono- 
mers , the dijtance of the Fixed Sters 15 cal- 
culared to be 10800 Semidiameters of the 


Great Orve. bogs 
The place athigned toa Fixed Star is much lefle 
than that ot Plancrt. 335 


The Mutations of che Fixcd Stars ought to be 
in tome greater, in others leſler , and in 0- 


thers nothing ar all. 34} 
The grand Diticulty in Copeinicus his Do- 
ctrine 


Qrine, is that which concerns , 
menaof the Sun and Fixed bs.” "op 
The Fixed Stars in the Ecliptick never Flere? 
nor Deſcend , on account of the Rows 
Motion , bur yet approach and recede. 
The Fixed Stars without the Fcliptick elevate 
more or lefie , according to thcir diſtance 
from the Ecliprick. ; . 
The Fpilogue to the Phxnomena of the Fixed 
a cauſed by the Annual Motion of the 
-arth. 
A place accommodated for the Obſereation' 
the Fixed Stars, 2sto what concerns the An- 
nul Motion of thc Earth, 352 


NEtw STax. 


The greateſt and leaſt Elevation of the New 
Star differ not from cach other more than the 
Polar Altirudes , the ſaid Star being in the 
Firmament, 255 


STEEL. 


<zeel Burniſhed , beheld from one place appears 
very bright , and from another very ob- 
{cure, ; 64 


STONE. 


The Sroxe falling from the Maſt of a Ship lights 
in the ſame place , whether the Ship moye 
or ſtands ſtill. 126 


STRENGTH. 


The Strezeth diminiſheth not, were it not em- 
ployed, 244 


I U Ne 


The $Sux more probably. in the Ceatre of the 
Univerſe than the Earth. ND 
Obſervations from whence it is collefcd that 
the Sunandnot the Earth, is in the Centre 
of the Celeſtial Revolutions. 295 
The Sun and Moon encrealc little by Irradia- 
tion. 305 
The Szrit {elf teſtifieth the Annual Morton to 
belong to the Earth. 312 

If the Earch be immoveable in the Centre of 
the Zodiack, there muſt be aſcribed to the 
Sun four ſeveral Motions, as is declared at 

- Icngth, 320 
The- diſtance of the 'Sws contecineth twelve 


hundrcd and cight. Semidiamerers of - 
Earth, 


T be 


Earth. | 325 
ſhe Diameter of the San half a Degree. 325 
The Apparent Diameter of the Sz» how much 

itis bigger than that of a Fixed Star. 325 
An Example of Gods care of Mankind , taken 

from the 51. ; 333 
An cxquiſite Obſervation of the approach and 


departyrc of the Sus from the Summer $ol- 


ſt1CC. | ; 6-768 x A 
The Sus paſſeth one half of the Zodiack ninc 
dayes ſooner than the other. 416 


The Miracle in Joſhuah of the Su-s ſtanding 
till anſwers not to the intent of lengthening 
the day , but on the contrary excellently a- 

ceth with the Copernican Syſteme, 456 

The $w2 without change of place revolvcth 
upon its own Centre in the ſpace of a 
Moncth. 457 

The Nobility of the Sun as being the Fountain 

of Light , Heart of the World , and Prin- 


ciple of Motion, 457 
The Suns tanding {till in Joſhuah explained by 
Kepler, 462 


The Sus found to be neerer to us than in timcs 
paſt , by five thouſand Miles. 469 
The Sw, Moon, and Stars , are onc and the 
ſame thing. 485 
Why the Szn to our thinking moveth, and not 
the Earth. 436 
How the Sw is (aid to riſe and fer by extrinfick 
denomination. 489 
The Sun is the King , Heart, and Lamp of the 
World. 497 


SYNPATHY» 


Smpathy and Antipathy , terms introduced by 
Phyloſophers , the more eaſily to oiVCarca- 
ſonot many Natural Effe&ts. 373 


SysTEMm of Copernicus. 


The Copernican Syſtem once admitted for true, 
Expoſitions might be found out for all thoſe 
Scriptures than that ſeem to make againſt 


i, : | 439 
qe a Stunica held that the Scripture may 


beſt expounded by the Copernican Sy- 
468 


SYSTEM Of Univerſe. 


The Syſtem of the Univer/e deſigned from the 
Appearances, | 296 
The Yftem of the Untunſe might probably have 
been intended to have been repreſented by 
6 the 


T able. 


the Golden Candleſtick: 580 


The H/tem repreſented likewiſe by the Applein 
Paradice, ; For 


TEiESCOopE. 


The Teleſcope cnablcth us to diſcourſe better of 
Celeſtial Matters than Ariſtotle himſelf. 42 


Invention ot the Te/e/cope rakea from Ari. 
ſtotle. 


WR \ 92 
An ingenious Conſideration about uſing of the 
Teleſcope with as much facility on the Round- 
top of the Maſt of a Ship, ason the Deck. 225 
The Mutations made in the Teleſcope, depend- 
| ingonthe Agitation of the Ship. 226 
The Opcrations of the Teleſcope accounted Fal- 
lacies by the Perjpateticks. 304& 319 
The Teleſcope is the beſt means rotake away the 
Irradiations of the Stars. | 306 
The Te//cope hath much contributed to the Re- 
ſtauration of Aſtronomy, 476 


TrtoLloOGY. 


Theology the Queen of the Sciences, and where- 
inher Prerogative conſiſts, 44 


TainGs. 


Some Things arc of that nature, thattheir parts 


may ſeperate from one another, and from 
their whole, others nor. 493 


Things are ſimply denominated in compariſon 
of all or the greateſt number of things of that 
kinde, 496 


Taks et 


The Number Three celebrated amongſt the Py. 
thagorcans. 2 


Tipe. 


The Tide and the Mobility of the Earth mutu- 
 allyconfirm eachother. 386 
Tyde. Vide Ebbing and Flowing. 


Txrkurt. 


True and Fairare one andthe ſame ; as alſo Falſe 
_ and Deformed, | 115 
For proot of Tr#e Concluſions , many ſolid 
. Arguments may be produced , but to prove 
ZZ 1k a 


a falſe one, none. 112. 245 
TrxuTH, and Truths. 


Untruths cannot be Demonſtrated as Truths 


arc, 112 
The Truth ſomctimes gains ſtrength by Con- 
tradiction. 181 


Truth hath not (olittle liglit as not ro be diſco- 
vered amoveſt the Vmbrages of Fal- 
[hoods, 384 


Tycnao: 


The Argument of Tycho grounded upon a falſc 
Hyporheſis. 324 
Tycho and his Followers never attempted to 
ſee whether there were any Phaxnomena 1n 
the Firmamenct for or againſt the Annual Mo- 
tion, 337 
Tho and others argue againſt the Annual Mo- 
tion , from the invariable Elcvation of the 
Pole, 338 


V 


VELOCITY: 


ti. !1o I2 
Natuic doth not immediately conferre a de- 
terminate degree of Velocity, although She 
could. 12 


inclining plane, 14 
Pelocitics arc {aid to be cqual , when the Spa- 
ces paſſed arc proportionate to their 
timCcs. I5 
The greater Velocity exacaly compenſates the 
greater Gravity. 192 


VENUS» 


The Mutation of Figure in Verws argueth its 
Moron to be about the Sun. 295 


junction, and very ſmall towards the Ma- 
rutinc. 297 


Fenus ncceſlarily! proved to move about the 
298 


Sun» 
The Phanomena of Vena appear contrary to 
the Syſtem of Copernicus. 303 


|| Another Dithculty raiſed by Venus againſt Co- 
b periueus, | 302 
| Ve- 


The T able. 


Vriform Velocity ſurable with Circular Mo- 


The F/oc;ry by the inclining plane equal to the 
yelocity by the Perpendicular, and the Mo- 
tivi, >; the Perpendicular ſwifter than by the 


Peuxs vcry great towards the Veſpertine Con- 


Venus according to Copernicus either lycid In 
it ſc]t, or a tranſparent ſubſtance, 

The Reaſon why Venas and Mars dg a 
pou to vary Magnitude fo much as is E: 

uiſite. 

A Good Reaſon ofthe ſmall apparent —_ 
of Venus. Ny 

Venus renders the Errour of Aſtronomers ine 
termining the Magnitude of Stars inex. 
cuſcable. 327 


VLysSSERL. 


Of the Motion of Water in a Vegul, Vide 
Water. 


UnversTANnD, Or, 


Man #nderflandeth very much intenſive , but 
little exten/fve, $6 
Humane #«der/tarding operates by Ratioci- 
nation, 87 


Univeas es. 


The Conſtitution of rhe ##uzverſe isone of the 
Nobleſt Problems a Man can ſtudy. 18; 
The Centre of the Univerſe according to Ari. 
ſtotle is that Polnt about which the Cele- 
ial Spheres do revolve. 294 
W hich ought to be accounted the Sphere of 
the #1iverſe, | 299 
[t is a great raſhnefle to cenſure thar to be ſus 
perfluous in the #niver/e which we ds not 
perccive tobe made for us. 32 
Vursrirtius 


Ciriſftianus Vur/{#tims- read certairy' LeAures 
rouctung the Opinion of Copernicus, and 
what happenedthereupon, i © 17 110 


WF. E Ro | 


He'that had not heard of the Elemengof war, 
_covlq never fancie to himſelf Ships and Fi- 
hes. 47 
An Experiment te praye the Reflecion of Wa- 
ter leſs bright than that of the Land, 81 
The Motion of the Water in Ebbing and Flow 
ing, not interrupted by Reſt, |. 251 
Thic vain Argumentation of ſame ,.to prove 
- the Element of Water to be of a 
SEES” 377 


The T able, 


The Progreſſive and uncyen Motion makes the 
Water 11 a Veſſel co run ro and ir0, 387 
The Several Motions in the cont:ining V cllcl, 
may make thc contcined water to riſe -_ 
387 
%s Gow raiſed in one end of the Yeſlel re- 
eurneth it («lf to Aquilibrium. ; 391 
{athe ſhorter {pa the Undulations of Wa- 
re more frequent, 391 

The preater fandiry maketh the Vndulati- 
onsof Pater the more trequent. 391 
Why in narrow placcs the Courſe of the IVa- 
vere is (wifter than in larger. 396 
The cauſe why 1n ſome narrow Chancls, we 
ce the Sea-Maters run alwayes one way. 398 
The Water more apt to conſerve an Impctus 
conceived than the Air, 400 
The Motion of the Water dependeth on the 


Motion of HcavCcn. 404 
WEIGHT $» 


ts queſtionable whether Deſcending Weights 
move ina Right Line, 21 


W ers Tr. 


The Courſe to the Weft India's caſie, the re- 


turn d.fficult. 402 
WindDt. 

Conſtant Gales of Winde within the Tropicks 

blow towards the Weſt. 403 


#ades from the Land , make rough the 
Seas. 403 


Wisvponeg Divine. 


divice Wiſdome infinitely infinite. $5 
The Diſcourſes which Humane Reaſon makes 


in time , the Divine Wiſdom refolverh ink 
Moment , that is hath them alwaycs prec- 


{ent. 87 
W 1 rt. 
The WW: of Ma1 admirably acute. $7 
The Pulilanimity of Popular pps. 364 
Poctick rs of two kinds, 2 $4 
W oxLop. 


world. Vide Univerſe, 

The »orl{s parts arc according to Ariſtotle two 
RNOEnY Elementary , contrary to cach 
other, 6 

The 0/4 ſuppoſed by the Anthour [ Galileo] 
to be perietly Ordinate, Io 

The Senſible World. 96 

It hath not been hitherto proved by any whe- 
therthe Yor// be finite or infinite. 293 

If the Centre of the world be the ſame with 
that about which the Plancts move, the Sun 
and not the Earth is placed in it. 295 


Wrrrtinag. 


Some Write what they underſtand rot ; and 
therefore underſtand not what they Write, 63 
The Invention of Writing Stupcndious above 
all others, 88 


Y 


YEA Ro 


The 7ears beginning and ending, which Ptolom 
and his Followers could never poſitively af- 
ſign, is exaRtly determined by the Coper» 
nican Hypothefis, 469 


THE END OF THE TABLE. 


THE 
Ancient and Modern 


DOCTRINE 
Holy Fathers, 


AND 


[ludicious Divines, 


CONCERNING 


The ra(h citation of the Teſtimony of Sacrab 
SCRIPTURE, in Concluſions meerly Natural, and 


that may be proved by Senfible Experiments, and 
Neceſſary Demonſtrations. 


———— 


_——— —<——<— 


\Wricten, ſome years ſince, ro Gratifie The moſt Se: x xhx 
CHRISTINA LOTHARINGA, Arch- 
Dutcheſs of TUSC ANT; 


by GALILEO GALIL #1, A Gentleman of 


F lorence, and Chief Philoſopher and Marthematician to 
His moſt Serene Highneſs the Grand DUKE. 


EE a ew  C—— — ———_—— —_ 
— — — ——— _ 


And now rendred into Engliſh from the Italian, 
B Y 


THOMAS SALUSBURY. 


_l—_ 
—— 


— — 


—— = 


—_— - —_  <- ——— 


Naturam Rerum invenire, difficile , + ubi inveneris, indicare 
mn vulgus, nefas. Plato. 


—_—____Uy_ 
—_— 


— 
— 
—_ -  <n— C— _— ——— — 


LONDON, 


Printed by WILLIAM LEYB OU RN, 1664. 
H hh 


_ Thy 
. 
- 
= 
- 
, : , 
. 
- 
. 
. 
. 
: » ” 
= *% _ - — gm _ 
FIN 1 wal - -_ by $4 - * poo——_ - » — = _ 4 ha 7 ID > - Z <A - 
= a a ” —_— _ - p . : _ i." oh een . . ——— "I M - _ . o - ; _— — - —_— 
Od o EP 2 _ >. on as = _— . | EE 4 _ —- - a ah ne 4 Kt. : 


T O 


Her moſt Serene 


HIGHNES 


THE 


Gran Ducheſs Mother. 


I cer. ., err i, en =—Y 


Je 72 Ome years ſince, as Your moſt Serene Highneſs well 
P23% knoweth, I did diſcover many particulars in Hea- 
| s (9) venthat had been unſeen and unheard of untill 
this our Age 3 which, as well for their novelty, as 
© bor certain conſequences which depend upon 
them, laſting with ſome Phyſical Propoſitions commonly recei- 
ved by the Schools , did ſtir up againſt me no {mall number of 
ch as profeſicd the vulgar Philolophy in the Univerſities ; as if 
[had with my own hand newly placed theſe things in Heaven to 
bicure and diſturb Nature and the Sciences : who forgetting 
that che muiticude of Truths contribute, and concur to the inve- 
tigation, augmentation,and eſtabliſhment of the Arts,and not to 
heir diminucjon) and dfirudiion; ; and at the lame time ſhewing 
themielves morc alfectionate to their own Opinions , than to 
Truth, w-nt about to deny, and to diiprove thoſe Novelties ; of 
which their very ſenſe, had they but pleaſed to have intentſly be- 
bcld them, would have rendered them thorowly aſſured. And 
ro this purpole they alledged lundry things, and publiſhed cer- 
rain Papers fraughted with vain dilcourſes ; and which was a 
more grols errour, interwoven with the atteſtations of the Sacred 
Scriptures, taken trom places by them not rightly underſtood, 
and which did not any thing concern the point for which they 
were produced Ianto which errour perhaps they would not 
have run, if they had but been advertiſed of a moſt profitable 
Document which S. Auguſtine giveth us, concerning OQOUr pro” 
cceding warily, in making politive determinations in points that 


Hhh a2 are 


427 


4.20 


(a) Nunc ate 
tem. ſexvatd ſc m- 
per modey 4: 1one "14 
raAvViraris » mill 
cvedeve de 16 0b- 
[ 414 /emree Ate 
bem , & lovie, 
ne,Ap [treawe nts 
y e*eCeril, qv 194- 
vis Libru Han lts, 
five Te/famen ; 
Vetrts, five No: 
Ui, nully m:40 ſe 
pe fſic gaver [11 mn, 
[amen propter A 
morem »oſtrs er yo” 
rs, 0derimm- 

Lib, 2, G-nct1 
ad Literam an 
tine, 


The Authority of ScRletu es, 


are obicure and hard to be underſtood by the meer liclp of 
ratiocination; where treating (as we) of a certain natural conclu. 
ſion concerning Celeſtial Bodics, he thus writes : (a) But now 
bawing evermore a reſpect to the moderation of pious Uravity 
we ought to believe nothing unadwviſedly in a doubtful point ; lej 
we Conceive 4 prejudice againſt that, ia favour to our Errour 
which Truth bereafter may diſcover to be no wiſe contrary tothe 
Sacred Books eauther of the Ol; or New Teſtament. 

Ic hath ſince come to pals, that Time hath by degrees diſco- 
vered to cvery Ouc the truths betore by me 11dicatrced : and to. 
gether with the tr uth of the tact, a diicovery hath buen made ot 
tlic Vitfereace of humours berween thole who fimply and with- 
ont paztioi did 'ctulc to admit Lluch like Fhanomena tor true, and 
choleawho to their iter. duliry had added tome diſcompoſed af- 
fection: For as thule who were better grounded in the Science of 
Aſtionomy, ai.d Natural P hilolophy, became {aticticd upon my 
firſt ntimarion of ihe uews 3 lo all thole who ftood not in the 
Neyative, or 1 doubt tor auy other rcaſon , but becauſe it wa; 
an unlook:-for-Novelty,and becauſe they had not an occaſion of 
ſccing a feuiible experiment thereof, did by degrees cone to (a- 
tisfic themſelves : - But thole, who beſides the love they bore to 
to their fi: ſt Errour, have 1 know not what imaginary intereſs to 
render them diſaitfcAcd 5 not fo much towards the things, as to- 
wards the Author of them, not being able any longer to d.ny 
chem, conceal themiclves under an obſtinate filence ; and bring 
exalpcratcd more than ever by that whereby thole others were 
fatisticd aad convinced, they divert their thoughts to other pro- 
Jes, aud ieck ro prejudice me ſome other wayes: of whom [ 
protel> thac | would make no more account than | have done of 
thole who heretoiore have contradicted me (art whom I alwaies 
laugh, as bcing aflured of the ifſue rhar the buſineſs is to bave) 
but that I ice that thole new Calumnies and Per{ecutions do not 
determine in our g1carer or Icfter Learning (1n which I will ſcarce 
pretend to any thing) but extend lo far as to attempt to aſperle 
me with Crimes which ought to be,and are more abhorred by me 
than Deathit ſelf: Nor ou zht I tro content my {elf that they 
are known to be unjuſt by thoſe onely who know me and them, 
but by all men whatſoever. They perliſting therefore in their 
firſt Reſolution,Of ruining me and whatſoever is mine , by all 
imaginable waics; and knowing how that Iin my Studies of 
Aſtronomy and Philolophy hold, as to the Worlds Sylteme, 
That the Sun, without changing place, is ſituate in the Centre 
of the Converſion of the Celeſtial Orbes; and that the Earth, 
convertible about its own Axis, moveth it {elf about the Sun : 


And moreover underſtanding;that I proceed to maintain this Po- 
1110n 


In Pn1r0soPHIcal ConTROVERSIES. 


7-i0n, not onely by refuting the Realons of Prolomy and Ariſto- 
tle. but by producing many on the CONtrary and in particular, 
ne Phylical pertaining to Natur: al Ettects, the caules of which 
p-1haps Can be by no other way afligned ; and others Aſtrono- 
mical depending upon many circumſtances and encounters of 
no Dilcoveries in Heaven, which maniteſtly confure the Prolo- 
mack Syſteme, and admirably agree with and contum this other 
Hypochefts - and poſlibly being aſhamed ro lee the known truth 
of ocher Politions by me aflerred, different from thole that have 
en commonly received ;. and therctore diſtcutting their de- 
f-:c: lo long as they ſhud continue in the Field of Philoſo- 
phy : for thle reipects, | lay, tney have relolved to try whes- 
ther they could make a Shield for the fallacies of their Argu- 
nents of the Mantle of a t-igned Religion, and of the Autho- 
ry of rhe Sacred Scriptures, applyed by them with little judg- 
ment to the contutation of ſuch Realo,s of mine as they had 
--ither underſtood, nor {o much as heard. 

And firſt, they have indeavoured) as much as in them lay, to 
divulge an opiniou thorow the Univerle, that thoſe Propoficions 
are contrary to the Holy Letters, and conſequemily Damnable 
and Heictical : And thereupon perceiving, that for the moſt 
part, the inclination of Mans Nature is more prone to imbrace 
thoſe enterprizes, whereby his Neighbour may, although un- 
juſtly, be oppreſſed , than thoſe from whence he may receive 
juſt 11couragement ; it was no hard matter ro find thoſe Com- 
plices, who tor luch (rhat is, for Damnable and Heretical) did 
trom their Pulpits with unwoated confidence preach it, with bur 
1n unmercitul and lcls contiderate injury, not only to this Do- 
arinc, and to its followers, but to all Mathematicks and Ma- 
thcmaricians together. Hereupon atluming greater confidence, 
and vainly hopiug that thac Seed which firſt rook root in their un- 
ſound mindes, might {pread its branches, and aſcend rowards 
Heaven, they went. {cattering rumours up and down among the 
Pcople , That it would, ere long be condemned by Supreme Au- 
thority : and knowing that juch a Cenſure would lupplant 
not onely thele two Conclutions of the V Vorids Syſteme, bur 
would make all other Aſtronomical and Phytical Oblervations 
that have correlpondence and neceflary connection therewith ro 
become damnable, to facilitate rhe buſineſs they leek all they 
can to make this opinion(at leaſt among the vulgar) to ſeem new, 
and peculiar to my {clt, not Owning to know that Nzcholas Coper- 
Nics was its Authour, or rather Reſtorer and Conhirmer : a per- 
lon who was not only a Catholick, but a Prieſt, Canonick, aid 
lo eſteemed, that there bcing a Diſpute in the Lateran Council, 
under Leo X. touching the corre&ion of the Eccleſiaſtick Ca- 


lender 


429 


430 


T he Autbority of ScnRirTuREy, 


lendar, he was ſent for,to Rome from the remoteſt Parts of 
Germany, for to aſſiſt in this Retormation, which for that tine 
was left imperfe&, onely becauſe as then the true mcalure gf 
the Year and Lunar Moncth was not exattly known : Whereupon 
it was given him in charge by the Biſhop of Sewpronze , ar that 
time Super-intendent in that Aﬀair, to {darch with reiterated 
ſtudies and pains for greater light and certainty,touching rho; 
Calcſtial Motions. Upon which, with a labour truly Atlantich 
and with his admirable Wit, ſctting himſelf again to that Study, 
he made ſuch a progrets 1n thele SCICnces , and reduced the 
knowledge of the Cacleſtial Motions to luch exaGinetle, that he 
gained the title of an Excellent Aſtronomer. And, according 
unto his Do@rine, not only the Calendar hath been lince regu 
lated, but the Tables of all the Motions of the Planets have al- 
ſo been calculated : and having reduced the {aid IoGrine into 
ſix Books, he publiſhed them to the World at the inſtance of 
the Cardinal of Capna, and of the Biſhop of Culma. And in 
regard that he had re-aſlumed this ſo laborious an cnterprize by 
the order of The Pope ; he dedicated his Book De Rewolution:- 
bus Caleſtibus to His Succeſlour, namely Paul III. which, being 
then alſo Printed, hath been reccived by The Holy Church, and 
read and ſtudied by all the World, without any the leaſt um- 
brage of ſcruple that hath ever been conceived art his Doctrine; 
The which, whilſt it is now proved by manifcſt Experiments and 
neceflary Demonſtrations ro have been well groundcd, there 
want not perſons that, though they never ſaw that ſame Book in- 
tercept the reward of thole many Labours to its Authour, by 
cauſing him to be cenſured and pronounced an Heretick ; and 
this, only to ſatisfie a particular dilplealure conceived, withour 
any cauſe, againſt another man, thar hath no other intereſt in 
Copernicus, but only as he is an approver of his Doftrine. 

Now in regard of theſe falle aſperſions, which they ſo unjultly 
ſeek to throw upon me, I have thought it neceſſary for my uſti- 
fication before the World ( of whole judgment in matters of 
Religion and Reputation I ought to make ygreat eſteem) to 
diſcourſe concerning thole Particulars, which theſe men produce 
to {candalize and ſubvert this Opinion, and ina word, to con- 
demn it, not only as falle, bur allo as Herctical; continually 
making an Hipocritical Zeal for Religion their ſhield ; going a- 
bout moreover to intereſt the Sacred Scriptures in the Diſpute, 
and to make them in a certain ſenſe Miniſters of their deccipttul 
purpoſes: and farthermore defiring,tf I miſtake not, contrary to 
the intention of them, and of the Holy Fathers ro extend (that 1 
may not ſay abuſe)their Authority,ſo as that even in Conclulions 
mecerly Natural, and not de Fide, they would have us RM 

cave 


[nPHuitoSornical ConTtROVERSIE Ss. 


Ieave Senſe and Demonſtrative Reaſons, for ſome place of Scri- 

-ure which ſometimes under the apparent words may contaun 
; different ſenle. Now I hope to ſhew with how much 
greater Picty and Religious Zeal I proceed,than they do, in that 
| propole not,that the Book of Copernicus 15 not to be condemu- 
ed, but that it 15 not to be condemned, as they would have it : 
without underſtanding it, hearing it, or ſo much as ſeeing it ; 
and eſpecially he being an Author that never treateth of marters 
ofReligion or Faith ; nor by Reaſons any way depending on the 
Authority of Sacred Scriptures whereupon he may have erroni- 
oully interpreted them; but alwaies infiſts upon Natural Conclu- 
ſons belonging to the Celeſtial Motions, handled with Aſtrono- 
mical and Geometrical Demonſtrations. '  NGt that he had nota 
reſpe& to the places ofthe Sacred Leaves, but becauſe he kne w 
very well that his {aid Doctrine being demonſtrated , ir could 
not contradidt the Scriptures, rightly, and according to their trug 
meaning underſtood, And therefore in the end of his Epiſtle 
Dedicatory, ſpeaking to The Pope, he laith thus: (b) IF there 


ſhould chance to be any Mat eologiſts, who though ignorant in all 7? 


the Mathematicks, yet pretending a skill in thoſe Learnings, 
ſhould dare, upon the authority of ſome place of Scripture wreſted 
to their purpoſe, to condemn and cenſure this my Hypotheſes, I 
value them not, but ſball ſlight their inconſiderate Tudgement. For 
it is not unknown, that LaQtantius (otherwiſe a Famons Author, 
though mean Matbematician) writeth very childiſbly touching the 
Form of the Earth, when he ſcoff s at thoſe who affirm the Earth to 
be in Form of a Globe. So that it ought not to ſeem ſtrange to the 
[ngenious , if any ſuch ſhould likewiſe now deride us. The Ma- 
thematicks are written for Mathematitians, to whom (if Idecerve 
not my ſelf ) theſe Labours of mine ſhall ſeem to add ſomething, 
as alſo to the Common-weale of the Church , whoſe Government is 
now in the hands of Tour Holineſs. 

And of this kinde do thele appear to be who indeavour to 
perlwade that Copernicus may be condemned betorc his Buok 1s 
read 3 and to make the World believe that it is not onely law full 
but commendable ſo to do, produce certain Authotitics of the 
Scripture, of Divines, and of Councils ; which as they are by me 
had in reverence, and held of Supream Authority,inlomuch that 
| ſhould eſteem ir high temerity for any .one to contradict them 
whilſt they are uſed according to the In ſtitutes of Holy Church, 
lo I believe that it is no errour to ſpeak, ſo long as one hath rca- 
lon to ſuſpe& that a perſon hath a deſire, for ſome concern of 
his own, to produce and alledge them, to purpoſes different from 
thoſe that are in the moſt Sacred jotention of The Holy Church. 
Therefore I not onely proteſt (and my fincerity ſhall _— K 

c 


431 


(c\S; fort a Toe ws: 
CAM 1 x Is qr 
Crim ommniny Mui 
themat'cum 11.4- 
rs /int, tamen de 114 


jud cram aſſu- 


munt, Pprofter alt- 
uem l'cum $Scvri- 
ptur«,male ad [- 
um propoſurum, de- 
tortum , auſi fre- 
rint boos mem 1n- 
ſtuutum repre} eq* 
deye ac inſettart, 
slos mibil moroy, 
ado ut etiam ill)- 
rum [ndicinum,t an- 
qudm t« mira rium 
Contemnam. Non 
enim obſcurnm eſt, 
Lataninm , cele- 
lcbrem altoque 
Scriproxem , ſed 
Mathematicum 
parvum, admodum 
pueriliter de forma 
Terre logut, cum 
deridet cor , qni 
Terram,G'obi for- 
mam habere prodt- 
derunt, Itaque non 
debet miram vides 


ni ſtudioſis, fs qut 


tales, nos ettam rt- 
debunt. Mathema: 
ta Mathematics 
ſeribuntur ; quibus 
&F hi noſtr: laba® 
res, (fi me non fal- 
lit optrro) wviles 
burtiur etram Re 
publice Eccleſia» 
ſtice conducere a= 
I quid, C4115 Prins 
cipatum | u4 Sans 
(titas nunc tent, 


432 


The »Autborityof ScRiprtuRE, 


ſelf) that 1 intend to ſubmit my ſelf freely to renounce thoſ«. er 
rors, into which, through ignorance, I may run in this Diſcour({ 
of matters pertaining to Religion 3 but | farther declare, that 1 
deſire not in theſe matters to engage dilpute with any one, al. 
though it ſhould be in points that are dilputable : for my end 
tendeth onely to this, That if in thele conliderations , beſides n 

own profeſſion, amongſt the errours that may be in them , there 
be any thing apt to give others an hint of ſome Notion beneficja] 
to the Holy Church,touching the determining about the Coper- 
nican Syſteme, it may be taken and improved as ſhall ſeem be 


| to my Superiours : It not, let my Book be torn and burnt ; for 


that 1 do ncither intend, nor pretend to gain to my lelf any fruir 
from my writings, that is not Pious and Carholick. And moxe- 
over, although that many of the things that I oblerve have been 
ſpoken in my own hearing, yet I ſhall freely admit and grant to 
thoſe that ſpake them , that they never laid them, if {6 they 
pleaſe , but confeſs that I might have been miſtaken : And 
therefore what I ſay, letit be ſuppoled to be ſpoken not by them, 
but by thoſe which were of this opinion. | 
The motive therefore that they produce to condemn the Opi- 
nion of the Mobility of the Earth, and Stability of the Sun, is,that 
reading in the Sacred Leaves, in many places, that the Sun mo- 
veth, that the Earth ſtandeth ſtill; and rhe Scripture not being 
capable of lying, or erring, it followeth upon neceſſary conſe- 
quence, that the Poſition ot thoſe is Erronious and Heretical,ho 
maintain that the Sun of it (elf is immoveable , and the Earth 
moveable. 
Touching this Reaſon I think ic fitin the ficſt place, to con- 
ſider, That it is both piouſly ſpoken,and prudently affirmed, That 
the Sacred Scripture can never lye,when ever its true meaning is 
underſtood : Which | believe none will deny to be many times 
very abſtruce, and very different from that which the bare ſound 
of the words figniftieth. Wohence it cometh to paſs, that if ever 
any one ſhould conſtantly confine himſelf to the naked Gram- 
matical Sence,he might , erring himſelf, make not only Contra- 
ditions and Propoſitions remote from Truth to appear in the 
Scriptures, but alſo groſs Herefies and Blaſphemics : For that we 
ſhould be forced to aflign to God feet, and hands, and eyes, yea 
more corporal and humane affe&ions, as of Anger , of Repen- 
tance , of Hatred, nay,and ſometimes the Forgetting of things 
paſt,and Ignorance of thoſe to come : Which Propoſitions, like 
as (lo the Holy Ghoſt afficmeth) they were in that manner pro- 
nounced by the Sacred Scriptures, that they might be accommo- 
dated to the Capacity of the Vulgar,who are very rude and un- 
learned 3 ſo likewiſe, for the ſakes of thoſe that deſerve to be di- 
ſtinguiſhed 


]; Pn1tLo0soPHICAL ConTROVERSIES. 


ſinguiſhed from the Vulgar, it is neceſlary that grave and skilful 
Expolitors produce the true {enſes of them, and ſhew the parti- 
ular Reaſons why they are diftated under ſuch and ſuch words. 
Ard this is a Doctrine lo true and common amongſt Divines, 
har it would be ſuperfluous tro produce any arteſtation 
creot. 

p Hence methinks I may with much more reaſon conclude, that 
the fame holy Writ, when ever 1t hath had occaſion to pronounce 
any natural Concluſion, and eſpecially, any of thoſe which are 
more abſtruce, and difficult co be underſtood , hath not failed to 
obſerve this Rule, that ſo it might not caule confuſion in the 
nindes of thoſe very people, ai:d render them the more contu- 
macious againſt the Dofrines that were more ſublimely myſteri- 
ous : For (like as we have ſaid, and as it plainly appeareth) our 
of the ſole reſpe& of condeſcending to Popular Capacity, the 
Scripture hath not {crupled to ſhadow over moſt principal and 
fundamental Truths, attributing, even to God lumſc]f, qualities 
extreamly-remote from, and contrary unto his Effeuce. Who 
would poſitively affirm that the Sctipture, laying aſide that re- 
ſpect, in ſpeaking but occaſionally of the Earth, of the Water, of 
the Sun, or of any other Creature , hath choſen to confine it 
ſelf, with all rigour, within the bare and narrow literal ſenſe of 
the words ? And eſpecially , in -mentioning of thoſe Crea- 
tures, things not at all concerning the primary Inſtitution of 
the ſame Sacred Volume, ro wit, the Service of God, and the 
alvation of Souls, and in things infinitely beyond the appre- 
benfion of the Vulgar ? 

This theretore being granted, methinks that in the Diſcuffion 
of Natural Problemes, we ought not to begin at the authority 
of places of Scripture 3; but at Senſible Experiments'and Ne» 
ceflary 1>cmonſtrations: For, from the Divine Word , the 
Sacred Scripture and Nature did both alike proceed ; the firſt, 
as the Holy Ghoſts Inſpiration ; the lecond, as the moſt obſer- 
vant Executrix of Gods Commands: And moreover it being 
convenient in the Scriptures ( by way of condeſcenſion to the 
underſtanding of all men) ro {peak many things different, in 
appearance ; and ſo far as concernes the naked tignification of 
the words, fromablolute truth: But on the contrary, Nature 
being incxorable and immutable, and never pafling the bounds 
of the Laws afſigned her-, as one that nothing careth whether 
her abſtruſe reaſons and methods of operating be, or be not ex- 
Poled to the Capacity of Men ; I conceive that that, concer- 
ning Natural Effe&s, which cither Senſible Experience ſets be- 
fore our eyes, or Neceſſary Demonſtrations do prove unto us, 
oupht not, upon any account, to be called into queſtion, mm 

| Iii cls 


433 


— [CO oY - OCRrOF RT ogy ow 


kat A 


434 


Nor de finimm , 
D:am, promo N. » 
twra copneſcer- 
dum; Deinde, Po- 
frina recogneſcen- 
dum . I: 1ay 1 e.X 
operibua;, D ih re 
ma exp £4icCalt'- 
mobs, 

Tertul, advert. 
Ma:cion-. 11.2. I's 
cap.13, 


The » Autborityof Sc RipTuRE, 


leſs condemned upon the teſtimony of Texts of SCripturc, which 
may, under their word, couch Senles ſeemingly contrary there. 
to; In regard that every Expreflion of Scriprure is not tied +, 
{o ſtrift conditions, as every Effect of Nature: Nor doth God 
Icts admirably dilcover himic]t unto us in Nature's Actions, thay 
in the Scriptures Sacred Diftions. Which peradventure Terty!. 
l: an jnteuded ro exprel> 1n thole words : (c) We conclude, God 
is known ;, firſt, by Nature, and then again more Particularly 
known by Do&trine : by Nature, in bis I orks,; by Dottrine, in bis 
IWord preached. . | 

But 1 will not hence attirm, but that we ought to have an cx- 
traordinary ſtecm ior ti:c Places of Sacred Scripture, nay, being 
Come tO a certainty 1n any Natural Conclulions, we ought 
to make ule of them, as moſt appolite helps to the true Expo. 
ſition of the lame Scripturcs , and to the inveſtigation of thole 
Senſes which a1c necelacily conteined in them, as moſt true, and 
concordant wich the Truths demonſtiated. 

This maketh me to ſuppoſe, that the Authority of. the Sacred 
Volumes was itcnded principally to perſwade men to the be- 
lief of thole Arcacles and Propolitions, which, by reaſon they 
ſurpa(s all humane diſcourſe, could not by any other Science, or 
by any other means be made credible, than by the Mouth of 
the Holy Spirit it ſelf. Beſides that, even in thoſe Propoſitions, 
which are not de Fide, the Authority of the {ame Sacred Leaves 
ought to be preferred to the Authority of all Humane Sciences 
that are not wiitten in a Demonſtrative Method, but either with 
bare Narrations, or elſe with probable Realons 3 and this I hold 
to be ſo far convenient and necellary, by how far the ſaid Di- 
vine Wildome (urpaſſcth all humane Judgment and Conjedure. 
But thar ihat lelt fame God who hath indued us with Senſes, 
Dilcourle, avd Underſtanding hath intended, laying afide the 
ule of thelezto give the knowledg of thole things by other means, 
which we way attaia by thele, fo as thateven in thoſe Natural 
Coclufions, which cither by Senſible Experiments or Neceſlary 
Demonſtrations are ler before our eyes, or our Underſtanding, we 
ought to deny Senle and Reaſon, | do not conceive that I am 
bound to believe it ; and eſpecially in thoſe Sciences, of which 
but a {mall part, and that divided into Concluſions is to be 
found in the Scripture : Such as, for inſtance, is thar. of Aſtro- 
nomy, of which there is ſo ſmall a part in Holy Writ, that it doth 
not lo much as name any of the Planets, except the Sun and the 
Moon, and once or twice onely Venxs under the name of Luci 
fer. Forif the Holy Writers had had any intention to perſwade 
People to believe the Diſpoſitions and Motions of the Ccaleſtial 


Bodics 3 and that conſequently we are ſtill to derive that _ 
eage 


{n Pu1tr0$0Plcat ContrRoOvERSY Es. 


ledoc from the Sacred Books they would not, in my opinion, have 
woken (o little thereof, that it is as much as nothing, in compa- 
ſon of the infivire admirable Concluſions, which in that Sci- 
ence are comprized and demonſtrated Nay, that the Authours 
of the Holy Volumes did not only not pretend to teach us the 
Conſtitutions and Motions of the Heavens and Stars, their Fi- 
Pure, Magnitudes, and Diſtances, but that intentionally (al- 
heir that all thele things were very well known unto them) the 
forbore to ſpeak of them,is the opinion of the Moſt Holy & Moſt 
Learned Fathers:and in S. Auguſtine we read the following words. 
(c) Itis likewiſe commonly asked, of what Form and Figure 
we way believe Heaven to be, according to the Scriptures : For 
many contend much about thoſe matters, which the greater pru- 
dence of our Authors hath forborn 10 ſpeak of, as nothing further- 
ing their Learners in relation to a bleſſed life ; and, (which js 
the chiefeſt thing ) taking up much of that time which ſhould be 
ſpent in boly exerciſes. For what 15 it to me whether Heawen, as 
2 Sphere, doth on all ſides environ the Earth, a Maſs ballanced in 
the mrddle of the Ii orld;or whether like a Diſh it doth onely cover 
'r overcaſt the ſame ? But becauſe belief of Scripture is urged for 
that cauſe, which we have oft mentioned,that is,That none through 
inorance of Divine Phraſes,when they ſhall find any thing of this 
mature in,or hear any thing cited ont of our Bibles which may ſeem 
to oppoſe manifeſt Concluſions , ſhould be induced to ſuſpe&t tbeir 
truth,when they admoniſh,relate,@> deliver more profitable matters 
briefly be it ſpoken, touching the Figure of Heaven, that our. Au- 
tbors knew the truth: But the H. Spirit would not, that men ſhoul 
karn what is profitable to none for ſalvation. 


435 


(c) Qneri etiam 
ſolet, que forma & 
fiewra Cels cre- 
dends fit ſecun- 
dum Scripturas 
woſtra » Multi e- 
nim multum diſ- 
putant d: iy rebua, 
quas majori price 
dentta noſtri Auto» 
res omiſerunt , ad 
beatam vitam non 
prof utur as diſcen- 
libus, CF 0ccupans 
tes (quod prixa eft) 
multuns prolixa, 
& rebut ſalubri- 
bus impendenda 
lemporum [patia. 
9nd we —_ 
pertinet , wtrum 
Clam, [ict Spb a- 
r4,#undique conclu- 
dat Terram , in 
media Munds mo= 
le libratam ; an 
eAMs OX Kna par 
te deſuper, we- 
lut diſcxa , ope- 


rat ? Sed quia de Fide agt ur Scrip'nrarum, pripeer illam canſam,quam non ſemel commemoravimus, Ne ſcilices 
quiſquam eloguia divina non mrelligens, cum d- bis rebua tale «liquid vel invenerit in Libris Noſtris, vel ex illis 


ediverit, quod ſercepris aſſerti»mibus adver ſart videat ur, rullo modo els, cetera ntilia monentibus, vel narrantibug, 


vel prenuntiantibus, cred i : Breviter diſcendum e]}, de "I" ( eli,boc ſciſſe Autores noſtros, quod veritas ba= 


bet: Sed Spirstum Det. que Py irſog bquebatur, nolutſſe ft 


ifta docere homines, nulli ad ſalutem profutura. D. 


Avout, Lib.2.D: Gen.ad i:teram,Cap, 9.1dem ctiam legitur apud Petrum Lombardum Magiltrum Sententiarum. 


And the ſame intentional filence of thele ſacred Penmen in 
determining What is to be bclieved of theſe accidents of the Ce- 
leſtial Bodies, is again hinted to us by the ſame Father in the en- 
luing 10, Chapter upon the Queſtion, Whether we are to belicye 
that Heaven moverh , or ſtandeth iill,in theſe words : ( 4) There 
are ſome of the Brethren that ſtart a queſtion concerning the motion 
of Heaven, Whether it be fixed, or moved : For 1 
(ſay they ) bow 3s it a Firmament ? If it ſtand ſtill, how do theſe 
Stars which are beld to be fixed go round from Eaſt to Weſt , the 


mor: Northern performing ſhorter Circuits near the Pole ; ſo that 

*eaven, if there be another Pole, to us unknown, may ſeem to re- 
volye upon ſome other Axis , but if there be not another Pole, it 
Mey be thought te move as a Diſcus? To whom 1 reply, That 
I11 2 theſe 


(4d) De Motu 
etiams Cali, non» 
null: fratres que- 


f it be moved ſtimem movent, «- 


trum ſtet, an mo- 
veatur;quia [5 wee- 
vetr, inquinar, 
quemodo Firmas» 
mentums eſt ? $i 
autem ſt at,quonee- 
do Sydera que in 
ipſo fixs creduns 
twr, ab Oriente in 
Occidentem circ 


- wat + 


- - 
. 
-— 
= 


_— 
* - 
— 


* © - 
LI 

- " ” 
of 9 _ ”" 


— — 
© 


= 
- 


_—TT OS = 
Sono bow _” - 


__— 
- 
4 


* _ of - I 
we 44 
-- 


 — 
- — 
at 
_4 


436 The »Antbority of S © K1P TU RE, 


cum , Serren"io- theſe points require mary ſubtil and profound Reaſons, for the 


nali”ds brev:orcs 


Cyror nuts cards making out whether they be really ſo, or 705 the undertakeing and 


rb . * . ” = 
Dom pr egenttfs; difcuſſeng 0 which 15 neither conſrjrent with my leaſure | 
ut Celim,” e5F 4* ſe 5 f iſt ) ſ y Nor their 


ling xebis 0cc#li3 duty, »vbom I deſire #0 inſtru&t in the neceſſary matters more di- 
who ex ale ver- rely conducing 10 their ſalvation , and to the benefit of The Holy 


tice, ficut Sphera; 
anew null 6: Churcb. 


uu cardoeſt, vel From which (that we may come nearer tO our particular calc) 


-: , of rs On wa. neceſſarily £lloweth, that the Holy Ghoſt not having intend- 


ye ſponded, Multnms -d to teach us, whether Heaven moveth Or ſrandeth ſtill ; nor 
ſubtilibus & 14bo= gherher 1ts Figure be in Form of a Sphere,or of a Dilcus , or di- 


riots ration0194 


; ſta per quiri,ut ve- Gended in Planum : No! wherher the Earth be contained in the 
74 p rcipiarur , ® Centre of it, or ON ONE Gde ; he hath much leſs had an intention 


trum itay an 100 . - - b \ 
Os gin -... to aſſure 1s of other Concluſions of che ſame kinde, and in {uch 


wndic a:qu irs” A manner, connected tO theſe: already named , that without the 
Hands , wee mb go germination of them, one can either aficm one Or the other 


am tempus ef ,»ec 


olis eſſe debe: 41008 part 5 which are, Fhe determining of rhe Morion and Reſt of the 
5d Oo - 121d Earth, and of the Sun. Aud if the {ame Holy Spirit hath 
mece [art wit; HC4ce purpolely pretermitted to teach us thole Propoſitions,as nothing 
__ ;»/ar994* Concerning his intention, chat is, our ſalvation : how can it be at- 
e &rmed, that the holding of one part rather than the other, ſhould 
be ſo necelſary, as that it :. de Fide, and the other erromous ? 

Can an Opinion be Heretical » and yet nothing concerning the 

(alvation of ſouls ? Or can it be (aid that the Holy Ghoſt purpo- 

\Ea1d, Baronius: ſed not to'teach us a thing that concerned our ſalvation ? I might 
Spirits ſartte here inſert the Opinion of an Eccleſiaſtical * Perſon, raiſed to the 
mentem fuilſe » 195 ACgIEC ot Eminentifſamo, to wit, That the intention of the Holy 
drcere, quomede ad (hy (Þ, 55 to teach 15 how we ſhall go 10 Heawven,and not bow Hea- 


C el: 198 catny : non 
aurem, quomodo ven goeth. 


(lum gradarer. But let us return to confider how much neceſlary Demonſtca- 
Cardinal. Bar, * . . 
-ons,and ſenſible Fxpertmene ought to be eſteemed in Natural 
Conclufioas;and of what Aurhority Holy and Learned Divines 
- ca Ms have accounted chem. from whom amongſt an hundred other atte- 
e 4 ' . . 
ctiem (tions, We have thelc that follow:(e ) W* muSt alſo carefully 


diligentey Ccaver- 


dum , & omnino beed and altogether 101d in bandling the DoGrine 0 Moſes, to 


-d | . . 
gps” of Yo avouch or ſpeak any thing affir matively and confi ently which 


Df. ms, nee Contradideth the manifeſt Experiments and Reaſons of Philoſo- 
gram «formate F phy, or other Scrences- For fruce ul Truth 3s agreeable to Truth, 


aijc Ver Axter ſer 


3 ew <> dica- #06 Trutb of Holy W Fit cannot be contrary #0 the ſolid Reaſons 
nzu » 911od 1eU&- and Experiments of Humane Learning. 

»9:it man, eſt ts eX = 

perimes 14s & yationibus Philoſs phie,vel aliarum Diſciplinarum- Namque cum Verum onne ſemper Fw Vero 
Congriiltt y HOP noreſt Peritas S4Crarnum Litter a7 19098 , Vers Rationibs & Experiments H um anarum Doirine 
yum efſe contraria, Peier, Gn, circa PrincipLum» 


(f) Si manife- —Andindt. Auguſtine we read: (f) If any m7 ſball obje8 


ſte certeque Rati- 


oi, volut ſanita- the Authority of S acred W rit,againſt clear and manifeſt Reaſon 


ram Litterarnm be that doth ſo, knows not what be undertakes : For be objeS. 
objicitnur autgrie gin) 


1; Pu1tosopPHICAL ConTROVvERSITES: 


\111ft the Truth, not the ſenſe of the Scripture (which 3s be- 
ol his comprehenſion ) but rather his own; nor what is mit, but 
what, finding it itt himſelf , he fancyed to be in it. 

This granted, and it being true, (as hath been laid) that two 
Truths cannot be contrary to each other, it 1s the office of a 
Judicious Expolicor to ſtudy to finde the true Senſes of Sacred 
Texts, which undoubtedly ſhall accord with thoſe Natural Con- 
uſions, of which manifeſt Senic and Neceflary Demonſirations 
had before made us ſure and certain, Yea, in regard that the 
Scriptures (as hath been ſaid ) for the Reaſons alledged, admir in 
many places Expoſitions far trom the Senſe of the words 3 and 
moreover, We not being able to affirm, that all Interpreters 
peak by Divine Inſpiration; For (it it were ſo) then there 
would be no difference between them about the Senſes of the 
ame places 3 I ſhould think that it would be an a& of great pru- 
dence to make it unlawful tor any one ro uſurp Texts of Scri- 
prure, and as it were to force them to maintain this or that Natu- 
rall Concluſion for truth, of which Sence, & Dcmonſtrative,and 
necelſary Reaſons may one time or other aſfure us the contrary. 
for who will preſcribe bounds to the Wits of 'men 2 Who will 
aſſert that all that is ſenſible and knowable in the World 1s al- 
ready diſcovered and known ? Will not they that in other points 
diſagree with us, confeſs this (and it is a great truth) that Ez 
je ſcimus, ſint minima pars corum que ignoramys ? That thoſe 
Truths which we know, are very few, in compariſon of thoſe 
which we know not ? Nay more, if we have it from the Month 
if the Holy Ghoſt, that Dexs tradidit Mundum diſputationt 
corum, ut nou inveniat homo opus, quod operatus eſt Dens ab 
mitio ad finem : One ought not, as I conceive, to ſtop the way 
o free Philolophating, touching the things of the World, and of 
Nature, asf that they were already certainly found, and all ma- 
mfeſt : nor ought it to be counted raſhneſs, if one do' not fit 
down ſati:fied with the opinions now become as it were com- 


mune ; nor ought any perſons to be diſpleaſed, if others do not. 


bold, in natural Diſputes to that opinion which beſt pleaſeth 
them ; and eſpecially touching Problems that have, for chouſands 
of years,been controverted amongſt the greateſt Philoſophers,as is 
the Stability of the Sun, and Mobility of the Earth, an opinion 


teld by Pythagoras, and by his whole Se&; by Heraclides Pon-, 


ticus, who was of the ſame opininion ; by Phylolaus, the Maſter 
ot Plato; and by Plato himſelf, as Ariſtotle relateth, and of 
which Plutarch writeth in the life of Numa, that the ſaid Plate, 
when he was grown 01d, ſaid, It is a moſt abſurd thing to think 
therwiſe : The ſame was believed by Ariftarchus Sanus, as 
Ke haveit in Archimedes; and probably by Archimedes him- 


ſelf ; 


437 

ritas, non intell;> 
git, qu hoe facit ; 
CC mw SCYIPtRr 4 
ſerſum (ad qnens 
fPerietrave nou poo 
tuit) ſed ſwum po* 
tis obyicnt Verit a= 
tr: nec rd quod in 
6a, [td quod in fe- 
erſ» velut pro ed 
1mventt, opponit, 
Enift. 7, ad Mars 
celiinum. 


Eccleſialt.cap.3+ 


The Autbority of SCRIFTURE, 


ſelf 3 by Nicetas the Philoſopher, upon the teſtimony of Scicero, 
and by many others. And this opinion hath, finally, been am. 
plified, and with many Obſervations and Demonſtrations con. 
firmed by Nicholaus Copernicus. And Seneca, a moſt eminent 
Philoſopher , in his Book De Comets, advertizeth us that ye 
ought, with great diligence , ſeek for an aſſured knowled e, 
whether it be Heaven, or the Earth, in which the Diurnal Cgn. 
verſion reſides. 

And for this cauſe, it would probably be prudent and profi- 
table counlcl, if beſides the Articles which concern our Salyati. 
on, and the eſtabliſhment of our Faith (againſt the ſtability of 
which there 1s no fear that any valid and folid DoGrine can e- 
ver riſe up) men would not aggregate and heap up more, with- 
out neceſlity : And if it be ſo, it would certainly be a prepoſte- 
rous thing to introduce ſuch Articles at the requeſt of perſons 
who, belides that we know not that they {peak by inſpiration 
of Divine Grace, we plainly {ee that there might be wiſhed in 
them the underſtanding which would be neceſſary firſt to enable 
them to comprehend, and then to diſcuſs the Demonſtrations 
wherewith the ſubtiler Sciences proceed in confirming ſuch like 
Concluſions. Nay, more I ſhould ſay, (were it lawful to ſpeak 
my judgment freely on this Argument) that it would haply 
more ſuit with the Decorum and Majeſty of thoſe Sacred Vo- 
lumes, if care were taken that every ſhallow anu vulgar Writer 
might not authorize his Books (which are not feldome grounded 
upon fooliſh fancies) by inſerting into them Places of Holy Scri- 
pture, interpreted, or rather diſtorted to Senſes as remote from 
the right meaning of the {aid Scripture, as they are neer to deri- 
rifion, who not without oſtentation flouriſh out their Writings 
therewith. Examples of ſuch like abuſes there might many be 
produced, but tor this time I will confine my ſelf ro two, not 
much beſides theſe matters of Aftronomy : One of which, is that 
of thoſe Pamphlets which were publiſhed againſt the Medicean 
Planets, of which I had the fortune to make the diſcovery ; a- 
gainſt the exiſtence of which there were brought many places of 
Sacred Sctipture : Now, that all the World ſceth them to be 
Planets, 1 would gladly hear with what new interpretations 
thoſe very Antagomilts do expound the Scripture,and excuſe their 
own ſimplicity. Fhe other example is of him who but very 
lately hath Printed againſt Aſtronomers and Philoſophers, that 
the Moon doth not receive its light from the Sun, but is of its own 
nature reſplendent : which imagiration he in the cloſe confirm- 
eth, or, to lay better, perſwadeth himſelf that he confirmeth by 
ſundry Texts of Scripture, which he thinks cannot be reconciled 
unlefſe his opinion ſhould be true and neceſſary. Neves 

tne 


I; PalLOSOPHICAL CONTROVERSIES. 


-he Moon of it ſelf is Tenebrole, and yet it is no lefſe lucid than 
the Splendor of the Sun. 

Hence it is manifeſt, that theſe kinde of Authors,in regard they 
4;d not dive into the true Sence of the Scriprtures,would (in calc 
their authority Were of any great moment) have impoled a necel\- 
ſry upon others to believe ſuch Conclulions for true as were re- 

ugnant tO manifeſt Reaſony and to Scnle. Which abule Deus 
wertat, that it do not gain Countenance and Authority ; for if ic 
hould, it would ina ſhort time be necetlary to proſcribe and in- 
bit all the Concemplative Sciences. For being that by nature 
he number of luch a* are very unapt to underſtand perte&ly 
both the Sacred Scriptures, and the other Stiences 1s much great- 
» than that of the skilfuil and intelligent ; thole of che firſt fort 
ſuperficially running over the Scriptures, would arrogate to them- 
ſelves an Authority of decreeing upon all the Queſtions in Na- 
ture, by vertue of ſome Word by them miſunderſtood , and pro- 
diced by the Sacred Pen-men to another purpole : Nor would 
the ſmall number of the Intelligent be able to repreſs the turious 
Torrent of thoſe men, Who would finde ſo many the more fol- 
lowers, in that the gaining the reputation of Wile men without 
pains or Study, is far more grateful ro humane Nature, than the 
conſuming our ſelves with reſtleſs contemplations about the moſt 
rainfull Arts. Therefore we ought ro return infinite thanks to 
Almighty God, who of his Goodneſs freeth us from this fear, in 
that he depriveth ſuch kinde of perſons of all Authority and, re- 
pſerh the Conlulting, Relolving, and Decreeing upon ſo im- 

rtant Determinations in the exrraordinary Wildom and Can- 
tor of moſt Sacred Fathers; and in the Supream Authority of 
thole, who being guided by his Holy Spirit, cannot but determin 
Holily : So ordering things, that of the levity of thoſe other men, 
there 15 no account made. This kinde of men are thole, as I be- 
leve, againſt whom, not without Realon, Grave, and Holy Wri- 
ters do ſo much 1nveigh ; and of whom 1n particular S. Hierom 


Writeth: ('g) Thx (Scilicet the Sacred Scripture ) the talking |, 


old woman,the doting old man, the talkative Sophiſter, all venture 
nponlacerate, teach, and that before they have learnt it. Others 
induced by Pride, diving into hard words , Philoſophate among ſt 
Women , touching the Holy Scriptures. Others .(O0h ſhame- 
ful ! ) Learn of Women what they teach to Men, and , as if this 
Pere nothing, in a certain facility of words, | may ſay of confi- 
dence, expound to others what they underſtand not themſelves. I 
forbear to ſpeak of thoſe of my own Profeſſion, who , if after Hu- 
"ane Learning they chance to attain to the Holy Scriptures, and 
ickle the ears of the people with affeied and Studied expreſſtons, 


bey aſfirm that all they ſay, is to be entertained as the Law of God; 
and 


439 


(g) Hare (Sci 
icet Sacram cri. 
pturam) garruld 
anus , banc deli- 
Y#4 ſen:X bc $0- 
phiſt a verboſus, 
hanc wniverſs pr ee 
ſumunt , laceranm, 
d:Ccent, antequans 
diſcant 4 Ali, 
addntto ſupercilio, 
grandia verbs 
trutinantesy, mtey 
mulierculas , de 
Sacrs Litter 
Philoſophantur. 
Ali diſcunt, proh 
prdoy | @ femints, 
quod viros decent, 


an —- > 
” W—— - 
s "_ ba Ww 
_ _— on 


: ; 
ii Ge. 4 


24 4". 


SLIT Tn 


©'S 


Pr V 4 OIWR-"Aa* 
=" oy, A | 
OE ea we 


——_— 
+ * 


440 


+ a bt 
ty qualam ſact- 
lttate wverbirum, 
iv audaca, eaiſ- 
ſeri alns, qurd 
1/1 yon intelli» 
gunmt, T ace? de 
met ſimilibus , qui 
ſi forte a4 Serine 
14s Sarttu, poſt 
ſeculares litter as 
venerint , & ſer- 
mane compoſite, 
aurem Popul! mul- 
ſer int : 
dixerint , hoc le* 
gem Det pitt ant *: 
nec ſcire dig nan- 
tur, quid Prorhe- 
tt, quid eApoſt ls 
ſenſer i: , ſed ad 
ſenſam ſum , 1:7 
Cor urug apiant ice 
ft 1:0n14 : 
grand: fit , C7 nm 
vitwocrft num 40- 
cendi genus , at- 
pravare ſentent nr 
As, GT ad vVolun- 
tatem ſwam Scrti- 
pturamtrahere re- 


quirqed 


O)., 1h 
f ti! 


pugnantem. |c- 
ron. Epilt. ad 
Paxl. IO7T, 


The »Amnthorityof ScRipTURE, 
and not tooping to learn what the Prophets. and Apoſtles hel 


they force incongruous teſtimonies to their own Senſe ; As if ; 
were the genuine, and not corrupt way of teaching to deprave Fey. 
tences, and }V reſt the Scripturc according to their own ſingular and 
contradictory humour. | 

[ will not rank among thele ſame {ecular Writers any Theo. 
logiſts, whom | repute ro be men of protound Learning, and fy». 
ber Manners, and therefore hold them 1n great eſteem and yene. 
ration: Yet I cannot deny but that I have a certain (cruple in 
my mind, and conſequently am delirous to have it removed, 
whilſt I hear thar they precend to a power of conſtraining others 
by Aurhority of the Scripture: to follow that OPINION in Naty- 
ral Ditputations, which they think moſt agreeth with the Texts 
of that : Holding withall, thet they are not bound to anſwer 
the Realons and Experunents on the contrary : In Explication 
and Contirmation of which their judgement they (ay, That The- 
ologie being the Queen ot all the Scicnces, ſhe ought not upon 
any account to ſtoop to accomodate her felt to the Pafitions of 
the reſt, leſs worthy, and inferior to her : But that they ought 
to refer themlelves toher (1s to their Supzeam Emperels) and 
change and alter their Concluſions , according to Theological 
Statutes and Decrecs. And they further add , That if in the 
inferior Science there ſhould be any Concluſion certain by ver- 
tue of Demonſtrations or experiments, to which there is found 
in Scripture another Concluſion, repugnant; the very Profeſſors 
of that Science ought of themſelves to reſolve their Demonſirati- 
ons, and difcover the falacies of their own Experiments, without 
repairtng to Theologers and Textuarics, it not ſuiting, (as hath 
been ſaid) with the dignity of Theologie to ſtoop to the inveſtiga- 
tion of the falacics of the inferior Sciences : But it ſufficeth her, 
ro determine the truch of the Concluſion with her abſolute Au- 
thority, and by her infallibility. And then the Natural Conelu- 
lions 1n Which they tay that we ought to bide by the meer Au- 
thority of the Scripture, without gloſſing , or expounding it to 
Senſes different from the Words, they affirm to be Thole of |} 
which the Scripture ſpeaketh alwaies in the ſame manner 3 and 
the Holy Fathers all reccive, and expound to the lame 
Senle. : 

Now as to theſe Determinations, I have had occaſion to conlt- 
der (ome particulars (which 1 will purpoſe) for that I was made 
cautious thereof, by thoſe who underſtand more than I in theſe 
buſineſſes, and to whoſe judgements 1 alwaics ſubmit my ſelt. 
And firſt I could ſay, that there might poſlibly a certain kinde of 
equivocationinterpole, in that they do not diſtinguiſh the prehe® 


minences whereby Sacred Theologie meriteth the Title of —_ 


[nPuitosSopHlcat ContROvERSIESs. 


For it might be called fo, either becauſe that that which is taught 
yy all the other Sciences,is found to be comprized and demonſtra- 
«cd in it,but with more excellent means, and with more ſublime 
Learningzin like manner, as for example; The Rules of meaſuring 
of Land, & of Accountantſhip are much more excellently contain- 
«din the Ari:hmatick and Geometry of Exclid, than in the PraQi- 
ie: of Surveyours and Accomptants:Or becauſe the Subje& about 
which Theologre 1s converſant, excelleth in Dignity all the other 
$ybjets, that are the Matters of other Sciences : As alſo becauſe 
is Documents are divulged by nobler waies. That the Title 
ind Authority of Queen belongeth to Theologie in the firſt 
genſe, I think that no Theologers will affirm, that have but any 
1n-ſight into the other Sciences; of which there are none (as I be- 
lieve) that will lay that Geometry, Aſtronomy Muſick, and Me- 
dicine are much more excellently and exactly contained in the 
Sacred Voiumes, than in the Books of Archimedes, in Ptolomy, in 
Boetias, and in Galen. Therefore it is probable that the Regal 
Preheminence 15 given her upon the ſecond account, namely, By 
reaſon of the SubjeR, and the admirable communicating of the 
Divine Revelations in thoſe Concluſions which by other means 
could nor be conceived by men, and which chiefly concern the 
- acquilt of eternal Beatirude. Now if Theologie being conver- 
ant about the lofticſt Divine Conremplation, and reſiding for 
Dignity in the Regal Throne of the Sciences, (whereby ſhe be- 
cometh of higheſt Authority) deſcendeth not to the more mean 
and humble Speculations ot the inferior Sciences : Nayz (as hath 
been declared above) hath no regard to them, as not concerning 
Bearirude ; the Profetiors thereof ought not to arrogate to them= 
ſ{:lves the Anthority to determin of Controverſies in thoſe Pro- 
ſeſſions which have been neither practiſed nor ſtudied by them. 
For this would be as if an Abſolute Prince , knowing that he 
might freely command, and cauſe himſelf to be obeyed , ſhould 
(bcing neither Philictian nor Archite&) undertake to adminiſter 
Medicines, and ere& Buildings after his own faſhion, to the great 
endangering af the lives of the poor Patients, and to the manitfeſt 
deſtruction of the Editices. 

Again, to command the very Profeſſors of Aſtronomy, that 
they of themſelves ſee to the confuting of their own Oblerva- 
tions and Demonſtrations, as thoſe that can be no other but 
Falacies and Sophiſmes, is to cnjoyn a thing beyond all poſſibi- 
lity of doing : For it is not onely to command them that they do 
Not ſee that which they ſee, and that they do not underſtand 
that which they underſtand ; but that in ſeeking, they finde the 
Gntrary of that which they happen to meet with. Therefore be- 
fore that this is to be done, it would be neceſſary that they were 

K kk ſhewed 


441 


442 


(g) Hoc inds- 
bit anter tenendium 
oft , ut quicquid 
Sapientes b uimus 
AAundi, de Natu- 
14 YETHm Ur AC1- 
ter demorſtrave 
potuerint, oſt enda- 
mm, noſtris tibrus 
mon eſſe contrari- 
wm : quicqu'd tn- 
ters i{lt,nn, ſ1448 V9- 
lumintbus, contr a- 
rium Sacrs Lit- 
ters docent , ſine 
wlla dubit atone 
credamnid fallhſ- 
ſimum eſſe,& qu0* 
que modo poſſu- 
mrs, etiam oft cn- 
damu ; atque 14 
teneamns PFidem 
Demins noſtri , wn 
qna ſunt abſcondut 
omnes theſanrt 
Savrentia, wt ne” 
que falſe Philoſo= 
phie loquacitare 
ſeducamar , neque 
fimulata Religo- 
mis ſuperſtitione 
FEYFEAMANTY, 

Gen, ad Litteram, 
lib 1,Cap.25, 


The e Authority of ScRivTuRE, 


ſhewed the way how to make the Powers of the Soul to command 
one another, and the inferior the Superior ; lo that the 1maginati- 
on and will might, and ſhould belicve contrary to what the Inte]. 
Ie& underſtands : I ſtil] mean in Propofitions purely Natural,and 
which are not de F ide, and cot in the Supernatural , which Are 
de Fide.. 

I would entreat thele Wile and Prudent Fathers , that they 
would withal diligence confider the differcnce that is betweey 
Opinable and Demonſtrative DoGrines : To the end, that wel 
weighing in their minds wich what force Neceſlary Illations oh. 
lige , they might the better aſcertain themlſclves, that ic is not jn 
the Power of the Profclors of | :cmonſtrative Sciences to change 
their Opinions at pleaſure, and apply rhemlelves one while tg 
one (ide, and another while co another 3 and that there is a great 
difference between commanding a Methametitian or a Philoſo- 
pher, and the diſpoling ot a Lawyer or a Merchant ; and that the 
demanſtrated Conclutions touching the things of Nature and of 
the Heavens cannot be changed with the {ame facility, as the 
Opinions are touching what is lawful or not in a Contra, Bar- 
gain, or Bill of Exchange. This difference was well underſtood 
by the Learned and Holy Fathers, as their having been at great 
pains to confute many Arguments, or to ſay better, many Phi- 
loſophical Fallacies,doth | nh unto us ; and as may expreſly be 
read in {ome of them, and particularly we have in $, Auguſtine 
the following words: (g) This 3s to be held for an undoutt. 
ed Truth, That we may be confident, that whatever the Sages of 
this World bawe demonſtrated touching Natural Points, is no waies 
contrary to our Bibles: And in caſe they teach any thing in their 
Books that 1s contrary to the Holy Scriptures, we may without any 
ſeruple conclude it to be moſt falſe ; And aceording to our ability 
let us make the ſame appear: Andlet us ſo keep the Faith of our 
Lord, in whom are hidden all the Treaſures of Wiſdom ; that we 
be neither ſeduced with the Loquacity of falſe Philoſophy, nor 
ſcared by the ſuperſiition of a counterfeit Religion. 

From which words, I conceive that I may colle& this Do- 
&rine, namely, That in the Books of the Wile of this World, 
there are contained lome Natural truths that are ſolidly demon- 
{trared, and others again that are barely taught ; and that as to 
the firſt (ort, it 1s the Office of wile Divines to ſhew that they 
are not contrary to the Sacred Scriptures ; As to the reſt, taught, 
but not neceflarily demonſtrated, if they ſhall contain any thing 
contrary to the Sacred Leaves, it ought to be held undoubtedly 
falle, and ſuch ic ought by all poſſible waies to be demon 
ſtrated. 


If therefore Natural Concluſions veritably demonſtrated, are 
not 


[In Part oSoPHlcalt ConTROVERSIES. 


or to be poſtpoſed to the Places of Scripture, but that it ought 
0 be ſhewn how thole Places do not interfer with the ſaid Con- 
luſjons; then its necefſary-before a Phyſical Propoſition be 
-ondemned, to ſhew that ir is not neceſſarily demonſtrated ; and 
-his is to be done not by them who hold it to be true, but by thoſe 
who judge it to be falle. And this ſeemeth very reaſonable, 
ind agreeable to Nature ; .that js to ſay, that they may much 
more calily find the fallacies in a Diſcourſe, who believe it to be 
{\lſe, than thoſe who account it true and concludent. Nay, in 
this particular it will come to paſſe, that the followers of this o- 
pinion, the More that they ſhall turn over Books, examine the 
Arguments, repeat the Oblcrvations, and compare the Experi- 
ments, the more ſhall they be confirmed in this belief. And your 
Highneſs knoweth what happened to the late Mathematick Pro- 
tefſor in the Univerſity of Piſa, Who betook himſelf in his old 
age to ſook into the Dodtrine of Copernic#s, with hope that he 
might be able (olidly to confute it (for that he held it fo far to 
be falle, as that he had never ſtudied it) but it was his fortune, 
that as ſoon as he had underſtood the grounds, proceedings, and 
demonſtrations of Copernicxs, he found himſelf to be perlwaded, 
and of an oppoſer became his moſt confident Defender. I 
might alſo nominate other * Mathematicians, who being moved 
by my laſt Diſcoveries, have confeſſed it neceſsary to change the 
formerly received Conſtitution of the World, it not being able 
by any means to ſubliſt any longer. 

If tor the baniſhing this Opinion and Hypotheſis out of the 
\Vorld, it were enough to ſtop the mouth of one alone, as it 
may be chey perſwade themſelves who meaſuring others judge- 
ments by their own, think it impoſſible that this Do&rine ſhould 
be able ro (ublilt and finde any followers, this would be very ea- 
lic ro be done , but rhe bulinels ſtanderh otherwiſe : For to 
exccute ſuch a determination, it would be neceſſary to prohibite 
not onely the Book of Copernicus, and the Writings of the 0- 
ther Authors that follow the ſame opinion, but to, interdi& the 
whole Science of Aſtrovomy ; and which 1s more , to forbid men 
looking towards Heaven, that ſo they might not ſee Mars and 
Venus at one time neer to the Earth, and at another farther off, 
with ſuch a difference that the latter is found to be fourty times, 
and the former (ſixty times bigger in ſurface at one time than at 
another; and to the end, that the ſame Venxs might not be 
dicovered to be one while round, and another while forked, with 
molt ſubtil hornes : and many other ſenſible Obſervations which 
can never by any means be reconciled to the Ptolomaick Syſteme, 
but are unanſwerable Arguments for the Copernican. 

But the prohibicing of Copernicus his Book, now that by many 

Kkk 2 new 


* Þ. Clayius the 


Jeſuice, 


443 


ZE 
— A. | — 


- i" 


Pea h 


—Y 
= > 


"x DB Iz a \ 
—m 


_ 
x << . 


444 


The Autbority of ScR1pturs, 


new Obſervations, and by the application of many of the Lear. 
ned to the reading of him, his Hypotheſis and Do@ine doth 
every day appear to be more true, having admitted and tolerated 
ir for ſo many years, whilſt he was lefle followed, ſtudied, ang 
confirmed , would ieem, in my judgment, an affront ty Truth, 
and a f(ecking the more to obicure and ſuppreſſe her, the more 
fhe ſheweth her (elf clear and perſpicuous. 

The aboliſhing and cenſuring, not of the whole Book, but 
onely ſo much of it as concerns this particular opinion of the 
Earths Mobility, would, it I miſtake not, be a greater detriment 
to ſouls, it being an occaſion of great icandal, to fee a Poſition 
proved, and to ee it afrerwards made an Hereſie to believe it. 

The prohibiting of che whole Science, what other would it 
be but an open contempt of an hundred Texts of rhe Holy Scri- 
ptures, which tcach us, T hat the Glory, and the Greatnefle of 
Almighty God 1s admirably dilcerned in all his Works, and di- 
vinely read in the Open Book of Heaven? Nor let any one 
think that the Lefure of the lofty conceits that are written in 
thoſe Leaves finiſh in only beholding the Splendour of the Sun, 
and of the Stars, and their riſing and ſetting, (which is the term 
to which the eyes of bruits and of the vulgar reach) but there 
are couched in them myſteries ſo protound, and conceipts ſo ſub- 
lime, that rhe vigils, labours, and ſtudies of an hundred 'and an 
hundred acute Wits, have not yet been able thorowly to dive 
into them after the continual diſquiſition of ſome thouſands of 
years. But let the Unlearned believe, that like as that which 
their eyes diſcern in beholding the aſpe& of a humane body, is 
very little in compariſon of the ſtupendious Artifices, which an 
exquiſite and curious Anatomiſt or Philoſopher finds in the ſame 
when he 1s ſearching for the uſe of ſo many Muſcles, 'Tendons, 
Nerves, and Bones; and examining the Offices of the Heart, 
and of the other principal Members, ſeeking the ſeat of the vi- 
cal Faculties, noting and oblerving the admirable ſtrufures of 
the Inſtruments of the Senſes, and, without ever making an end 
of ſatisfying his curioftity and wonder, contemplating the Re- : 
ceptacles of the Imagination, of the Memory, and of the Un- 
derſtanding ; So that which repreſents it ſelf to the meer fight, * 
is as nothing in compariſon and proportion to the ſtrange Wons | 
ders, that by help of long and accurate Obſervations the Wi | 
of Learned Men diſcovereth in Heaven” And this is the fub- ! 
ſtance of what I had to confider touching this particular. | 

In the next place, as to thoſe that adde, That thoſe Natural | 
Propoſitions of which the Scripture ſtill ſpeaks in one conſtant | 
tenour, and which the Fathers all unanimouſly receive in the 


lame ſenſe, ought to be accepted according to the naked and 


literal } 


[ny Pyu1L0$s0Ptcat ConTtROVERSIES, 


iceral ſenſe of rhe Words, without gloſſes and interpretations , 
and received and held for moſt certain and true ; and that con- 
ſequently the Mobility of the Sun, and Stability of the Earth, 
zs being ſuch, are de Fide to be held for true, and the contrary 
opinion to be deemed Heretical : I ſhall propole to conſidera- 
ion, in the firlt place, That of Natural Propolitions, ſome there 
are, of which all humane Science and Diſcourſe can furniſh us 
only with ſome plautible opinion, and probable conjeQure ra- 
ther than with any certain and domonſtrative knowledge ; as for 
example, whether rhe Stars be animated : Others there are, of 
which we have, or may confidently believe that we may have, 
þy Experiments, long Oblervatioas, and Neceſſary Demonſtra- 
ions an undubitable aſſurance ; as for inſtance, whether the 
Farth and Heavens move, or not; wither the Heavens are 
Spherical, or otherwiſe. As to the fi;ſt ſort, I doubr not in the 
aſt, thar if humane Ratiocinations cannot reach them, and 
that conſequently there is no Science to be had of them, but on- 
ly an Opinion or Beliet, we ought fully and abſolutely to com- 
ply with the meer Verbal Senſe of the Scripture : But as to the 
other Poſitions, I ſhould think (as hath been ſaid above) That 
\ weare firſt to aſcertain our ſelves of the fat it ſelf, which will 
ffiſt us in finding out the true fenſes of the Scriptures z which 
hall moſt certainly be found to accord with the fa& demonſtra- 
ted, for two truths can never contradict each other. And 
this | take to be a Do&trine orthodox and undoubred, for that I 
fnde it written in Saint Auguſtine, who: ſpeaking to our point 
of the Figure of Heaven, and what it 15 to be believed to be, in 
regard that which Aſtronomers affirm concerning it ſeemeth to 
be, contrary to the Scripture , (they holding it to be rotund, 
and the Scripture calling 1t as 1t were a * Curtain, determi- 
neth that we are nor atall to regard that the Scripture contra- 
dts Aſtronomers 3 bur to believe irs Authority, if chat which 
they ſay ſhall be falſe, and founded,only on the conjeures of 
humane infirmity : but if that which which they affirm be pro- 
ved by indubitable Reaſons, rhis Holy Father doth not ſay, 
that the Aſtronomers are to be enjoyned, that they themlelves 
reſolving and renouncing their Demonſtrations do declare their 
Concluſion to be falſe , but faith , that it ought to be de- 
monſtrated, That what is ſaid 1n Scripture of a Curtain is not 
contrary to their true Demonſtrations. Theſe are his words : 
(b) But ſome obje&i ; How doth it appear, that the ſaying in our 
Bibles, Who ſtretcheth out the Heaven as a Curtain, maketh 
not againſt thoſe who maintain the Heawens to be in figure of 4 
Spbere? Let it be fo, if that be falſe which they P : For 
that is truth which :is ſpoke by Divine Authority, rather than 

that 


445 


* Pelle, a Skinin 
the Original, but 
in our Bibles a 
Curtain» 


(h) Sed aire ali- 
q':45, quomodo non 
et coMmmrariam is, 
qui figur am Sphe- 
re Celo tribunt, 
quod ſcriptum eſt 
on Libru Noftrus, 
Qui extendie Car- 
lum, ficut pellem? 


— 
er i. 


F. , 

4 \ 

S1t [ane Contr ars- 
um, i falſum eſt, 
quod ill dicunt * 
hoc en'm virim 
e/t, qt d Diryina 
dicn authwiuna, 
pY' 1144 quam illu1, 
qt 4 humana 1m- 
firmi'as Connie, 
Sea h forte illud 
ralrbus 1111 docn- 
mrentls probare Þo= 
tuerint, nt audi. 
tari inde nin debes 
at:demonſtrandum 
eſt, hoc qu01 apud 
or eſt de Pelle v1» 
Fam, ver us 
ratiombus non eſſe 
Contrar inm. 


(s) nod licet in 
preſents facile ron 
poſſi: comprehena!; 
arbitroy tamen, im 
pProceſſu tratt an- 
darum Scriptura- 
T1114, 0pportwnora 
loc poſſe Occurres® 
re, ub: nobu de hac 
re, {rcundum Sane 
te auttoritatss 
Litteras, etfs non 
oftendere certum 
aliquid,tamen cre- 
dere licebit, Nunc 
autem , ſervata 
ſemper mod r at10- 
0 Pie pravitathe, 
nihil c- edere ac re 
obſcurgs temere 
debemna d ne forte, 
quod poſte a werit 48 
patefecerit,q 4ams 
vis Libris Sans 
tus, five T eſt «= 
menti veterts, fuve» 
novi nullo modo e(- 
ſe poſſit eeverſum, 
ramen propter 4- 
morem noſtri er- 

rorts0der tmus, 
Ii, D Aug. mn 

Gen, ad Leiite- 

T4, lid. 1,14 fs » 


4 


7be Amtbority of Sc r1prurey 


that which proceeds from Humane Infirmity. But i f peradven. 
ture they ſhould be able to prove their Poſition by ſuch Experiment; 
as puts it out of queſtion, it i540 be proved, that vwhat s ſaid in 
Scripture concerning a4 Curtain , doth in no wwiſe contrad, 1 
their manifeſt Reaſons. 

He proceedeth afterwards to admonilſh us that we Oug ht to be 
no leſs careful and obſervant in reconciling a Text of Scripture 
with a demonſtrated Natural Propoſition , than w th another 
Text of Scripture which ſhould found to a contrary Senſe, Nay 
methinks that the circumlpeCtion of this Saint is worthy to be ad.- 
mired and imitated, who even in oblcure Concluſions , and of 
which we may aſlurc our {clves that we can have no knowledge 
or Science by humane demonſtration, is very rclerved in deter. 
mining what 15 to be believed, as we ſec by that which he wri. 
teth in the end of his ſccond Book, de Geneſi ad Litteram , {peak- 
102, whether the Stars are to be believed animate : ( 7) Which 
particular, although ( at preſent) it cannot eaſily be comprehended, 
yet I ſuppoſe in our farther Progreſs of handling the Scriptures, 
we may meet with ſome more pertinent places , upon which it will 
be permitted us (if not to determin any thing for certain, yet ) to 
ſuggeſt ſomewhat concerning this matter, according to the difiates 
of Sacred Authority. But novv, the moderation of pious gravity 
being alwaies obſerved, wwe ought to receive nothing raſbly in 
a doubiful point, leaft perhaps wwe reje& that out of reſpeS to 
our Errour, vwvbich hereafter Truth may diſcover , ts be inn 
vviſe repugnant to the Sacred Volumes of the Old and Newy Te- 
ſtament. 

By this and other places (it I deceive not my felt ) the intent 
of the Holy Fathers appeareth to be, That in Natural queſtions, 
and which are not de Fide, it is firſt to be conſidered , whether 
they be indubitably demonſtrated, or by ſenſible Experiments 
known 3 or whether ſuch a knowledge and demonſtration is to be 
had ; which having obrained, and it being the gift of God, it 
ought to be applycd to find out the true Sences of the Sacred Pa- 
ges in thole places, which in appearance might ſeem to ſpeak to 
a Contrary meaning : Which will unqueſtionably be pierced into 
by Prudent Divines, together with the occaſions that moved the 
Holy Ghoſt, (for our cxercile, or for ſome other reaſon to me un- 
known) to veil it ſelf ſometimes under words of differcnt figni- 
fications. 

As to the other point, Of our regarding the Primary Scope of 
thole Sacied Volumes, I cannot think that their having ſpoken 
alwaies in the ſame renour , doth any thing at all diſturb this 
Rule. For if it hath been the Scope of the Scripture by way of 


condeſcention to the capacity of the Vulgar at any time , to w 
preſs 


In PH1L.0$s OPHICAL CONTROVERSIES, 


preſs 2 Propoſition in words, that bear a ſenſe different from the 
rence of the laid Propoſition 3 why might it nor have oblerved 
-he ſame, and for the ſame reſpeCt, asoften as it had occaſion t& 
peak of the ſame thing ? Nay I conceive , that to have done 
therwiſe, would but have encreaſed the contuſion , and dimi- 
iſhed the credit that thele Sacred Records ought to have a- 
mongſt the Common People. 

Again, that rouching the Reſt and Motion of the Sun and 
Earth, it was neceſſary, for accommodation. to Popular Capa- 
city, £0 aſſert that which the Litteral ſenie of the Scripture im- 
orteth, expericnce plainly proveth : For that even to our dayes 
people far lets rude, do Continue 1n the ſame Opinion upon Rea- 
lons, that if they were well weighed aud examined , would be 
found to be extream trivial, and upca Experiments , either whol- 
ly talle, or altogether beſides the putpole, Nor is it worth 
while to go about to remove them from ir, they being incapable 
of the contrary Reaſons that depend upon too exquiſite Obſer- 
vations, and too [ubtil Demonſtrations, grounded upon Abſtra- 
gions, which, for the comprehending of them, require too ſtrong 
an Imagination. Whercupon , although that the Stability of 
Heaveu, and Motion of the Earth ſhould be more than certain 
and demonſtrated to the Wiſe; yet neverthele(s it would: be 
neceſſary, for the conſervation of credit amongſt the Vulgar, to 
afficm the contrary : For that of a thouſand ordinary men, chat 
come to be queſtioned concerning theſe particulars, its probab e 
that there will not be found ſo much as one that will not an- 
wer that he thinketh, and ſo certainly he doth , that the Sun 
noveth, and the Earth ſtandeth ſtill. But yet none ought to 
ake this common Popular Afſcnt to be any Argument of the 
tuch of char which is affirmed : For if we ſhould examine 
thele very men rouching the grounds and motives by which they 
ace induced ro believe in that manner; and on the other ſide 
ſhould hear what Experiments and DemonſtrationsIperſwade 
thole few others to believe the contrary , we ſhould finde theſe 
latter to be moved by moſt ſolid Realons , and che former by 
imple appearances, and vain and ridiculous occurrences. That 
lcrefore it was neceſſary to aſlign Motion to the Sun, and Reſt 
(0 the earth, leſt the ſhallow capacity of the Vulgar ſhould be 
(ontounded, amuſed, and rendred obſtinate and contumacious, 
n prying credit to the principal Articles, and which are ablolute- 
ly de fide, it is ſufficiently obvious. And if it was neccſlary ſo 
0 do, It is not at all ro be wondred at; that it was with extraor- 
nary Wiſdom ſo done, in the Divine Scriptures. 

; But] will alledge further , That not onely a reſpe&to the 


ncapacity of the Vulgar, but the current Opinion of thole __ 
made 


443 


'k) Quaſi non 
multa tn Scriptu- 
vis Sanlt is dican- 
tir juxta opinio- 
ne. tins tenmpor us 
qu? gift a referunt, 
FF row 1uxta qued 
res Veritas Contimes 
bar,D.Hti-ro. inc, 
28. Jerem, 

(1) Conſuetudi- 
ns Scriptwrarum 
eſt, ut opiniorens 
multarum rerum 
fic naryet Hiſt or» 
cls , qnom?do e0 
tempore ab ononi- 
bus credebatur, [n 
cap.13.Matth, 

* D. Thomas, 1n 
cap. 26,Job, v, 7- 


7 be Authority of Sc RipTuRs 


made the Sacred Writers, in the points that were not necefſary 
to ſalvation, to accommodate themlelves more to the receives 
aſc, than to the true Eſſence of things: Of which S. Hiergy, 
treating, writeth: (k) As if many things were not ſpoken jy 
the Holy Scriptures according to the judgement of thoſe times 
in which they were acted , and not according to that whit) 
truth contained. And elſewhere, the ſame Saint: (1) It ;s the 
ftome for the Pen-men of Scripture, to deliver their Tudgments in 
many things, according to the common received opmion that thei, 
times had of them. And *S. Thomas Aquinas in Fob upon thoſe 
words, Qui extendit Aquilonem ſuper vacuum , Os appendit 
Terram ſuper nibilum: Noteth that the Scripture calleth that 
ſpace Vacuum and Nibilum, which imbraceth and invironeth the 
Earth, and which we know, not to be empty, bat filled with Air; 
Nevertheleſſe, ſaith he, The Scripture to comply with the appre. 
henſion of the Vulgar, who think that in that lame ſpace there 
is nothing, calleth it Vacuum and Nibilum. Here the words of 
S. Thomas, Q uod de ſuperiori Hemiſpherio Celi nibil nobis ap. 
paret, niſ: ſpatinm acre plenum, quod wulgares homines reputant 
Vacuum ; loquitur enim ſecundum exiſtimaiionem vulgarium ho- 
minum, prout eſt mos in Sacra Scriptura, Now from this Place 
I think one may very Logically argue, That the Sacred Scripture 
for the ſame reſpe& had much more reaſon to phralc the Sun mo- 
veable, and the Earth immoveable. For it we ſhould try the ca- 
pacity of the Common People, we ſhould find them much more 
unapt to be perſwaded of the ſtability of the Sun, and Motion 
of the Earth, than that the ſpace that environeth it js full of Air. 
Therefore if the ſacred Authors, in this point, which had not lo 
much difficulty to be beat into the capacity of the Vulgar, have 
notwithſtanding forborn to attempt perſwading them unto it, it 
muſt needs ſecm very reaſonable that in other Propoſitions much 
more abſtruſe they have obſerved the ſame ſtile. Nay Copernicus 
himſelf, knowing what power an antiquated cuſtome and way 
of conceiving things become familiar to us from our infancy 
hath in our Fancy, that he might not increaſe confuſion and dit- 
ficulty in our apprehenſions, after he had firſt demonſtrated, | 
That the Motions which appear to us to belong to the Sun, or to | 
the Firmament, are really in the Earth 3 in proceeding after- 
wards to reduce rhem into Tables, and to apply them to uſe, he 
calleth them the Motions of the Sun, and of the Heaven that 1: 
above the Planets ; expreſly terming them the Rifing and Set- 
ting of the Sun and Stars; and mutations in the obliquity of 
the Zodiack, and variations in the points of the Equinoxes; the 
Middle Motion, Anomalia, Profthaphereſis of the Sun; and ſuch 
other things; which do in reality belong to the Earth : But be- 


caule 


[nPnitoSOPHICAL COnTROVERSIES. 


«ule being zoyned to it, and conſequently having a ſhare in eve- 
ry of its motion*,We cannor immediately diſcern them in her, but 
are forced to reter them to the Celeſtial Bodies in which they 
appear : therefore we call them as it they were made there, where 
they ſeem to us to be made. Whence it isto be noted how ne- 
neflary it is tO ACCO modate our dilcourle to our old and accu- 
tomed manner of underſtanding. 

That, in the next place, the common conſent of Fathers, in re- 
ceiving a Natural Propoſition of Scripture , all in the tame ſenſe 
ought to Authorize it fo far, as to make it become a matter of 
Faich to believe it tobe * fo, I ſhould think that it ought at moſt 
-o be underſtood of thoſe Conclutions onely,which have beenb 
the ſaid Fathers diſcufled, and fifred with all poſſible diligence, 
anddebared on the one fide, and on the other, and all things in 
the end concurring to difprove the one, and prove the other. But 
the Mobility of the Earth, and Stability of the Sun, are not of 
this kinde ; For, that the ſaid Opinion was in thoſe times total- 
ly buried, and never brought amongſt the Queſtions of the Schools, 
and not confidered, much leſs followed by any one: So that it is to 
be believed that it never ſo much as entered into the thought of 
the Fathers to dilpute it,the Placesof Scripture,their own Opinion, 
and the afſent of men having all concurred in the {ame judgemenc, 
without the contradiction of any one, ſo far as we can finde. 

Belides, it is Dot enough to (ay that the Fathers all admit the 
ſtability of the Earth, &c- Therefore to believe ic is a matter of 
Faith : But irs neceſſary to prove that they have condemned the 
contrary Opinion : For I may affirm and bide by this, That their 
ot having occaſion to make fſatisfation upon. the ſame, and to 
diſcuſs it, hath made them to omit and admitic , onely as cur- 
ent, bur nor as reſolved and proved. And I think I have very 
00d Reaſon for what I ſay, For either the Fathers did make 
reflection upon this Concluſion as controverted, or not : If not, 
then they could determin nothing concerning it, no not in their 
private rhoughts ; and their incogitance doth not oblige us to 
receive thoſe Precepts which they have not, ſo much as in their 
intentions enjoyned. But if they did refle& and conlider there- 
on, they would long fince have condemned it, it they had judged 
terroncous;which we do not find that they have done. Nay, after 
that ſome Divines have began to conſider it, we find that they 
have not deem'd it erroneous; as we read in the Commentaries of 
Didacus a Stunica upon Fob,in Cap.9,v.6.0nthe words, ui gom- 
movet Terram de loco ſ#8,&c. Where he at large dilcourleth upon 
the Copernicau Hypotheſis, and concludeth, That the Mobility 
of the Earth, 3s not contrary to Scripture. 

Withal, I may juſtly queſtion the cruth of that determination, 
damely, That the Church enjoyneth us to hold ſuch like Natural 


449 


» Namely | ac- 


Y cording tothe Lit- 


teral Senſe. 


LI11 Cons 


450 


Concil, Trid. Seſſ. 
4 


the BY, 
fo nleg, mil um 
ſubulter, & | iba» 
refes re'tonbus, 
iſt a perq! = 
Vere perc'natnr, 
utrim ita, An 101 
14 fit: quibus 1n- 
eundis atque trd- 
Ft and ts y nec mihi 
Jam tem'w eſt, 
necilly eff» deber, 
qu's ad ſulutem 
ſuam , Sanit e Ec- 
clefie neceſſar1am 
weilitatem cups» 
mi informari. 


(m) Non Solemyſ:d 
Primum Mobile 
immatum conſt;- 
tiſe; Daoniſ, 
Arecop, 

(n) Omnia cor- 
pora Celeſtia  im- 


ewe ſubſtitiſſe: 


The «Amtborityof ScRipTuRE, 


Concluſions as marters of Faith, onely becauſe they bear the 
ſtamp of an unanimous Interpretation of all the Fathers : And 


I do ſuppole that it may poſſibly be, that thoſe who hold in this 
manner, might poſſibly have gone about in favour of their own 
Opinion, to have amplificd the Decretal of the Councils ; which 
I cannot finde in this cale to prohibit any other, ſave onely , Per. 
werting to Senſes contrary to that of Holy Church , or of the 
concurrent conſent of F athers, thoſe places, and thoſe onely that 
do pertain either to t aith or Manners, or concern our edification 
in the DcCrine of CLriſtianity : And thus ſpeaks the Council of 
Trent. Seſj. 4 But the Mobility or Stability of the Earth, or 
of the Sun, are not matters of Faith, nor contrary to Manners, 
nor is there ary one, that for the ſtabliſhing of this Opinion, 
will pervert places of Scripture in oppolirion to the Holy Church, 
oc to the Fathers : Nay, Thoſe who have writ of this Dodtine, 
did never make uſe of Texts of Scripture ; that they might leave 
it ſtill in the breaſts of Grave and Prudent Diviaes to interpret 
the (aid Places, according to their true meaning. 

And how far the Decrees of Councills do comply with the Ho- 
ly Fathers in thele particulars , may be ſufficiently manifeſt, in 
that they are ſo far trom enjoyning to receive luch like Natural 
Concluſions for matters of Faith, or from cenſuring the contrary 
Opinions as erronious 3 that rather reſpeGing the Primitive and 
primary intention of the Holy Church, they do adjudpe it un- 
profitable to be bulicd in examining the truth thereof. Let 
your Highneſs be pleaſed to hear once again what S. Auguſtine 
anlwers to to thole Brethren who pur the Queſtion , Whether it 
be true that Heaven moyeth, or ſtanderh ſtill? (*) To theſe 1 


anſwer, That Points of this nature require a curious and pro- 


found examination , that it may truly appear whether they be 


trxe or falſe, a work inconſiſtent with my leaſure to under- 
take or 20 thorow with, nor ts it an 


y way neceſſary for thoſe, 


whom. we deſire to inform of the things that more nearly 
concern their own ſalvation and The Churches Be- 
nefit. 

- yet although in Natural Propoſitions we were to take the 
relolurtion of condemning or admicting them from Texts of Scri- 
pture unammouſly expounded in the ſame Senſe by all the Fa- 
thers, yet do | nor {ee how this Rule can hold in our Caſe;for that 
upon the ſame Places we read ſeveral Expoſitions in the Fathers 3 
(m.) Dionyſins Areopagita ſaying, That the Primum Mobile, and 
not the Sun ſtand ſtill. Saint Auguſtine is of the ſame Opinion 3 
(#) All the Celeſtial Bodies were immoweable. And with then 


concurreth Abulenſis. But which is more, amongſt the Jewiſh 


Authors (whom Foſeph»s applauds) ſome have held , (0) on 


InPnyitoSOPHICAL WonTROVvEnsIESs. 


The Sur did not really ſtand ſtill, but ſeemed ſoto do, during the 
fort tame 11 which Iſrael gave the overthrow to their Enemies. 
$ for the Miracle in the time of Hezekiah,Paulns Burgenſis is of 
opinion that it was not wrought on the Sun, but on the Diall. 
pur that, In ſhort, it is neceſlary to Gloſſe and Interpret the 
words of the Text in Joſhna, when ever the Worlds Syſteme 
.in diſpute, I ſhall ſhew anon. Now finally, granting to theſe 
Gentlemen more than they demand, to wit, That we are whol- 
ly co acquielce in the judgment of Judicious Divines, and that 
in regard that ſuch a particular Dilquiſition is not found to 
have been made by the Ancient Fathers, it may be undertaken 
by the Sages of our Age, who having firſt heard'the Experiments, 
Obſervations, Reaſons, and Demonſtrations of Philoſophers and 
aſtronomers, on the one fide, and on the other (ſeeing that the 
Controverſie is abour Natural Problems, and Neceſſary Dilem- 
mas, and which cannot poſlibly be otherwiſe than in one of 
the two manners in controverſte) they may with competent cer- 


451 


(0) Solem rye- 
vera non ſubſtitiſ- 
ſe immotum, ſed 
pro brevi tempore, 
intra quod Iſracli- 
tay boſtes ſos fu- 

erwnt, i4 Uta vi- 
ſum eſſe. 
Ifa..Cop. ;9, 


tainty determine what Divine Inſpirations ſhall diftate ro them. 


But that without minutely examining and diſcuſling all the Rea- 
ſons on both ſides; and without ever comming to any- certainty 
of the truth of the Cale, ſnch a Reſolution ſhould be taken, Is 
not to be hoped from thoſe who do not ſtick to hazzard the Ma- 
xſty and Dignity of the Sacred Scripture , in defending the re- 
putation of their vain Fancies ; Nor to be feared from thoſe 
who make ic their whole buſineſſe, to examine with all in- 
tenſneſs, what the Grounds of this DoGrine are; and that only 
n an Holy Zeal for Truth, the Sacred Scriptures, and for the 
Majeſty, Dignity , and Authority , in which every Chriſtian 
hould indeavour to have them maintained. Which Dignity, 
who ſeeth not that it is with greater Zeal deſired and procured 
by thoſe. who , abſolutely ſubmitting themſelves to the Holy 
Church, deſire, not that this, or that opinion may be prohibi- 
ted, but onely that ſuch things may be propoſed to conſidera- 
tion, as may the more aſcertain her in the ſafeſt choice, than by 
thole who being blinded by their particular Intereſt, or ſimula» 
ted by malitious ſuggeſtions, preach that ſhe ſhould, without 
more ado, thunder out Curſes, for that ſhe had power ſo to do : 
Not conſidering that all that may be done is not alwayes conve- 
nent to be done. The Holy Fathers of old were not of this 
Punon, but rather knowing of how great prejudice, and how 
much againſt the primary intent of the Catholick Church, it 
would be to go about from Texts of Scripture to decide Natu- 
al Concluſions, touching which, either Experiments or neceſſary 
Demonſtrations, might in time to come evince the contrary, of 
| What which the naked ſenſe of the Words foundeth, they have 
LI1I 2 not 


—_ 


. . . 
<4 i 4 7" =; + 1 
. > 4 - _— SE" we 
"»* o 4 C 
x 
Wt” mY —_ > 


—_ 


- 


452 The » Authority of > © RIPTURE, 


not only procceded with great circumipeGion, but have 1c; the 
(nv) Inrebia ob following Precepts for the inſtruction of others. ( p) In point, 


ly thing 
ris oculu rem?» Y1 ith a aly t th ] n 
f LAG Hs a out of Sacred IWrit, that, with a Salvo to the Faith that we ba 


[cripta etiam divi- imbued, may correſpond with ſeveral conſtructions, let ys nct (y 


we my farre throw our ſelves upon any of them with a precipitons 1 
{int [| arva e, ; . 3 
felt rock, a. ſtinacy,as that if, perhaps the Truth being more diligently ſearch, 
[us __ alia p4- into, it ſhould juſtly fall to the ground, we might full togethe, 
rere (ententin , in _. Fe: ltd 
RS and ſo ſhew that we contend not for the ſenſe of Divine 


precipiti affirma- Scriptures, but our own, in that we would have that whit), Is 
tione 114 Projict- 


om, wt | fore Or 0rPn to be the ſenſe of Scriptures, vwben as wve ſhould ,. 


ailygemis; diſcuſ- ther deſire the Scriptures meaning to be ours. 
ſa veritas ea rette 


labcfatt averit, corrwamns ; non pro ſententia Divinarum $cripturarum , ſed pro noſtra ita dimicantes, ut dad 


vel: mu SCript #y arum 4/[e, qH4h noſtra eſt, cum Pot 1168 cam Juu4 S criptiy ar um eſt, noſtram «(ſe velle debram, 
Divus Augultin, in Gen, ad Litteram, lib. 2.c. 18. & (cq, 


He goeth on, and a little after teacheth us, that no Propoſj- 
tion can be againſt the Faith, unleſfſe firſt it be demonſigated 
(q) Tam din = talle; ſaying, (4) Tis not all the while contrary to Faith, until it 
ly, 219960 be diſproved by moſt certainTruth,which if it ſhould ſo be,the Holy 
riſa refellarwr. Scripture affirm'd it not, but Humane Ignorance ſuppoſed jt, 
_ þ {42% Whereby we ſee that the ſenſes which we impoſe on Texts of 
bebarDwvina Scr1- SCripture, would be falſe, when ever they ſhould diſagree with 
as 5 oor ns Fruths demonſtrated. And therefore we ought, by.help of de- 
wrania, lod,  monſtrated Truth, to feck the undoubred tenſe of Scripture : 
and nor according to the found of the words, that may ſeem 
true to our weakneſſe, to go about, as it were, to force Na- 
ture, and to deny Experiments and Neceſlary Demonſtia- 

tions. 


Let Your Highneſle be pleaſed to obſerve farther, with how 
great circumipection this Holy Man proceedeth , before he af- 
ftirmeth any Interpretation of Scripture to be ſure, and in ſuch 
wile certam, as that it need not fear the encounter of any difh- 
culty that may - procure it diſturbance , for not contenting 
bimlelt char ſome ſenle of Scripture agreeth with ſome Demon- 

(r) 54 ane» ſtration, he ſubjoynes. (r) But if right Reaſon ſhall demon- 
_ ED ; ph ſtrate-this to be true, yet is it queſtionable whether in theſe words 


ftraverit , adbuc of Sacred Scripture the Pen-man would have this to be under- 
inceritumrs Crit , M- | 


uns hoc is tis fto9d, or ſomewhat elſe, no leſſe true. And in caſe the Context 


verbs Sanftorum of bis Words ſhall prove that he intended not this, yet will noi 
Libroram, Scrip- 


A od that which be would have to be underſtood be therefore falſe, but 


rit, an aliquid 4 Moſt true, aad that which is more profitable 10 be knowvn. 
lind now ming ve- 


rum, On'd Peetera Contextio ſermon non hoc enum volniſſe probaverit, Lon ideo falſum erit alg4d, q4:d p/e 
intell;gi volnit, ſed & wernum, & quod wiilins cognoſeatur, 


But that which increaſeth our wonder concerning the cir- 
| | £ cumſpedtion, 


In PulLOSOPHICAL CONTROVERSIES. 


cum|pection » wherewith this Pious Authour proceedeth I hl 
at not truſting to his oblerving , that both Demonſtrative 
Rcalons) and the lenſe that the words of Scripture and the reſt 
of the Context both precedent and {ublequent, do contpire to 
prove the ſame thing, he addeth the following words. 
(ſ ) But if the Context do not hold forth any thing that may 
diſprove this to be the Authors Senſe , it yet remains to enquire, 
1 bether the other may not be intended alſo. And not yet reſolving 
toaccept of one Senſe, or reje& another , but thinking that he 
could never uſe ſufficient caution, he proceedeth: (t) But if 
» be we finde that the other may be alſo meant,it vw1ll be doubted 
which of them be would have toſtand ; or which in probability he 
may be thought to aim at, if the trxe circumſtances on both ſides be 
weighed. And laſtly, intending to render a Reaſon of this his 
Rule, by ſhewing us to what perils thoſe men cxpole the Scri- 
ptures, and the Church z who , more relpecting the lupport of 
their own errours, than the Scriptures Dignity, would ſtretch its 
Authority beyond the Bounds which it preicribeth to ir ſelf, he 
ſubjoyns the enſuing words, which of themſelves alone might 
ſuffice to repreſs and moderate the excellive iberty, which {ome 
ink that they may aſſume to- themlelves : ( #) Forit many 
times falls out, that a Chriſtian may not ſo fully underſtand a 
Point concerning the Earth, lleawen, and the reſt of ths Worlds 
Elements ; the Motion, Conwerſion, Magnitude, and Diſtances of 
the Stars, the certain defects of the Sun and Moon, the Rewoluti- 
ons of Tears and Times, the Nature of Animals,F ruits, Stones, 
and other things of like nature , as to defend the ſame by right 
Reaſon, or make it out by Experiments. But its too great an ab- 
ſurdrty, yea moſt pernicious, and chiefly to be avoided, to let an 
Infidel finde a Chriſtian ſo ſtupid, that be ſhould argue theſe mat- 
ters; as if they were according to-'Chriſtian DoGtrine ; and make 
him (as the Proverb ſaith) ſcarce able to contain bis laughter, ſee- 
ing him ſo far from the Mark. Nor is the matter ſo much that one 
m an errour ſhould be laught at, but that our Anthors ſhould be 
thought by them that are without, to:be of the ſame Opinion,and to 
the great prejudice of thoſe whoſe ſalvation we wait for, [enſured 
and rejeSted as unlearned. For when they ſhal confute any one of the 
Chriſtians in that matter,vwvhich they themſelvs thorowwly under- 


ftand,and ſhall therenpon expreſs their light eſteem of our Books , 


boov ſhall theſe Volumes be believed touching the Reſ urretion of 


the Dead, the Hope of eternal Life , and the Kingdom of Heawen, 
vuhen,as to theſe Points vobich admit of preſent Demonſtration, 
or undoubted Reaſons , they conctive them to be falſly vwritten. 


wr, & cum magro exitio cory de quorum ſalute ſatagimus, tanguam indotti reprebendunt 


453 


(/) Tr Autemn one 
texcro Scyipturd, 
hoc voln:jſe intel- 
l01 Scriptoremy 
nin repngnaverit, 
adhuc reſt abt 
quarere, utrum & 
alind non pormeric. 

(r) Qurdſpo & 
alnd porwifſe rog- 
FEY 1TH , aricert uns 
erit ; quidnam c0- 
11m ille voluerit : 
aut MIT que vo» 
luiſſe zon inconve- 
menter credirdy, fi 
utriuſque ſententie 
certa circumſtan- 
tia ſufragatury. 

( « ) Plerumque 
e117 Accidit , it 4- 
l:anid de T erra,de 
Celode ceteris bue- 
Jus murdi elemens 
tw,de mot cone 
ver ſhone, vel etian 
magnitndine @& 
mervallis Syde-= 
rum, de certts de- 
feflibut Sol, & 
Lynne, de eircuiti- 

bus annorum & 
temporum; de Na- 
turls animalium, 
fruticumlapidum, 
argue hujuſmedi 
Cefer 8, tram nou 
Chriſtian ita no» 
Vers, wt cipt'fſima 
ratione vel experi- 
entid tentat. T wr- 
fe antem eft nims 
T pernicrſum, ac 
mAXiume CAVen- 
dum , ut Chriſtua- 
num de hs rebus 
quaſi ſecundum 
Chriſtianaslitter «4 
loquentemyta de= 
lirare quilibet in« 
fidels andiat , ut, 
quemadmodum dis 
cat#r, toto Celoey- 
rAreconſpiciens, vi- 
ſ#teneyxe vix poſit 
non tam mole- 
ſtum eſt, quod er- 
rans homo deride- 
retur;ſed quod an- 

ftores noſtri, ab 115 

qui forts ſunt , ta- 
{ta ſenſi ſſe credun- 


uy atque reſpunntny, 


Cum enims quemquam de numero Chriſftianoruym eamre, quam 1 op optime norunt deprehenderints F vanam ſenter= 


1am ſnam de noſtris librus aſſerent ; quo patto ills Librg cre 


art furt de Re ſurreftione MOrivornm, & de ſpe 


We ererne,Regneque (elorum;quando de his rebus quas jam experirizuel indubitatss ratiombus percipere potwernunt, 


ſallaciter putaverint eſſe conſcriptos, And 


44 
A 
' : 
Þ- 
7. 
hi. y 
p 2 7 
t', 
i 
k | 
) 


ts 


454 


CI) Onid enim 
mooleſtia ariſtieq ue 
ſuper ant proudenti- 
bus fratribus , te» 
nerars! pr eſumpio- 
ries. ſatu dict yn 
poteſt , cum , þ 
quando de faiſa & 
prava opirione ſus 
reprehends OT con» 
Vinci ceprrint, ab 
ils qui noſtrorum 
librorums auttori- 
rate, apertiſſima 
falſrrate dixerunt , 
coſdum (thros 5 4n- 
Reg , unde 1d pro 
bent 5 proferre co- 
HAKIMY ; vel etiam 
memoriter, q't ad 
teſt: monium val 
re arbarantir1 
wulta inde verbs 
pronnncianty no» 
gntelligentes nequt 
gue loguuntur, nt 
gue de quibus af” 


firms nt, 


Tbe Authority of Sc Riet ung 


And how much the truly Wiſe and Prudent Fathers arc dic. 
plealcd with thele men, who in defence of Propofitions which 
they do not underſtand, do apply, and ina certain ſenſe Pawn 
Texts of Scripture, and afrerwards go on io encreaſe their rſt 
Errour, by producing other places lels underſtood than the for. 
mer. The {ame Saint declareth in the expreſſions following . 
(x ) What trouble and ſorrow weak unaertakers bring upon 
therr knowing Brethren, %s not to be expreſſed ; ſince wwhen they 
begin to be told and convinced of their falſe and unſound Opini on, 
by thoſe vwho have no reſpe& for the Authority of our Scriptures, 
in defence of wwhat through a fond Temerity,and moſt manifeſt fal. 
ſity, they bave urged they fall to citing the ſaid Sacred Books 
for proof of it, or elſe repeat many wwvords by beart out of them, 
vwbich they conceive to make for their purpoſe , not knowving 
either what they ſay, or wwbereof they affirm. 

In the number of theſe we may, as I conceive, account thoſe, 
who, being either unwilling or unable to underſtand the De- 
monſtrations and Experiments, wherewith the Author and fol- 
lowers of this Opinion do confirm it, run upon all occaſions to 
the Scriptures, not conſidering t hat the more they cite them , and 
the more they perſiſt in affirming that they are very clear , and 
do admit no other ſenſes , fave thoſe which they force upon 
them, the greater injury they do to the Dignity of them (if we 
allowed that their judgements were of any great Authority) in 
caſe that the Truth coming to be manifeſtly known to the con- 
trary, ſhould occaſion any confuſion , at leaſt to thoſe who are 
ſeparated from the Holy Church ; of whom yet ſhe is very ſolici- 
tous, and like a tender Mother, deſirous to recover them again 
into her Lap. Your Highneſs therefore may ſee how przpoſteroyl- 
ly thoſe Perlons pro:ced, who in Natural Diſputationsdo range 
Texts of Scripture in the Front for their Arguments ; and ſuch 
Texts too many times,as are but ſuperficia}ly underſtood by them. 

Burt if theſe men do verily. think, & abſolutely believe that they 
have the true ſence of Such a particular place of Scripture, it muſt 
needs follow of conſequence;that they do likewiſe hold forcertain, 
that they have found the abſolute truth of that Natural Concluſi- 
on, which they intend to diſpute: And rhat withall, they do know 
that they have a great advantage of their Adverſary, whole Lot it 
is todefend the part that is falſe; in regard that he who maintain 
eth the Truth,may have many ſenſible experiments,and many ne- 
cellary Demonſtrations on his fide 3 whereas his Antagonilt can 
make uſe of no other than deceitful appearances, Paralogiſms and 
Sophiſms. Now if they keeping within natural bounds, & produ- 
cing no other Weapons but thoſe of Philoſophy,pretend however, 


to have {ſo much advantage of their Enemy ; why do they _ 
wards 


In Pa1r0sSoPHICAL CONTROVERSIES, 


yards in coming to engage, preſently betake themſclve$to a Wea- 

1 inevitable & dreadful to territie their Opponent with the ſole 
holding of ic? But if I may ſpeak the truth, believe that they are 
he firſt that are affrighted, and that perceiving themſelves'tnabk 
0 bear up againſt the aſſaults of their Adverſary,go about to find 
our ways how to keep them far enough off, forbidding unto them 
the uſe of the Reaſon which the Divine Bounty had vouchſafed 
them,& abuſing the moſt equitable Authoriry of ſacred Scriprate, 
which rightly underſtood and applyed, can never, according to 
the common Maxime of Divines, oppole the Manifeſt Experi- 
meats, or Neceflary Demonſtrations. But theſe mens running 
o the Scriptures for a Cloak to their inability to comprehend, 
not to {ay reſolve the Reaſons alledged againſt them, ought (it I 
b: not miſtaken) to ſtand them in no ſtead : the Opinion which 
th-y oppale having never as yet been condemned ' by Holy 
Church. So that if they would proceed with Candor, they 
ſhould eicher by filence confeſs them(elves unable to handle ſuch 
like points, or fiſt conſider that it is nor in the power of them or 
others, but onely in that of the Pope, and of Sacred Councils to 
cenſure a Poſition to be Erroneous : Bur that it is left to their 
feedome ro diſpute concerning its falſity. And thereupon, 
knowing that it is impoſſible that a Propoſition ſhould at the 
me time be Trugand Hererical ; they ought, I ſay, to imploy 
them(clves in that work which 13 moſt p oper to them, namely, 
n demonſtrating the falſicy thereof : whereby they may lee 
bow needlefſe the prohibicing of it is, its falſhood being once 
iſcovered, for that none would follow it : or the Prohibition 
xould be fafe, and without all davger of Scandal. Therefore 
irſt let theſe men apply themſelves ro examine the Arguments 
of Copernicus and others 3 and leave the condemning of them 
for Erroneous and Heretical to whom it belongerh : But yer let 
them not hope ever to-finde ſuch raſh and precipitous Determina- 
tions in the Wary and Holy Fathers, or in the ablolure Wi- 
dome of him that cannot erre, as thoſe into which they ſuffer 
themſelves to be hurried by ſome particular AﬀecGion or [are- 
reſt of their own. In thele and luch ocher Poſitions, which are 
not direRly de F:de, certainly no man doubts but His Holineſs 
bath alwayes an abſolute power of Admitting or Condemn- 
ing them, but it is not in the power of any Creature to make 
them to be true or falſe, otherwiſe than of their own nature, 
and de faGo they are. 

Therefore it is in my judgment more diſcretion to afſure ug 
brſt of the neceſſary and immutable Truth of the FaQt, (over 
which none hath power) than without that certainty bycondem- 
ung one part to deprive ones ſelf of that authority of freedome 

to 


455 


If this paſſage 
ſeem harſh, the 
Reader muſt re- 
member that I do 


but Trauſlate, 


The Authority of ScriptuRE 


to ele&, making thoſe - Determinations to become neceſſary 
which at preſent are indifferent and arbitrary, and reſt in the 
will of Supreme Authority. And in a word, if it be nor pol. 
ſible that a Concluſion ſhould be declaicd Heretical, whilft we 
are not certain, but that it may be true, their pains are in vain 
who pretend to condema the Mobility of the Earth and Stabilj. 
ty, of the Sun, uuleſle they have firſt demonſtrated it to be im- 
poſlible and falle. 

It remaincth now, that we conſider whether it be true, that 
the Place in Joſbuah may be taken without altering the pure ſig- 
nification of the words : and how it can be that the Sun, obey. 
ing the command of Joſhuab, which was, That it ſhould ftand 
fill, the day might thereupon be much lengthened. Which by. 
ſineſle, if the Celeſtial Motions be taken according to the Prolg. 
maick, Syſteme, can never any wayes happen, for that the Sug 
moving thorow the Ecliprick, according to the oider of the 
Signes, which is from Ealt ro Weſt (which is chat which maketh 
Day and Night) it is a thing manifeſt, that the Sun cealing its 
true and proper Motion, the day would become ſhorter and not 
longer, 3 and that on the contrary, the way to lengthen ir would 


| be to, haſten and velocitate the Suns motion 3; imlomuch that to 


cauſe the Sun to ſtay above the Horizon for ſome rime, in one 
and the ſame place,wirhout declining towards the Weſt, it would 
b- neceſſary to accelerate its motion 1n ſuch a *manner asthat ir 
mi zht ſeem equal to that of the Primum Mobile, which would be 
aa acccl-racing it about three hundred and (ſixty times more than 
ordinary. It therefore Foſhuah had had an intention that his 
words ſhould be taken in their pure and proper (ignitication, he 
would have bid the Sun to have accelerated its Motion fo, that 
the Rapture of the Primum Mobile might not carry it to the 
Weſt ; but becauſe his words were heard by people which hap- 
ly knew no other Celeſtial Motion, fave th x grand and common 
one, t:om Eaſt tro Weſt, ſtooping to their Capacity, and having 
no intention to teach them the Conſtitution of the Spheres, but 
only that they ſhould perceive the greatneſs of the Miracle 
wrought, in the lengthening of the Day, he [poke according to 
theic appceiiention. Pollibly this Conſideration moved Dioay- 
ſins Areopagita ty ſay that in this Miracle the Primum Mobile 
ſtood ſill, and this ſtopping, all the Celeſtial Spheres did of 
coniequence ſtay : of which opinion is S. Auguſtine himſelf, and 
Abulenſis at large confirmech ic. Yea, that Foſhua's intention 
was, that the whoi. 8 ſteme of the Celeſtial Spheres ſhould 
ſtand ſtill, is collefcd f.om the command he gave at the ſame 
time to the Moon, airhough that it had nothing to do in the 


lengthening of the day 3 and under the injunRion laid ”P the 
| ooh, 


Jn Pyu1.0$s0PHIcal ConTtrROvYERS1Es. 


Moon, we are tO underſtand the Orbes of all the other Planets, 
paſſed over 1n ſilence here,as allo in all other places of the Sacred 
Scriptures 3 the intention of which, was not to reach us the Aſtro- 
nomical Sciences. I luppole therefore , (if I be not deceived) 
chat it is very Plain, that it we allow the Ptolemaick Sylteme, we 
muſt af necellity interpret the words to {ome ſenſe different trom 
heir ſtrict (ignitication, W hich Interpretation (being admo- 
wiſhed by the molt uſetull precepts of S. Auguſtine) I will not 
Amro be of neceſſity this above-mentioned , ſince that ſome 
other man may haply think of ſome other more proper,and morc 
agreeable Senle. 

But now, if this ſame paſlage may be underſtood in the Coper- 
aan Syſteme, to agree better with what we read in Joſhuah, 
with the help of another Oblervation by me newly ſhewen in 
the Body of the Sun 3 I will propound it to conſideration , ſpeak- 
ing alwaies with thole {afe Reſerves ; That] am not 1o aftecio- 
nate to My own Inventions, as to prefer them before thole of 
other men, and to believe that better and more agreeable to the 
intention of the Sacred Volumes cannot be produced. 

Suppoſing therefore in the firſt place, that in the Miracle of 
foſbuah, the whole Syſteme of the Celeſtial Revolurions ſtood 
ſtill, according to the judgement of the afore-named Authors: 
And this is the rather to be admitted , ro the end, that by the 
ſtaying of one alone , all the Conſtitutions might not be con- 
unded, and a great diſorder needleſly introduccd in the whole 
vurſe of Nature: I come in the {econd place to conlider how the 
lar Body,although ſtable in one conſtant place, doth neverthe- 
ks revolve in it ſelf, making an entire Converſion in the ſpace 
of a Month, or thereabouts ; as I conceive I have ſolidly demon- 
ſtrated in my Letters Delle Machie Solari : Which motion we 
(enſibly ſee ro be in the upper part of its Globe ', inclined to- 
wards the South 3: and thence towards the lower part, to encline 
towards the North, juſt in the ſame.manner as all the other Orbs 
oithe Planets do. Thirdly, If we reſpe& the Nobility of the 
Sun, and his being the Fountain of Light, by which, (as I necel- 
larily demonſtrate) not onely the Moon and Earth, but all the 
other Plancts (all in the ſame manner dark of themſelves) become 
!luminated;I conceive thatit will be no unlogicall Lllation to ſay, 
That it, as the Grand Miniſter of Nature, and in a certain (cnle 
the Soul and Heart of the World, infulcth into the other Bodies 
which enviro: it 3 not onely Light, but Motion allo; by revol- 
Ving* init {elf : Sothatin the ſame manner that the motion of 
the Heart of an Animal ceaſing, all the other motions of its 
Members would ceaſe ; ſo, the Converſion of the Sun ccaling, 

'(2nverſions of all the Planets would ſtand ſtill. And though 

M m m ; 


457 


4 8- 1, On its 9wrr. 


XN 3s 


455 


(*) Lux equa collt- 
git,convertiique ad 
ſe omu1a , que Vis 
dentir, q#4 mo- 
ventny , que illus 
ftrantur , que ( 4- 
leſcunt,& 10 n= 
mine ed, ue ab t- 
jus ſplendore con- 
tynentiur, Itaque 
Sol HaiG arcitiir, 

quod omnta con- 

greger,colligatque 

diſper ſa. 
(x) Ss enim 
Sol hic nuem wvi- 


l 
demwm, corum q'14 


ſub ſenſum ca- 
dunt, efſentias C& 
qualttates,queque 
mul: 4 fant AC aiſ- 
/i mules, tAmn ip/c 
qu: unus eſt \equar 
{tterque lumen 
fundiut,renwat, a- 
luytuenr per fictt, 
drvidit , conjwngity 
fover,f acunda reds 
dit, Auget, mulat, 
format edit movet, 
vitaliaq; facit om- 
ma: &f undue, 
res bujuu nmvere 
fitatis , pro Carty 
ſuo, un aigiees 
juſders Selts eft 
partice?s, caiiſaſ- 
que multoritm, 
gue PArinrip 'nt, 1 
ſe equabs'ter 4+ 
eicipatas babe, 
Certe mAjors 74th 
we, Kc. 


The Amtbority of S@rxieturs 
I could produce the teſtimonies of many grave Writers to prove 


the admirable power and influence of the Sun, I will content q 
ſelf with one ſole place of Holy Dioniſevs Areopagite in his Book 


de Divinis Nominibus, who thus writes of the Sun: (*) Hjs Lis}, 

athereth and conwerts all things to himſelf , which arg ſeen 
moved, illufirated, wax bot, and (in a word) thoſe things Lov. 
arc preſerved by bis ſplendor : W. berefore the Sun 3s called Hu, 
for that be colleeth and gathereth together all things diſperſed, 
And a little after of the Sun again he adds ; (*) If this Sun whicl, 
we ſee , as touching the Eſſences and Q nalities of thoſe thing; 
which fall vwithin our Senſe, being very many and different ; yet 
if he vwho is one, and equally beſtowwes his Light, doth renew, 
nouriſh, defend, perfe&, divide, conjoyn, cheriſh , make fruitful, 
encreaſe, change, fix, produce, move, and faſhion all living crea. 
tures : And every thing in this Univerſe at his Pleaſure, is par- 
taker of one and the ſame Sun ; and the cauſes of many things 
which participate of him, are equally auticipated in him : Certain. 
ly by greater reaſon, &c. The Sun therefore being the Foun- 
tain of Light and, Principle of Motion, God intending, that at 
the Command of To ſbua, all the Worlds Syſteme , ſhould con. 
tinue many hours in the ſame ſtate, it ſufficerh to make the Sun 
ſtand ſtill, upon whoſe ſtay (all the other Converſions cealing) 
the Earth, the Moon, the Sun did abide in the lame Conſtitution 
as before, as likewile all the other Planets : Nor in all that time 
did the Day decline towards Night, bur it was miraculouſly pro. 
loaged : And in this manner, upon the ſtanding ſtill of the$un, 
without altering, or in the leaſt diſturbing the other Alpedis and 
mutual Poſicions of the Stars, the Day might be lengthned on 
Earth ; which exaGtly agreeth with the Litteral ſenſe of the Sacred 
Text. 

But that of which, if I be not miſtaken, we are to make no 
{ma]] accoynr, is, That by help of this Copernican Hypothelis 
we have the Litteral, apert, and Natural Senſe of another partt- 
cular that we read of in the ſame Miracle ; which is, That the 
Sun ſtood ſtil] zz Medio Celi : Upon which paſſage grave Divines 
raiſe many queſtions, in regard it ſeemeth very probable , That 
when Joſhuab detired the lengthning of the Day , the Sun was 
near ſetting, and not in the Meridian ; for if it had been 11 the 
Meridian , it being then about the Summer Solſtice, and con- 
ſequently the dayes being at the longeſt, it doth not ſeem likely 
that it was neceſlary to pray for the lengthning of the day , *0 
prolecute Victory in a Battail, the (pace of ſeven hours and more, 
which remained to Night, being tufthcient for that purpole. 
Upon which Graye Divines have been induced to think that thc 
Sun was near ſetting: And io the words themſelves fecm to 


- 


ſound 


\ "Il 
In Pnuitos oPHICAL CONTROVERSIES. 


{>und, ſaying, Ne mMovearts Sol , ne movears, For it it had 
been 1n the Meridian, cither it had been needle(s to have asked 
i Miracles of it would have been ſufficient to have onely praid 
or ſome. retardment. Of this opinion is Cajetan, to which ſub- 
ribeth Magaglianes, confirming it by ſaying, that Foſhuus had 
hat very day done lo many other things before his commanding 
he Sun, as Were not pollibly ro be dilpatch r n half a day. 
Whereupon they are forced to read the Words in Medio Cul; 
/to confeſs the truth) with a little-harſhnels, ſaying that chey 
;mp rt NO MOTC than this : That the Sun ſtood ſtill, being in our 
Hemiſphere, 1hat 1s, above the Horizon. Bur:(if Ido not erre) 
we ſhall avoid that and all other harſh expolitions, it accordin 
-o the Copernicean Syſteme we place the Sun in the midſt; -thar 
js, 1n the Centre of the Celeſtial 'Orbes, and /of the Planetary 
Converſions, as 1t 16molt requitite to 'do; .'For fuppoſing! any 
hour of the day (either Noon, or any other, as you ſhall plca(e 
neerer to the Evening) the Day was lengthened, and all the 
Celeſtial Revolutio ns ſtayed by the Suns Randing ſill, 1» the 
mdjt, that 1s, 21 the Centre of Heawen, where it relides : A 
Sent fo much the more accomodate to the Letter (beſides what 
hath beea ſaid already ) in that, if the Text had defired to have 
affirmed the Suns Reſt to have been cauſed at Noon-day, the 
proper expreſſion of it had been 10 ſay, It ſtood ſtill at Noon-day, 
orinthe MeridianCircle, and not in the midſt of Heawen : In 
regard that the true and only M:ddle of a Spherical Body (as is 
Heaven ) 15 the Centre. 

Again, a5 to other places of Scripture, which ſeem contrary to 
this poſition, I do not doubt but that if it were acknowledged 
tor True and Demonſtrated thoſe Very Divines who fo long as 
taey repute it falſe, hold thoſe places incapable of Expoſitions 
that agree with it would finde ſuch Interpretations for them, -as 
ſhould very well ſuit therewith ; and elpecially if to the know- 
|«dge of Divine Learning they would but adde ſome knowledge 
of the Aſtronomical Sciences : And as at preſent, whilſt they 
deem it falle they think they meet 1n Scripture only with (ſuch 
places as make ayaialt it, if they ſhall but once have entertained 
ano:her conceipt thereof, they would meet peradventure as many 
others that accord with it, and haply would judge, that the Holy 
Church doth very appolitly teach, That God placed the Sun in 
the Centre of Heaven, and that thereupon by revolving it in it 
lt, after the manner of a Wheel, He contributed the ordinary 
__ to the Moon and other Erratick Stars, whilſt that ſhe 

1ngs, 

; Cali Deus ſanctiſſume, 

Q uti lucidum Centrum Poli, 
M m m 2 


Candore 


459 


Solem ſtetiſſe, 
aun adbucin He» 
mr1ſpherio noſtro , 
ſupra ſcilrcer Ho 
riz,ontew exs/t erce. 
Cajetan rm loco, 


- bh. 


450 The Authority of ScRipTuRE 


Candore pings igneo, 
Augens decoro lumine, 

O uarto die, qui flammcam 
Solis rotant conſtituens 
Lune miniſtras ordinem, 


Vagoſque curſus Syderum. 


They might ſay, that the Name of Firmament very well a- 
greeth, ad literam, to the Starry Sphere , and to all that which 
is above the Planetary Converſions ; which according to this Hy- 
pothelis is altogether firme and immoveable. Ad litteram (the 
Earth moving circularly ) they might underſtand its Poles, 
where it's ſaid, Nec dum Terram fecerat, &@ flumina, gs Cardi- 

* Or Poles, NES Orbis Terre, Which Cardines or* Hinges leem to be aſcribed 
to the Earth in vain, if it be not to turn upon them. 


46t 


ABSIRACT 


W p by - " bw 
a, 7, => -- - = — <0 
4a — 9 0 --——  —_, = - - 
: "4 . _ a of - > 


OF THE 
Learned Treatiſe hl 
O F bl 
JOHANNIS KEPLERUS, "| 


The Emperours Mathematician : 
ENTITULED 
His Introduition upon M ARS: 


_ 


- — —— 


— 


AM Deo Gon T muſt be confeſſed , that there are very 


WAG F< many who are devoted to Holineſle, 
| thar diſſent trom the Judgment of Co- 


| pernicxs, fearing to give the Lye to the 0 

Holy Ghoſt {peaking in the Scriptures, bh 

| if rhey ſhould ſay, that the Earth mo- s: 
veth, and the Sun ſtands ſtill. Bur let [8 
» || {uch conſider, that ſince we judge of ve- af 
= 1y many, and thoſe the moſt principal {W 
things by the Senſe of Secing, it is impoſlible that we ſhould ali- nn 
enate OUr Speech from this Senſe of our Eyes. Therefore many | o | 1 
things daily occur, of which we ſpeak according to the Senſe of i$ 
Sight, when as we certainly know that the things themſelves are 'n 
otherwiſe. An Example whereof we have in that Verſe of | 4 
Virgil ; Te 


Provehimur portu, Terr.eque urbeſque recedunt. 


So when we come forth of the narrow ſtraight of ſome Val- 
ley, we ſay that a large Field diſcovereth it ſelf. So Chriſt to 
Peter, Duc in altum : [ Lanch forth into the Deep, or on high, ] 01.1 
8if the Sea were higher than its Shores ; For {o it {eemeth ro "1 
the Eye, but the Opticks ſhew the caule of this fallacy. Yet F: 
Chriſt uſeth the moſt received Speech, although it proceed from !. 
tlis deluſion of the Eyes. Thus we conceive of the Riſing and 
Setting 


463 


The eAmbority of Sc r1eTuURE, 


Setting of the Stars, that 15 to ſay, of their Aſcenſion and Det. 
cenſion ; when at the ſame time that we aftirm the Sun riſeth, 0. 
theis (ay, thatit goeth down. See my Optrces Aſtronomie,cap. 
10.fol.327. Soin like manner, the Ptolomarcks aftirm , that the 
Planets ſtand ſtill, when for ſome dayes together they ſeem to he 
fixcd, although they believe them at that very time to be moyed 
in a dire& line , either downwards to, or upwards from th. 
Farth. Thus the Writers of all Nations ule the word Solſtiti. 
1m, and yet they deny that the Sun doth really ftand ſtil]. Like. 
wile there will never any man be lo devoted to Copernicus, but 
he will ſay, the Sun entererh into Cancer and Leo, althouph he 
granteth that the Earth enters Capricorn or Aquarizus : And (g 
in other calcs of the like nature. But now the Sacred Scriptures, 
ſpcaking to men of vulgar matters (in which they were not in- 
tended to inſtru men) after the manner of men, that ſv they 
might be underſtood by men, do ule tucl Expreſſions as are 
granted by all, thereby to infinuate other things more Myſteriou: 
and Divine. What wonder 1s it then, it the Scripture peak; 
according to mans apprehenſion, at {uch time when the Truth 
of things doth diſſent from the Conception that all men, whe- 
ther Learned or Unlearned have of them ? Who knows not 
that it 1s a Poetica] alluſion, Pſal.19. where, whilſt under the fi. 
militude of the Sun, the Courle of the Goſpel, as alſo the Pere- 
grination of our Lord Chriſt in this World, undertaken for our 
ſakes, is deſcribed, The Sun 1s {aid to come forth of bis Talerns- 
cle of the Horizon, as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, r e. 
joycing as a Giant to run a Race ? Which Virgil thus imitates; 


Tithono croceum linquens Aurora cubile : 


For the firſt Poets were amongſt the Jews. The Pſalmiſt knew that 
che Sun went not forth of the Horizon, as our of its Tabernacle, 
& yet ic leemeth to the Eye 1o to do: Nor did he believe,that the 
Sun moved, tor that it appeared ro his ſight ſo to do. And yer he 
faith both. for that both were ſo to his teeming. Neither is it 
to be adjudged falle in either Senſe : for the perception of the 
Eyes hath its verity, fit for the more ſecret purpoſe of the Plal- 
miſt 1n ſhadowing torch the current paſſage of the Goſpel, as 
allo the Peregrination of the Son of God. Joſhua likewile 
mentioneth the Vallics on or in, which the Sun and Moon mo- 
ved, for that they appearcd to him at Fordan fo todo : And yet 
boch thele Pen-men may obtain their ends. Dawv1d, (and with 
him Syracides) the magnificence of God being made knownz 
which cauſed theſe things to bz in this manner repreſented to 
{1ght, or otherwiſe, the myſtical meaning, by means of thele 


Vidbles being diſcerned : And Joſhua, in that the Sun, as 10 on 
Senle 


ſnPuitoSOoPAICAL GOnTROVERSIE s; 


Cenle of Secing, ſtaid a whole day in the midſt of Heaven,wherc- 
;.at the lame time to others it lay hid under the Earth. But in- 
-ooirant perſons onely look upon the contrariety of the words, 
The Sun ſtood ſtill, that 1s, The Earth ſtood ſtill; not conlidering 
that this contradiEtion 15 confined within the limits of the Op- 
ticks and Aſtronomy : For which caulc it is not outwardly ex- 
aled to the notice and ule of men: Nor will they underſtand 

| that the onely thing Joſbnab prayed for, was that the Mountains 
might not intercept the Sun from him ; which requeſt he expreſ- 
ſed 11 words, that tuited with his Ocular Senſe : Beſides it had 
becn very unſealonable at that time to think of Aſtronomy , or 
the Errours in Sight ; for if any one ſhould have told him that 
the Sun could not really move upon the Valley of Ajalon, , but 
onely in relation to Senſe, would not Foſhxab have replyed, that 
iz defire was that the day might be prolonged, fo it were by 
zny means whatſoever ? In like manner would he have anſwered 
ifany one had ſtarted a queſtion about the Suns Mobilicy , and 
the Earths Motion. But God calily underſtood by Foſhuabs 
words what he asked for, and by arreſting. the Earths Motion, 
made the Sun in his apprehenſion ſeem to ſtand Rill. For the 
lumm of Joſbuahs Prayer amounts to no more but this, that it 
might thus appear to him, letitin the mean time be what it 
zwld of it ſelf. For that its ſo ſeeming, was not in vain and 
adiculous, but accompanied with the deſired effe&. Burt read 
me tenth Chap. of my Book , that treats of the Optick part of A- 


fronomy, where thou ſhalc finde the Reaſons why the Sun doth 


n this manner {cem to all mens thinking to be moved , and not 
ae Earth 3 as namely, becauſe the Sun appeareth ſmall, and the 
fach bigg. Again, the Motion of che Sun is not diſcerned by 
taccye, by reaſon of his ſeeming tardity , but by ratiocina- 
ton onely; in that after lome time it varieth not its proximity to 
ch and ſuch Mountains. Therefore it is impoſſible that Rea+ 
lon, unleſs it be firſt inſtructed, ſhould frame to it ſelf any other 
apprehenſion, than that the Earth with Heavens Arch placcd 
over 1t, 15 as 1t were a great Houle, in which, being immoveable, 
the Sun like a Bird flying in the Air, paſſeth in ſo imall a Species 
wutot one Climate into another. Which . imagination of all 
Man-sinde bet.ig chus, gavc the firſt hne in the Sacred Leaves : 
In the beginning (fauh Moſes) God created the Heawen and the 
Errth ; for that thele two are moſt obvious to the eye. As if 
\oſes ſhould have ſaid thus to Man 3 This whole Mundane Fa- 
Tick which thou ſceſt, lucid above, and dark, and of a vaſt ex- 
ent beneath, wherein thou haſt thy being, and with which thou 

it covered, was created by God, 
ln another place Man is queſtioned; Whether he can fende out 
the 


* Gen, Ohp. 


(#8 


«£S 


* Plal. 24. 2: 
Plal.13 7+ ?. 
h * Chap. 1ov, 4,60 
F 9. 
4 
4 
» : . 


The «Amborityof ScRkipTuRE, 


the beight of Heaven above , or depth of the Earth bene.xth, - for 
that each of them appeareth to men of ordinary Capacity, to h 
equally an infinite extent. And yer no man that is in his 
mind will by thelc words circumicribe and bound the gj! 
of Aſtronomers, whether in demonſtrating the moſt contemprible 
Minuity of the Earth, in compariſon of Heaven, or in learchin 

out Aſtronomical Diſtances : Since thoſe words ſpeak not of the 
Rational, but real Dimention ; which to a Humane Body, 
whilſt confin'd to the Earth, and breathing in the open Air, is aj- 
ropether impoſſible. Read the whole 35. Chapter of Job, ang 
compare it with thoſe Points which are diſputed in Attronom A 
and Phyſiologie. If any one do alledge from Pſal.24. That * Tþ, 
Earth 1s founded upon the Seas, to the end that he may thence 
inter ſome new Principle in Philoſophy, abſurd to hear ; as, Thar 
the Earth doth float upon the Waters ; may 1t not truly be tg 
him) That he ought not [0 meddle with the Holy Spirit , Nor to 
bring him with contempt into the School of Phy tiologic. 
For the Pialmiſt in that place means nothing e!{c bur 
that which men fore-know, and daily lee by experience ; namely, 
That the Earth (being lifted up after the {eparation of the Wa. 
ters) doth ſwim between the Grand Oceans, and float about the 
Sea. Noris it ſtrange that the expreſſion ſhould be the ſame 
where the Iſraelites fing, * That they ſate on the River of Buby- 
{-1 ; that 15, by the River fide. or on the Banks of Erphrates and 
[ ygr7s. 

[t any one receive this Reading without {crup.c, why not the 
other ; that ſo in thole ſame Texts which are wont to be alledged 
againſt the Motion of the Earth, we may 1n like manner turn our 
cyes from Natural Philoſophy, to the ſcope and intent of Scri- 
pture. One Generation paſſeth away, ( ſaith Eccleſiaſtes ) and a- 
nother Generation cometh: But the Earth abideth for ever. * As 
if Solomon did here diſpute with Aſtronomers, and not rather put 


dV 
I tght 
lMCnce 


- men in minde of their Mutability ; whenas the Earth, Mankindes 
/ habitation, doth alwaies remain the ſame : The Suns Motion 
; doth continually return into what it was at firſt : The Wind Þ 


acted in a Circle, and returns in the ſame manner : The Rivers 
flow from their Fountains into the Sea , and return again from 
thence unto their Fountains : To conclude, The Men of tl 


| Agedying, others are born in their room ; the Fable of Lite 1 


ever the ſame ; there is nothing new under the Sun. Here 15 no 
rcterence ro any Phyſical Opinion. N ev3goia 15 Moral of 4 thing Th It 
{elt manifeſt, and ſeen by the eyes of all, but little regarded: 113 
that therefore which Solomon doth inculcate. For who knows 10! 
that the Earth is alwaies the ſame ? Who ſees nor that the Sun 


dothariſe from the Eaſt ; That the Rivers continually rn _ 
. the 


in PurtoSOPHICAL WONT ROVERSIE <. 


ho Sca 3 Thar the viciflitudes of the \Windes recurn into thei: 
primitive Statc ; That {ome men {ucceed others? But who con- 
idercth that the lelf-lame Scene of Life is ever acting, by diffe- 
ent pcrlons ; and that nothing is new in humane affairs ? There- 
f:c Solomon inſtancing 1n thole things which all men ſee, doth 
ut inen in minde of that which many thorowly know, but roo 
yhcly conlider. h 
Burthe 104. Pſalm is thought by ſome to contain a Diſcourſe 
alogether Phy lical; in regard it onely concerns Natural Philoſo- 
by. Now God 1: there ſaid, To have laid the Foundations of 
the Earth, that it ſhould not be removed for ever. But here al- 
ſo the Plalmiſt is far from the Speculation of Phyſical Caufes : 
For he doth wholly acquieſce in the Creatnefle of God, 
who did all thele things , and ſings an Hymne to God the 
Maker of them, in which he runneth over the World in order, 
x it appcared to his eyes. And if you well conſider this 
Plalmc, 1t 15 a Paraphralc upon the fix dayes work of the Crea- 
ton: For as tn It the three firſt dayes were ſpent in the Separa- 
non of Regions ; the firſt of Light from the exrcriour Dark- 
pls; the {econd, of the Waters from the Waters, by the inter- 
poſition of the Firm ament 3 the third, of the Sea from Land ; 
when allo the Earth was cloathed with Herbage and Plants : 
And the three laſt dayes were ſpent in the filling the Re- 
00s thus diſtinguiſhed 3 the fourth , of Heaven ; the 
afth, of the Seas and Aire; the ſixth, of the Earth : $o 
here 1m this Plalme there are ſo many diſtin& parts pro- 
rortionable to the Analogy of the ſix dayes Works. For 
in Verſe 2. he cloaths and covereth the Creator with Light 
(the firſt of Creatures, and work of the firſt day) as with a 
Garment. The ſecond part beginneth at Verſe 3. and treats of 
the Waters above the Heavens, the extent of Heaven and of Me- 
teors (which the Plalmiſt ſcemeth to intend by the Waters a- 
dove) as namely of Clouds, Winds, Whirl-wmds, Lightnings. 
The third part begins at Verſe 6. and doth celebrate the Earth 
iz the toundation of all thole things which he here confidereth. 
ror \\c :cterreth all things to the Earth, and to thoſe Animals 
wlch inhabit ir for that in the judgment of Sight the two prin- 
cpal parts of the World are Heaven and Earth. He therefore 
:re oblerverh that the Earth after ſo many Ages hath not falte- 
a, tired, or decayed 3 when as notwithſtanding no man hath 
;taicovered upon what it is Founded. He goeth not about to 
vac men what they do not know, but puttceth them in minde 
1 what they negle&, to wit, the Greatnefſe and Power of God 
creating fo huge a Maſs ſo firm and ſedfaft. It an Aſtrono- 
"r ſhould teach that the Earth is placed among the Planets, he 
Non ovVer- 


455 


Pj al. | O04. V ©, 


_ INES 
- -- - 


466 


x Fhelters 


7hbe Authority of ScR1iptuRg 


overthroweth not what the Pſalmiſt here ſaith, nor doth he con- 
tradict Common Experience 3 for it is true notwithſtandin 
that the Earth, the Structure of God its Archite&, doth not Z 
cay (as our Buildings are wont to do) by age, or conſume þ 
wormes, nor ſway and leane to this or that fide; that the Sears 
and Neſts of Living Creatures are not moleſted; that the 
Mountains and Shores ſtand immoveable againſt the viol-nce of 
the Winds and Waves, as they were at the beginning. Butthe 
Pſalmiſt addeth a moſt Elegant Hypotheſis of the Separation of 
the Waters from the Continent or Main-Jand, and adorns jt 
with the produdtion of Fountains, and the benefits that Springs 
and Rocks exhibit to Birds and Beaſts. Nor doth he omit the 
apparelling the Earths Surface, mentioned by Moſes amongſt the 
works of the third Day, but more ſublimely deſcribeth it in his 
Caſe in cxpreſſions infuſed from Divine Inſpiration ; and flouri- 
ſheth out the commemoration of the many commodities which 
redound from that Exornation for the Nouriſhment and Com: 
fort of Man, and * Covert of Beaſts. The fourth pare begins 
at Verſe 20. celebrating the fourth dayes work , viz. The Sun 
and Moon , but chiefly the commodiouſneſſe of thoſe things, 
which in their Scaſons befall to all Living Creatures and to Man; 
this being the ſubject matter of his Diſcourſe : So that it plain- 
ly appeareth he a&ed not the part of an Aſtronomer. For if he 
had, he would not then have omitted to mention the five Planets, 
than whole moiton nothing is more admirable, nothing more ex- 
cellent, nothing that can more evidently ſer forth the Wiſdome 
of the Creator amongſt the Learned. The fifth part begins, 
Verſe 25. with the fifth Dayes work. And it ſtores the Seas with 
Fiſhes, and covers them with Ships. The ſixth part is more ob- 
{curely hinted at, Verſe 28. and alludeth to the Land-Creatures 
that were created the ſixth day. And laſtly , he declareth the 
goodneſle of God in general, who daily creatcth and preſerveth 
all things ? So that whatever he ſaid of the World is in relation 
to Living Creatures ; He ſpeaks of nothing but what is granted 
on all hands; for that it was his intent to extol things known, 
and not to dive into hidden matters, but to invite men to con- 
template the Benefits that redouud unto them from the works of 
each of thele dayes. 

And I doallo beleech my Reader, not forgetting the Diviac 
Goodneſle conferred on Mankind ; the conlideration of which 
the Plalmiſt doth chicfly urge, that when he returneth from the 
Temple, and enters into the School of Aſtronomy, he would 
with me praiſe and admire the Wiſdome and Greatneſle of the 
Creator, which I diſcover to him by a More narrow explication 


of the Worlds Form, the Diſquiſition of Cauſes, and _ 
O 


I; 2a1it SOPHICAL COnTRCOVERSIES. 


if the Errours of Sight : And ſo he will not onely extoll tlic 
pounty Of God n the preſervation : ee * aan of all 
indes, and eſtabliſhment of the Earth; bur even in its Motion 
ſo, which 1s {0 ſtrange,:.1o admirable, he will acknowledge rhe 
\Wildome of the Creator. But he who is lo ſtupid as not to 
comprehend the Science of Aſtronomy, or (o weak and [crupu- 
'0u5 as to think it an offence of Piety ro adhere to Copernicus, 
im | adviſe, that leaving the Study of Aftronomy, and cenſurin 
he opinions of Philoſophers at pleaſure, he berake himtclf to 
tis own Concerns, and thar deſiſting from further purſuit of theſe 
qricate Studies, he keep ar home and manure his own Ground ; 
and with thole Eyes wherewith alone he ſeeth, bcing eleva- 
ed towards this to be admired Heaven, ler him pour torth his 
wholc heart in thanks and praiſes to. God the Creator ; and af- 
ure himſelf that he ſhall therein perform as much Worſhip to 
God, as the Aſtronomer, on whom God hath beſtowed this Gift, 
that though he ſeeth more clearly with the Eye of his Under- 
ſanding 3 yet whatever he hath attained to, he is both able and 
willing to extoll his God above it. 25, 
And thus much concerning the Authority of Sacred Scripture. 
Now as touching the opinions of the Saints about thele Natural 
Points. Ianſwer in one word, That in Theology the weight of 
Authority, but in Philoſophy the weight of Realon 15 to be con- 
idered. Therefore Sacred was LaGtantivs, who denyed the 
arths rotundirty 3 Sacred was Auguſtine, who granted the Earth 
vbe round, but denyed the Antipodes; Sacred is the *Liturgy of 
w Moderns, who admit the {mallneſſe of the Earth, bur deny 
t: Motion : But to me more ſacred than all theſe is Truth, who 
th reſpe&t to the DoGors of the Church , do demonſtrate 
rom Philoſophy that the Earth is both round, circumbabited by 
{nipodes, of a moſt contemptible (malnefſe, and in a word, 


atit is ranked amongſt the Planets, 


Nnu 3 AN 


« Officiura 


ABSTRACT 


Some paſſages 1n the Commentaries of 


Didacus a Stunica, 


SALAMANCA 


Upon 7 0 B: 


The Toledo Edition, Printed by FOHN RODERICK, 
Anno 1584, in Quarto , Pag. 205. & ſeqq. on 
theſe Words, Chap. 9. Verle 6. 


Who ſbaketh the Earth out of ber place, and the Pile 
lars thereof Tremble, 


> ———_— — —_ 


———He Sacred Pen-man here ſets down another - 
"| fe&t whereby God ſheweth his Almighty Vo- 
wer, joyned with infinicc Wiſdom. Which 
place, though it miſt be confeſſed very digi- 
cult to underſtand, might be greatly cleaied 
by the Opinion of the Fythagorians , who 
hold the Earth to be moved of its own Na- 
ture, and that the Motion oft the Stars can no other way be alcer- 

cained, they being lo cxtreamly Citferent 1n rardity aud velocity. 

p ; Of which judgement was Philolaws, and Heraclides Ponticus, a: 
| Plutarch relateth in his Book De Placitzs Philoſopnorum : \V ho 
N were followed by Numa Pompilins , and, which 1 more regard, 
| The Divine Plato in his old age ; infomuch that affirmed that 
It was moſt abſurd to think otherwile, as the ſame Plutarch tel]: 

« In viiacimu, US In his * Numa. And Hypocrates in his Book De Flatibzs. 


calleth the Air m5 »3xize, j, e. The Farths Chariot. But into! 
Ou! 


— 


[nPnritLosoPHICAL ConTROVERSIES; 


our Age, Copernicus doth demonſtrate the courles of the: Pla- 
nets £0 bc according to this Opinion. Nor is it to be doubted 
vurthar che Planets Places may be more exattly and certainly 
aſſigned by his Dodrine, than by Ptolomtes Great Almogeſt ar 
 ſteme, or the Opinions of any others. Forts manifeſt ,: phat 
prolomy could never del{cribe either the Mation of the RE qui- 
,0xes, Or align the certain and poſitive beginnuag) of the Veac!: 
he which he 1ngeniouſly confeflerth in Lib. 3. De Almageſt. Mag- 
wu. Ch. 2- and which he leaveth to be diſcovered in after times 
by thole Aſtronomers, who coming into the World much later 
chan he, might be able to invent ſome way to make more accurate 
obſervations. And although the * Alphonſines & Thebith Ben Core 
have attempted to explain them ; yetit appeareth that they have 
done as much as nothing. For the Poſitions of the Alphonſines 
diſagree amongſt rhemlelves, as R.icivs proverh. And although 
the Reaſon of Thebith be more acute , and that thereby he de- 
cermined the certain beginning ot the year , (being that which 
Ptolomy ſought for) yet it is now clear, that the Progreflio.is of 
the Equinoxes are much longer than he conceived they could be. 
Moreover, the Sun 1s found to be much nearer to us than it was 
held ro be in times paſt, by above fourty thouland * Stadza, or 
furlongs. The Cauſe and Reaſon of, whole Motion , neucher 
Prulonty nor any other Aſtrologers cquld ever comprehend : And 
jet the Reaſons of theſe things ate molt plainly explain«d and 
&mouſtrated by Copernicus fromthe Morion of the Faith, with 
wich he ſhewerth that all the other Phenomena of the Univerle 
© more aprly.accord. Which opinion of his 1s not in the leaſt 
n:tradicted by what Solomon faithin * Ecclefteaſtes : But the 
Earth abideth for ever. For that Text ſignitierh no more but 
this, That alchough the ſucceſſion of Ages, and generations of 
\lcn on Earth, be various ; yer the Earth it elf is ſtill one and 
the ame, and continueth without any fſcnſible alteration , For 
the words run thus : One Generation paſſeth away, and another 
beneration cometh ; but the Earth abidcth for ever. $0 thar it 
ith no coherence with its Context , (as Philoſophers (hew) it it 
de expounded to ſpeak of the Earths immobility. And al- 
though in this Chapter Eccleſeaſtes, and in many others, iloly 
Writ alcribes Motion to the Sun, which Copernicus will have to 
and fixcd in the Centre of the Univerſe z yet It makes nothing 
4anſt his Poſition. For the Motion that belongs to the Earth, 
by way of ſpeech aſſigned to the Sun, even by Copernicus him- 
©, and thoſe who are his followers, ſo that the Revolution of 
hc Earth is often by them phraſed, The Revolution of the Sun. 
19 conclude, No place can be produced out of Holy Scripture, 
hich lo clearly ſpeaks the Earths Immobility , as rhis doth its 
\to- 


* Followers of 
that Learned 
Kings Hyrorhe- 
{15, 


« Thatis 50cg 
mics : eioht of 
thele making an 
Italian.or Erpli! 
mile Of 2 15 
Pac's every Pace 
CONLalNing 5, 


Fecr, 
. 
« Chap-1, V.4, ths 
- 
þ4 
' 
D 
7 
oy 
ns 
The M::t; or cf 
the Earth, not a- 


(- 


” T" <1 + p,% 
Nene * 0 "OY 


470 The Authority of Sek1eTuRg 


Mobility. Therefore this Text, of which we have \ poken, is ea. 
fily reconciled to this Opinion. And to ſer forth the \Wonge.. 
ful power and Wildome of God, who can indue and aGuate the 


Frame of the Whole Earth (it being of a monſtrous weight by 
Nature) with Motion, this our Divine pen-man addeth; 4, 
the pillars thereof tremble : As it he would teach us, trom 11. 
Do&rine laid down, that it is moved from its Foundations, 


1 
Þ 
# 
| 


AN 
EF EO TE EL 
Of the Reverend Father 


»40L0 eANTONIO FOSCARIMNT, 
A CARMELITE; 


Concerning 


the PYTHAGORIANandCOPERNICAN Opinion 
O F 


The Mobility of the EART H, 
A ND 
Stability of the S U N; 
AND 
Of the New Syſteme or Conſtitution 


OF THE 


W OR LD. 


IN W HICH, 


The AuthonnesoftSAGRED SCRIPTURE, 


and ASSERT IONS of DIYVINEsS, 


commonly alledged againſt this Opinion, 
are Reconciled. 


WRITTEN 
To the molt Reverend FaTHER, 


SEBASTIANO FANTONTLI. 


General of the Order of CARMELITESs. 


— — - Ot _ 


— —— 


f Eveli ſhed from the Original, ” 
BY 
THOMAS SAL USBURIE. 


— — 


— ——_— _H©pn_—@OQ_—  — — 


—— — — — 


So quis indiget ſapiemsa, poſtaler TN te: 
a Deo. Facobi I, Vcr(u. 5. 
Optavi, Cf data off mibi ſenſme. 
IEEE Sapientiz 7: verſu, 7, 


7 LONDON, EE £2008 
Printedby WILLIAM LEY BOVU RN; MDCLXAL. 


—_—— 


oo 


To the Moſt 0 
Reverend Father 


SEBASTIANO FANTONLTI, 
General of the Order of 


CARMELITES. 


3 N obedience to the command of the No« 
oDÞy || ble $ ignore Vincenzo Carraffa, a Neapo« 
litan, and Knight of S. Fobn of Feru- 

| ſalem, (a perion, to [peak the truth, of 

ſo great Merit, that in him Nobility cf 

Birth, Aﬀability of Manners , Univerlal 

knowledge of Arts and. things, Picty 
and Vertue do all contend for prehemi- 


« 4 LASNS y ? 
= : nence) I reſolved with my (cit to un- 


dertake the Defence of the Writings of the New, or rather Re- 
newed, and from the Duſt of Oblivion (in which it hath long 
lain hid) lately Revived Opinion, Of the Mobility of the Earth, 
and Stabilty of the Sun, in times paſt tound out firſt by Pytha- 
goras, and at laſt reduced into Practice by Copernicus 3 who like- 
wiſe hath deduced the Poſition of the Syſteme and Conſtitution 
of the World and its parts from that Hypotheſis : on which 
Subje& I have formerly writ to You, Molt Reverend Sir : But 
in regard I am bound for Rome to preach there by your Com- 
mand; and ſince this Speculation may ſeem more proper for a- 
nother Treatiſe, ro wit, a Volume of Coſzrography, which I am 
in hand with, and which 1 am daily buſie about, that it may 
come forth in company with my Compendium of the Liberal Arts, 
which I have already finiſhed, rather than now to diſculs it by it 
ſelf, I thought to forbear, imparting what I have done for the 
prelent 3 Yer I was deſirous to give, in the mean time, a brief ac- 
count of this my Determination, and to ſhew You, Moſt Reye- 
rend Father, (to whom 1 owe all my indeavours, and my very 
(lf) the Foundations on which this Opinion may be grounded, 
(caſt, whilſt otherwiſe it is favoured with much probability, it be 
lound in reality to be extreamly repugnant (as at firſt ſight ir 
Ooo lcems) 


"Wy 


474 


Tbe Authority of Sak1etuRg 


ſcems) not onely to Phyſical Reaſons, and Common Principleg 
received on all hands (whichy cannot daſo much haim) but all, 
(which would be of far woiſe conſequence) to many Autho;;. 
ties of ſacred Scripture : Upon which account many at thi; 
firſt looking into it, explode it as the moſt fond Paradox 4; 
Monſtrous Capriccio that ever was heard of. Which thing pro. 
ceeds only from an antiquated and long confirmed Cuſt. 
which hath ſo hardefhed men ih, and habituated them to Vul- 
gar, Plaulible, and for rhat caule by all men (aſwell learned a: 
unlcarned) Approved Opinions, that they cannot be removed 
one ſtep trom them © So great 15 the force of Cuſtome (which 
not unkily is itiled a ſccond Nature) prevailing over the whol« 
World, that touching things men are rather pleaſed with, de- 
lighted in, and deſirous of thole, which, though evil and obnox-. 
ious, are by uſe made familiar ro them, than ſuch, wherewith, 
though berrer, they are not accuſtomed and acquainted, Sg in 
Iikemanner, and-that chiefly, in Opinzons, which when once they 
are rooted in the Mind, men ſtart at, and reje& all other: 
whatſoever ; tiort only thole that are contrary to, but even all 
that ever ſo litcle dilagree with ot vary from theirs, as harſh to 
the Far; diſcoloured to the Eyes unpleaſant to the Smell}, nauſe. 
ous fo the Taſt, rough ro the Touch. And no wonder : For 
Phyfical Truchs ate ordinarily judged and conſidered by men, 
not according to'their Eſtence, but according to the prelcript of 
ſome one whoſe delcription or definition of them gaines him 
Aitthority amongſt the vulgar. Which authoricy neverthelel; 

fice 'tis no more than humane) ought not to be ſo eſteemed, as 
that that which doth manifeſtly appear to the contrary, whether 
f:om better Reaſons lately found out, ot from Senſe it (elf, ſhould 
for irs ſake be contemned and flighted 3 Nor is Poſterity ſo to be 
confined, bur that it may, and dares, not on] y proceed farther, 
but alſo bring to light better and truer Experiments than thoſe 
which have been delivered to us by the Ancients. For the Ges 
nius's of the Antients, as 1n Inventions they did not much fur- 
pats the Wits of our times; fo for the perfc&ing of Inventions 
this Age of ours ſeems not only to equal, bur far to excell former 
Ages; Knowledge, whether in the Liberal or Mechanical Arts, 
daily growing to a greater height. Which Ailcrtion might be 
caſily proved, were it not that 1n ſo clear a caſe, there would be 
more danger of obſcuring, than hopes of illuſtcacing ic wich avy 
farther light. 

Bur(thar I may not wholly be ſilent in this point)have not the 
ſeveral Experiments of Moderns, in many things, ſtopped the 
mouth of Venerable Antiquity, and proved many of their great- 
tt and weightieſt Opinions, to be vain and falſe? The Doarine 


0 


In Purt oSOPFHICAL CONT ROVERSITE & 


if the Antipodes by many of the Antients of approved Wil- 
Jane and Learning was held a Paradox no leſs abiurd than this 
Our Opinion of the Earths Motion may leem ro b2; as likewile 
ar of the Habit avlenzſſe of the Torrid Zone: Of theſe Opint- 
935 the fiſt was accounted unpoſlible by many, bur the Jarter 
wacabloltutcly denyed by the unanimous content of all : Bur 
izer Authors (to the great telicity and perpetual Glory of 
their ASC) have, not fo muca by Authority , as by accurate 
Lgence and indetativable ftady to tiade out the truth , pro- 
ved chem both to be undoubtedly rrue. Thus I aftficm that 
hs Anticats were deceived, and that in too lightly challengiag 
(C:did and Authority for their Inventions, they dilcovered to» 
much tol:y. Here for brevitics take | pals by many Dreams 
lately dereaed, boch of Ariſtotle and other of the aaticnt Philo- 
ſaphers 3 who 1n all likelihood it they had dived into the Obfer- 
rations of Modera Winters, and underſtood their Reatons, would, 
by changing their judgements, have given them the prieceveicy, 
ad would have lubicribed ro rheir maniteſt Truth. Hereby we 
lruar we Are not to have lo high a relpec tor the Autiens , that 
whatever they aite:c ihould be raken upon truſt , and rhac Faith 
ſhould be given co their layings , as it they were Otacies and 
Truths {ene down from Heaven. Bur yet (whnch indeed 1s 
acfly ro be 1cgarded in thete matrets) it ay thing be tuund out 
that 15 repugnant to Jivine Authority, or to the Sacred Leaves, 
that were dictated by rhe Holy Ghoſt, and by His Intpiracion 
xpounded by the Holy DoCtors of the Chucch, in this cate not 
dacly Hamanc Reaſon, but even Scnle it {cit is to 1ubmue : 
which, though by all manner oft weighry Conditions ard circum» 
ſtances 1t ſhou.d hold tocth any thing contrary to Diviac Autho- 
my, (which indeed 1s 1o plain) that there is no way ir to evade 
the right un c:ttanding of 1t) yet 15 it to be rezeed 3 and we 
muſt conclude our telves deceived by it, and believe that :har is 
not true which Senſe and Reaſon reprelents unto us: For, however 
wejudge of chings, we have, both in this and all other cales, a 
more certain knowledge, which proceed; from Divicc Faich ; as 
d. Peter hach moſt excellently expreſt it : \Who though with his 
denies he ſaw, aud perceived the Glory of our Loid in his 
Transiguration, and heard his words manifeſting his great Powe 
yet neverthelcts all theſe things compared with the Light of 
Fath,he adds : *I/e bave alſo a more ſure word of Prophecy, &Xc. 
Wheretore fince this Opinion of Pythagoras and Copernicas hath 
Etred upon the Stage of the World in lo ſtrange a Dreſs, and ar 
the ficſt appearance (beſides the rcſt ) doth teen to oppole fun- 
try Aurhyrimes of Sacred Scripture, it hath (this being grantcd) 
en jultly rezeGed of all men as a meer ablurdiry. 
Ooo2 But 


47) 


Foith ic move 
EY? Ain. than TY 
t'er Senſe or Rea» 


ſn, 


i Pet, I, I 9» 


Iv 
< - as. $i" ® = 


475 


*« Or Primum 
Ate bile. 


The » Autbority of Sc RIpTURE, 


Bu: yet becauſe the common Syſteme of the World deviſed ty 
Pt.lomy hath hitherto {atisfied none of the Learned, hicreupon a 
ſulpicion 1s riſen up amongſt all , even Profemy's followers them. 
ſclves, that there muſt be ſome other Syſteme, which is inoce try. 
than this of Ptoſcmy ; For although the Phenomena of Celcltial 
Bodys way {cem to be generally refolved by this Hy Pothelis, vt 
they are four:d to be involved with many difficulties, and 1c. 
red1to many devices 3 as namely, of Orbes of tundry t ors a; 4 
Figurcs, Epicicles, Equations, Liftercrices,Excerticks, at Gin. 
mcrable ſuch like fancies and Chymazra s which fayour of the 
F ns Kationis of Logicians, rather than of any Realem Eſſemiay 
Of which kinde is that of the Rapid Motion, than which I firde 
not any thing that can be more weakly grounded,and more eaſi- 
ly controverted and diſproved : And ſuch is that conceit of the 
* Heaven void of Stars, moving the inferior Heavens or Otbes : 
All which are introduccd upon occaſion of the variety of the 
Motions of Celeſtial Bodyes, which ſeemed impoſlible , by ary 
other way, to be reduced to ariy certain and determinate K ule, 
So that the Aﬀertors of that common Opinion, freely contels, 
that in deſcribing the Worlds Sy ſteme, they cannot as yet dilcy- 
ver, or teach the true Hypotheſis thereof : But that their crdca- 
voars are ore!y to finde out , amongſt many things , what is muſt 
agrecable with truth, and may, upon better and more accomo- 
date Reaſons, ai.lwer the Ceicltial Phenomena. 

Since thart,the Telelcope(an Oprick Invention) hath been found 
our, by help of which , many remarkable things in the Heavens, 


\moſt worthy to be known, and till then unthought of, were dil- 


covered by manifeſt ſenſation ; as for inſtance, That the Moon is 
Mountainous ; Venus and Saturn Tricorporeal 3 and Tupiler 
Quadricorporcal : Likewile that in the Vie LaSea, in the Fle- 
zades,and in the Stars called Nobuloſ there are many Stars , ard 
thoſe of the greateſt Magniiude which are by turns adjacent to 
one another ; and in the end it hath diſcovered to us, new fixed 
Stars, new planets, and new Worlds. And by this ſame Infiri- 
ment it appears very probable, that Venus and Mercury do 1.0t 
move properly about the Earth, but rather about the Sun 3 aud 
that the Moon alone moveth abour the Earth. What therciore 
can be inferred from hence, but that the Sun doth ſtand immo- 
vablein the Centre, and that the Earth, wich the other C elcltial 
Orbes, is circumvolved about it ? Wherefore by this and many 
Other Reaſons it appears, That the Opinion of Pythagor s and 
Copernicus doth not diſagree with Aſtronomical and Colmogra- 
phical Principles ; yea, that it carryeth with it a great likelihood 
and probabilicy of Truth : Whercas amongſt the ſo many leve- 


ral Opinions, that deviate from the common Syſteme , and pine: 
others, 


In PuttosoPHICalL CONTROYERSIES. 


achers, ſuch as were thoſe of Plato, Calippus, Eudoxus ; and ſince 
tm of Averroc, * Cardanus, Fracaſtorins, and others both Anti- 
ic and Modern, there 15 not one tound that 15 more facile, more 
rulacly ahd dererminately , accommodated to the Phenomens 
11d Motions of the Heavens , without Epicycles, Excentrix, Ho- 
wrentricks Detercnrs,and the ſupputation of the Rapid Motion. 
aad this Hyporhetis hath been alferted for true, not onely by 
p;thao0rss, and, after him, by Copernicus, but by many famous 
men, as namely, Heraclitzs, and Ecphantus,Pythagoreans, all the 
Diſcipics of that Se&, Miceta of Syracuſe, Martianus Capella,and 
many more. Amongſt whom, thoſe (as we have aid) that 
have attempted the finding out of New Syſtemes (for they refu- 
[{:d both this of Pythagoras, and that of Ptolemy ) are numberleſs: 
io yet notwithſtanding allowed this Opinion of Pythagoras to 
carry with it much probability,and indirefly confirmed it ; ina(- 
much as that they reze&ed the common one as imperfe& , defe- 
ive, and atrended with many contradictions and difficulties. 
Amongſt theſe may be numbered Father * Clawins, a molt learn- 
od [cluite 3 who, although he refutes the Syſteme of Pythagoras, 
yccacknowledgerh the Levity of the common Syſteme , and he 
uycniouſly coafcilcth,that for the removal of difficulties,in which 
the common Syſteme will not ſerve the turn, Aſtronomers arc 
forced ro enquire afrer another Syſteme , to the diſcovery of 
which, he doth very earneſtly exhort them. 

Now can there a better or more commodious Hypotheſis 
be deviſed, than this of Copernicus, ? For this Cauſe many Mo- 
dern Authors are induced to approve of, and follow ic : but 
with much hzlitancy, and fear, in regard that it ſeemeth in their 
Opinion (o to contradict the Holy Scriptures,as that it cannot 
p-liibly be reconciled to them. Which is the Reaſon that this 
Opinion hath been long (uppreſt, and is now entertained by men 
ina modeſt manner, ad as it were with a veiled Face ; according 
to that advice of the Poet : 


Tudicium populi nunquam contempſeris unus, 
Ne nullis placeas, dum vis contemnere multos. 


Upon conſideration of which, (out of my very g-eat love to» 
Wards the Sciences, and my ardent deſire to {ee the encreaſe and 
FricGion of them , and the Light of Truth freed from all Er- 
ours and Obſcurities) I began to argue with my ſelf touching 
this Point after this manner : This Opinion of the Pythagoreans 
> cither true, or falſe 3 If falſe, it ought not to be mentioned, and 
&eryes not to be divulged : If true, it matters not, though it 
coitradict all, as well Philoſophers as Aſtronomers : And though 

VI t5cſtabliſhment and reducement to ule a new ÞP Ry 
an 


477 
« Carcan d- r2- 


rum vat ict. Lid.t, 
Cap, I. 


*P, Chvi's in 


ul:1ma ſor, Opec» 


nun cdiczone, 


; 


The. Authoy 
fr tl SLICED ty 
d ferle bh the 
F 1-t''s CI bilt- 
ty, 1p*0vea by 
»” Ar} of h. CM 9+ 


(ie) Mis. 


The Authority of Se RipTuRL 


and Aſt onomy, ( founded upon new Principles and Hypotheſe) 
ſhou!d be corftitured : For the Authoiny of Sacred Scripture 
will cot oppoſe it ; neither doth one ruth contradif another 
It therefore the Opinion of Pzthagoras be true, withour douhe 
God hath difpoled and dictated the words of of Holy Writ ;n 
ſuch a manncr, that they may adinit an apt ice and reconcilia. 
tion with that Hyporheits. ? 
the probability ot the laid Opinion, | thought good to ty whes 
ther T<xts of Sacred Scripture might be expounded acco.dins tg 
Theological and Phyfical Principles, and wight be reconciled tg 
it, {o that (in regard that hirherro it hath bcecn held provable) it 
may ia after times, cominghvithour fcruple to be acknowledged 
for true, advance it Icif, and appear 1u publick with an uncover. 
cd Fact, without any mans proiubiriou, and may law tuily and 
treely hold a Sacred intelitgence with Hoiy Truth, fo earictly 
covercd aid commended by good Men. Which deligae, having hi- 
therto been undertaken by none that | know,wil,l am perlwaded, 
be very acceptable to the Studi9us of thcl- Learmugs,cipecialiy to 
the moſt Learned Galileo Galilei, chick Macheimarician to the 
molt Serene Grand Duke of Inſcany, aid jon Kepler, chit 
Macthematician to his Sacred aud 10vuuictovie May. fty, the Empe- 
rour, and to all that L{luſtiious, and much tobe conmei.ded Ace 
cademy of rhe Lynceans ; whom, it I miſtake” cot, are all of this 
Opiiiva. Although I doubt not but they , aud many other 
Learned Men might calily have {ound out thele or the like Re- 
concilia:ions of Scrpraral expreſiions; to whom nevertheleſs 1 
have thought tir (in rclpec& of char prot. flion which I have under- 
taken upva th. Faith of my loul, and the propenſity that I have 
towards ruth) to offcr that of the Poet, 


Nullins addicins jurare in werba Magiſtri. 


And in teſtimony of my cſteem to them and all the Learned, 
to communicate thule my thoughts ; confidently afſuiing my (cit 
thac they will accept them, with a Candor equal to that where- 
with | have wirtten them. 

Therciore to come to the buſineſs : All Authorities of Di- 
vine Writ which ſeem to oppole this Opinion , are reducibic to 
ſix Claſſes : The firſt is of thoſe that aflirm the Earth to ſta..d 
ſtill, and not to move : as Pſal. 92. He framed the round IWorld 
ſo ſure, that it cannot be moved : Allo P/al. 194. Iho lard the 
Foundations of the Earth, that it ſhould n6t be removed for ever : 
And Eccleſiaſtes x. But the Earth abidetb for ever : And others 
of the like ſenſe. 

Thetccond is of thoſe which atteſt the Sun to mor _o 

eVOLVC 


Bein z moved by thile Realons,, ard - 


FT, P2uIL OSOPHICAL C ONTROVERSIE g5 
Rovolve about rhe Earth; as Pſal.19. (6) Inthem bath be ſet a 


[ub-rnacle for the Sun, which cometh forth as a Bridegroom out 
of his chainber, ana rejoyceth as a Gyant to run bis Courſe. It 
meth forth from ibe uttcrmoſt part of the Heaven, and runnethb 
Jour unto the end of it again; and there 35 nothing bid from the 
hat thereof. And Fccleſraſt.1. The Sun riſeth, and the Sun go= 
1h down, and naſteth to the place where he aroſe: it goeth towards 
is South, and turnctÞ about unto the North. W hereupon the 
60s Retrogradation 1s mentioned as a Miracle, Iſaiah 38. The 
Sun returned ten degrees. And Eccleſraſticus 4b. In hs time the 
Un went backward, and lengthened the life of the King. And 
Mc this realon it. 15 related tor a Miracle, in the Book of Joſbugh, 
that ac the Prayers of that great Captain the Sun ſtoed 1till, its 
motion bcing forbidden it, . by him : Toſhio. Sun ſtand thog 
full upon Gibeon, Now it the Sun thould ſtand Rtill,. and the 
Facth move about it, its ſtation: at that tinie :was no Miracle ; 
ind if Joſþ#ab. had intended, «that the light: of the day ſhould 
have been prolonged by the Suns {plendour, he would not have 
ad, 541 ſtand thou ftill, but rather Earth ftand.thou ſtill. 


The third Claſlis is of thoſe Authorities which ſay, that Hea- 
ren is above, and the Earth:beneath ; of which fort is that place 
of Joel, chap. 2. cited by S. Peter, in Afis.2. 1 will pew wonders 
it Heaven above, and ſignes in the Earth beneath, with others of 
ie like purport. Hereupon Chriſt at his [ncarnation is'{aid to 
ume down from Heaven, and after his ReſurreQion to have aſ- 
mded up into beaven, But it the Earth ſhould move about 
iz Sun, it would be, as one may lay , in: Heaven, and conſe- 
ently would rather be above Heaven than beneath it. And 
bis is coafirmed 3 For that the Opinion which placeth the Sun in 
tie Centre, doth likewiſe place Mercary above the Sun, and 
Jens above Mercury; and the Earth above Venus, together 
vith the Moon, which revolves about the Earth, and therefore 
be Earth, together with the Moon, is placed in the third Heaven. 
lt therefore 1n Spherical Bodies, as in the World, beneath figni- 
ies no more than to be neer to the centre, and above, than to 
proach the Circumference , it muſt needs follow, that for ma- 
ing good of Theological Poſitions concerning the Aſcenſion 
nd Deſcenſion of Chriſt, the Earth is to be placed in the cen= 
ie, and the Sun, with the other Heavens in the Circumference 3 
nd not according to Copernicus , whole Hypotheſis inverts this 
Vder : with which one cannot ſee how the true Aſcenſion and 
Leſcenfion can be conſiſtent. 

The fourth Claflis is of thoſe Authorities which make Hell to 
*1the Centre of the World, which is the Common Opinion 
i Divines, and confirmed by this Reaſon, That ſince Hell (ta- 


ken 


479 


(65) Or In Sole 
poſuit rabernacus 
lum ſuum, accor- 
ding to the Tran- 
ſlation ONY ef «- 
thor followeth, 


In Spbericall 
Bodies, Deorfum 
# the (entre, and 
Surſum the Cir 


cumſerence, 


IF > . gene ls. th. 
=—_— I hh ec 7, 


AS 


Fell 18 in the 
cemrye of the 
F ert', n1t{ the 
lurid, 


Afier the an) 
«* fudement the 
Earth ſhall ſtand 


i1mmoyeable. 


Le 
a,” " _ 
-— 


The aAmtbority of ScRieTURE, 


ken in its ſtrict denomination) ought to be in the loweſt part of 
the World, and fince that in a Sphere there is no part lower 
then the Centre, Hell ſhall be, as it were, in the Centre of the 
World, «which being of a Spherical Figure, it muſt follow, that 
Hell is either in the Sun-(foralmuch as it 15 ſuppoſed by this Hy. 
potheſis ro be in the Centre of the World) or elle luppolin 
thar Hell is in the Centre of the Earth, if the Earth ſhould move 
about the Sun, it would neccffarily enſue, that Hell, together 
with the Earth, is in Heaven, and with it revolveth about the third 
Heaven ;- than which nothing more ablurd can be {aid or IMagi- 
ned: | | 
The fifch Claſſſs, is of thoſe Authorities which alwayes Op 
pole Heaven to the Earth, and fo again the Earth to Heaven Fr 
it there were the ſame relation betwixt them, with that of the 
Centre. xo the Circumference, and of the Circumtference to the 
Centce. But if the Earth were in Heaven, 1t ſhould be on one 
{ide thereof, and would not ſtand in the Middle, and confequent- 
ly there would be no ſuch relation betwixt them 3 which never- 
thelels doznort only in Sacred Writ, but even in Common Speech, 
ever and every where anſwer to each other with a mutual Oppo- 
lition. ..W-hence that of Gerneſ. x. In the beginning God created 
the Heawen and tht Earth : and Pſal.115. The Heaven, even 
the Heawens are,the Lords , but the Earth hath he given to the 
Children of men.: and our Saviour 1n that Prayer which he pre- 
(cribeth to us, Matth.6. Thy will be done in Earth, as it 4 in 
Heawen : and S-Paul, 1 Corinth. 15. The firſk man is of the 
Earth, earthy, the ſecond man 1 of Heaven, heawenly : and 
Coloſſ. 1. By him were all things created that are in Heaven, and 
that arc in Earth: and again, Hawing made peace through the 
Blood of b3s Croſſe for all things, whether they be things in Earth 
or things in Heawen : and Chap. 3. Set your, affedions on things 
above, not on things on the Earth, with innumerable other ſuch 
like places. Since therefore theſe two Bodies are alwayes mu- 
tually oppoſed to each other, and Heaven, without all doubr, 
referreth to the Circumference, it muſt of neceſſity follow, that } 
the Earth is to be adjudged the place of the Centre. "i 
The ſixth and laſt Claſlisis of thoſe Authorities, which (being ! 
rather of Fathers and Divines, than of the Sacred Scripture) lay, 
That the Sun, after the day of Judgment ſhall ſtand immoveable | 
in the Eaſt, and the Moon in the Weſt. Which Station, it the] 
Pythagorick Opinion hold true, ought rather to be aſcribed to 
The Earth; than to the Sun ; for if it be true, that the Earth doth ; 
now move about the Sun, it is neceſſary that after the day ot 
Judgment it ſhould ſtand immoveable. And truth is, if it muſt? 


. J . . . . | 
lubſiſt without motion in one conſtant place, there 1s no _ 
why 2 


In 2 yr oSOPHICAL Cont RrOveRs TEsS. 


«ly it 100% !d rather ſtand in one ſite of that Place than in ano- 

- or why it ſhould rather turn one part of it than another to 
= un, it ſo be that every of its parts without diſtin&ion, which 
. 1. fficure of the Suns light, cannot choole but be diſmal, and 
much worie affected chan that part which is 1ljuminated, Hence 
1.9 would arile many other aþlurdities belides thelc. 

Th:le are the Clatles, &c. trom which great aflaults are made 
{ail the ſtructure of the Pythagorick Syſteme ; yer by that 
"ny ane have firſt laid down fix Maximes or Principles, as 
pres zble Buiwarks erected againſt them, it will be catic to 
rc; tm, and to defend the Hypotheſis "of Pythagoras from 
beiug irraqued by them. Which before I propou::d, I do pro- 

with that Humility and Modeſty which becometh a Chrt= 
"hl aad a perlon in Religious Ocders) that I do with reverence 
lub:mic whac 1 am about to ſpeak to the Judgment of Holy 
Church. Nor have | undertaken to write thelc things out of 
1y inducements of Temericy, or Ambition, but out of Charity 
M, Dctire to be auxiliary to my neighbour in his 1nquiticion 

-r Truth. And there 15 nothing in all this Controverlie 
naicained by me (that expect to be better 1ſtrued by thoſe 
chop viets theſe Studies) which [ ſhall not retra&, it any per- 
lors ſha't by tolid Reafons & reiterated Experiments, prove lome 
other Hypothetis to be more probable; but yer, until ſuch time as 
ivy hail decide the Pointzl thall labour all I can for its {upport. 

M\ 1:{t and clucteſt Maxime 1s this z When any thing is at- 
nbuced in 11oly Writ, to God, or to a Creature, thats not be- 
L.eming to, vi 1ncommenturate with them, it muſt of nccellity 
v2 receved aud expounded once, or more of the four following 
wayes; Fiſt, it may be faid to agree with them Metaphcrically, 
md Prop rlionally, or by Siaulitude, Secondly, According to 
kr manier of Conſidering, Apprehending,Conceiving,Underſtand- 
lg | Knowing, &c. Thirdly, according to the Opinion of the 

Fulpar and the Common way of Speaking : to which Vulgar 
pecch che Holy Ghoſt doth very often with much ſtudy acco- 
modate it (elf. Fourthly, In reſpect of our ſelves, and for that 
be makes hamſelf like unto us. Ot eachof theſe wayes there are 
thele examples : God doth not walk, ſince he is Infinite and Im- 
moveable z He hath no Budily Members, ſince he 1sa Pure Act; 
ad conſequently 1s void of all Paſſion of Minde; and yet in 
"cred Scripture, Gen. 2 
teday : and Job 22.verſ.14. it is (aid, He walketh inthe * Cir- 
wt of Heaven : — in many other places coming, departing, 
making haſt 15 alcribed to God; and likewiſe Bodily parts, as 
be Ears, Lips, Face, Voice, Countenance, Hands, Feet, Bow- 

+ Garments, Arms; as allo many Paſlions, fuch as Anger, 


3-verſ.8. it is ſaid, He walked in the cool of 


PpP Sor- 


451 


«x Circa Cardi- 
nes Cite 


Ls om 
x- - SD 
- = 


192 


I.uke 16 


P oO 


The » Autbority of SeR1PpTURE, 


Sorrow, Kepentance, and the like, What ſhall we ſay «| 
fore ? Without doubt luch like Attributes, agree with God (ol 
ale the Schooknens words Metaphorically, Proportionally, and þ 
Simlitude: And touching Pattions, ic may be faid, that Goa 
condelcendeth to reprelent himiclt after that manner : ag ,, 
:nſtance, The Lord 35 angry; 1e- He rewealeth himſelf as on: that 
s angry: tle grieve; 1. C. He rewealeth him elf, as one 1h, 
5 ſorrowſul : It repented him that be had made man; \.c. He ſce. 
med as one that repented. Andindeed all thele things arc (yy. 
parative ad nos, and 1n reſpect of us. So God 1s laid to be jn 
Hcavcen, to move 1n time, to ſhew hunlelt, ro hide himiclt, to 
obſcrve and mark our ſteps 3 to leek us, to ſtand at the door 
ro knock at the door z not that he can be containcd in a bodily 
Place, NOT that he is really moved, nor in time 3 nor that humaice 
MAanncrs or cuſtomes can agree with him, lave only according to 
our manner of Apprchenkon : This Conceprion of ours orderiy 
diliingurſherh thete Attributes in him one trom another , when, 
notwithſtanding, they are one and the lame with him : T his Ap- 
prehention of ours divideth allo his actions into ſeveral rimes, 
which, neverthcleflc, tor the moſt part, are produced in one aud 
the (ame inſtant : And this, to conclude, alwayes apprehenderh 
tholc things with lome detect , which, norwichſtanding are in 
God moſt perftc&. For this real n doth the Sacred Scripture 
expreſs ir tcIf according to th: Vulgar Opinion, whiiſt it aſciibes 
ro the Earth Fnds and Foundations, which yet it hath not; to 
the Sea a Depth not to be fathomed 3 ro Death (which is a Pr- 
vation, and coniequently a Non entity ) it approp:1atcs Aciions, 
Motion, Pallions, and other ſuch like Accidents, of all which itis 
d.prived, as allo Epithites and Adjunds, which really cannot | 
{uit with it: Is not the bitterneſſe of Death paſt ? 1 Sam. 15.32. 
Let death come upon them, Plal 6. He bath prepared the liſiru- 
ments of Death, | lal.7.14. Thou raiſeſt me from the gates of | 
Death, Pial.54. In the midſt of the ſhadow of Death, ſal. 23. 
[ove 1s ſtrong as Death, Cant.8.9. The Firſt-Born of Death.Job 
15.1 3.DeſtruCtion and Death ſay,cc.Job2$, 22. And who know: 
not that the whole Hiſtory ot the rich Glutton doth conſiſt of 
the like phiales of Valgar Speech? So Eccleſiaſticus, Chap. 27. 
verl.11. The godly man abideth in wiſdome, as the Sun; but a 
fool changeth as the Moon ;, and yet the Moon according to the 
real truth of the matter no wayes changeth, bur abides the ſame 
for cver, as Aſtronomers demonſtrate , one half thereof remain- 
ing alwayes lucid, and the other alwayes opacous. Nor at any 
time doth this ſtate vary init, unleſſe #n reſpe&# of us, and ac- 
cording to the opimton of the Vulgar. Hence it is cleer, that the 


holy Scripture ſpeaks according to the common form of (peechu- 
ed 


1072» 


In PpitosoPHICAL ConTROVvERSIES, 


7.4 among(r the unlearned, and according to the appearance of 
-hings, and not according to their true Exiſtence, 1a like man- 
ner Geneſ.1. in the deſcription of the Creation of all things, 
he Light is ſaid tro be made firſt of all, and yet it followeth in 
he Text, And the Egening and the Morning made pon day : 
inda lictle after the ſeveral Ads of the Creation are diſtinguiſhed 
ind aligncd to ſeveral days, and concerning each of them ir is 
nid in the Text, And the Evening and the Morning made the 
ſecond d.ry ; and then the third day, the fourth day, &-c. Hence 
many doubts arile, all which I ſhall propound according to the 


common Syſteme, that it may appear even from the Hypotheſis 


of that Syſteme, thar the ſacred Scripture ſometimes, for the a- 
royding of emergent difficulties, is to be underſtood in a vulgar 
ſenſe and meaning, and 1n reſpe& of us, and not according to 
the narure of things. Which diſtinQion even Ariſtotle himielf 
zemeth to have hinted, when he- ſaith, * Some things are more 
intelligible to 25 3 others by nature, or ſecundum ſe. 

Filt therefore 3 If the light were made before heaven, then 
i rolled about without heaven to the making of the diſtintion 
of Day and Night. Now this 1s contrary to the very doGrine 
of thele men, who affirm that no Caeleſtial Body can be moved 
unletle per accidens, and by the motion of Heaven, and as a knot 
a board at the motion of the board. Again, if it be ſaid, that 
the Light was created at the {ame time with Heaven, and began 
10 be moved with Heaven, another doubt ariſeth, that likewiſe 
ppoſerh the forcſaid common Hypotheſis : For it being ſaid, 
hat Day and Night, Morning and Evening were made, that ſame 
; cither in reſpe& of the Univerle, or onely in reſpe& of the 
Earth and us. It ſo be that the Sun turning round (according to 
the Hypotheſis of the Common Syſteme) doth not cauſe the 
Night and Day, but only to opacous Bodies which are deſtitute 
ot all other light, bur that of the Sun, whillt in their half part 
(which js their Hemiſphere) and no more, (for that the Suns. 
ight paſſech over but one half of an opacous Body , unleſs a ve- 
ry mall mater more in thoſe of lefſer bulk) they are illumina- 
td by the Suns aſpect, the other half remaining dark and tene- 
brole, by reaſon of a ſhadow proceeding from its own Body. 
Therefore the diſtintion of dayes by the light of heaven, ac- 
cording to the delcription of them in the ſacred Scriptures, muſt 
not be underſtood abſolutely, and ſecundum ſe, and Nature ber 
ſelf; but in reſpe& of the Earth, and of us its inhabitants, and 
contequently ſecundum nos. Tis not therefore new , nor unu- 
ualin-lacred Scripture'to ſpeak of things ſecundum nos, and o0n- 
ly in reſpeS of us, and ſecundum apparentiam; but not ſecundum 
/*;and rei naturam, or Abſolutely and Simply. | 
PPP 2 And 


453 


Alia ſunt notio- 
ra nobis, alia, no» 
ciora natura, vel 
ſecundum ley, A- 


rt, 1b, 1. Phy, 


71 


na 


— 
- 


454 


«x Aut ad Umbram 


Which aye really 


" the great Lights 


in Heaven, 


The Amuthority of Sex1eTuRE 
Andif any one would underſtand theſe Days of ſacred &c;;. 


pturc, not only ſecundum nos, but allo ſecundun natiram, 1; 
circulations of Caleſtial Light returning to the (elf (ame Point 
from whence it did at firſt procecd ; fo as that there nee 1, 
reſpc& to be had to Night or to * Darknetle, for which (ole req. 


ſon we are fain to imbrace the Interpretation of ſacred Scripture 


ſecundum nos ; In oppolition to this we may thus argue : It the 
ſacred Scripture be underſtood to ſpcak abſolutely, of Iterated 
and ſucceſſive circulations of light, and not reſpe&u noſtr; , a; if 
theſe words Exvening and Morning had never been mlerted, which 
in their natural acceptation denote the Suns habitude to us and tg 
the Earth : For that the Morning is that time when the Sun he. 
gins to wax light, and to riſe above the Horizon in the Faſt, 
and become viſible in our Hemiſphere, and Evening 18 the time 
in which the Sun declines in the Welt, and approacheth with ;r; 
light neerer to the other oppolite Hori20n and Hemiſphere, 
which 1s contiguous to this of ours. Butthe word Day is a Co - 
relative to the word Night. From hence therefore it evidently 
appcareth, that theſe chree words Evening, Morning, and Day, 
cannot be underſtood of a Circulation of Light ſecundum fe, 
and abſolute, bur only ſecundum nos, and reſpectu noſtri; and in 
that ſenſe indeed the Morning and Evening do make the Nighy 
and Day, 

In like manner, Ger.1.16.1t 1s ſaid, God made two great Lights; 
the greater Light to rule the Day, and the leſſer Light torule the 
Night, and the Stars. Where both in the Propoſition andin the 
ſpecification ui it, things are {poken which are very difagreeing 
with Cacleſtial Bodies. Therefore thoſe words arc in that place 
eo be interpreted according to the foreſaid Rules; namely, ac- 
cording to the third and tourth ; fſothat they may be ſaid to be 
underſtood according to the ſenſe of the vulgar, and the common 
way of ſpeaking, which 1s all one, as if we ſhould lay, ſecundum 
apparentiam, and ſecundum nos, wel reſpectu noſtri. For firſt, it 
1s {aid 1n the Propolition, And God made two great Lights ; 
meaning by them the Sun and Moon, whereas according to the 
truth of the matter theſe are not the Greater Lights; For al- 
though the Sun may be reckoned amongſt the Greater, the Moon 
may- not be ſo, unleſs in reſpet of us. Becaulc amongſt 
thoſe that are abſolutely the Greater, and a little Icticr than the 
Sun (vay in a manner cqual to it ) and far bigger than the Moon, 
we may with great realon enumerate Saturn, or {ome 0l the 
Fixcd Stars of the firit Magaitude, ſuch as Canoprs, (otherwite 
called Arcanar ) in the end of a River ; or the Little Dog bis 
the mouth of the Great Dog ; or the Foot of Orion, called K- 


gel , or his &:oht ſboxlder, or any other of that Magans: 
cre- 


= Ad 4 £* "# ps; 
SLSR FT 73.97 


[nPxitSOPHICAL CoOnTROVERSIES: 48; [ 


Therefore the two great Lights arc tO be underſtood in reſpe& of 
us, and according to vulgar eſtimation, and not according to the % 
rue and reall exiltence of luch Bodies. Secondly, in the ſpeci- 

5cation of the Propoſition ir is laid, The greater Light to rule the 

Day; hereby denoting the Sun 3 in which the verbal ſenſe of 
Scripture agrecth with the Truth of the Thing ; For that the Sun 

the Greateſt of all Luminaries, and Globes. But that which 
{llowerh immediately after, And the leſſer Light to rule the 

Night, meaning the Moon, cannot be taken in the truc and real 

ſenle of the words : For the Moon is not the leſſer Light, but 

Mercury 3 which 1s not only much lefler than the Moon, bur allo 

han apy other Star. And if, again, it be ſaid, That the Holy 

Text doth not ſpeak of the Stars, but onely of the Luminaries, 

for that preſently after they are mentioned apart, Ard the Stars; 

and that what we fay is true touching the compariſon of the Stars 

anonglt themlelves, but not in reſpe&,of the Luminaries, name- 

ly, the Sun and Moon : This reply doth diſcover a man to be 

utterly ignorant in theſe Studies, and fuch who having not the 

leaſt {mattering in them, doth conceive an abſurd and erroneous e 
Opinion of the Cacleſtial Bodies. For the Moon and Sun, con- 

idercd in themlelves, and as they appear to us, it they ſhould 

be a tar greater diſtance from us, than indeed they are, would be | 
0 other, nor would appear to us otherwiſe than Stars , as the 
it do in the Firmament. But Great Luminaries they neither '# 
are, nor ſeem to be, fave only in reſpe& of #5 : And ſo, on n= Sun, Moen, # 
the orher ſide, the Stars, as to themſelves, are no other than ſo EDITS 
nany Suns and lo many Moons 3 yet are lo far remote from us, | 
that by reaton of their diſtance they appear thus ſmall, and dim 

of light, as we behold them, For the greater and leſſer diſtance on 
of heavenly Bodies ( cterss paribus ) doth augment and diminiſh d 
their appearance both as to Magnitude and Light. And there- * 
tore the words which follow in that place of Geneſee, And the F 
Stars (as diſtinguiſhing the Stars from the Sun and Moon ) are 
0 be taken 1n no other acceptation than that which we have ſpo- 
ken of, namely, according to the ſenſe of the Vulgar, and the 4 
common manner of ſpeech. For indeed, according to the truth " 
of the matrer, all Caeleſtial Bodies, being ſhining Globes, are of % 
1vaſt bigneſs, to which if we ſhould be lo ncer as we are to the | F 
Mloon, they would ſecm to us of as great, yea a greater magni- 


" — ” —— f ” — 4 wY Le. ————_— - a+ 


oo 
Ki. "4 x. 


* * . is | 
tude than the Moon : As likewile on the contrary, if we were as | 
at Qiltant from the Sun and Moon, as we are from them, borh n 
\lvon and Sun would ſhew bur as ſtars to us. And yet the 1 


; plendor of the Sun would doubtleſs be greater intenſive than 
that of any other ſtar. For, although ic ſhould be granted that 
'ome ſtars (as thole of the Fixed that twinkle) do ſhine of them- 


ſelves 


The Earth ts 4- 


nother eMoon Or 
Star. 


ivhy the Sunre 
ſeemeth 10 ms 0 
move, & not th: 


F art! 


The » Authority of Sc RipTURE, 


ſelves, aud by their own nature, as the Sun, that derives not jt; 
Iight from others (which yet remains undecided and doubrfu)' 
and borrow not their light from the Sun; Nevertheleſs ſince the 
brightneſs of none of the ſtars may be compared With the Suns 
{plendour, which was created by God firſt, and before all other 
Luminaries, in the higheſt kind of Light, it would therefore 
notwithſtanding follow, that none of thole ſtars, although pla- 
ced in the ſame proximity to us with the Sun, and therefore ap. 
pearing to us of the {amc Magnitude as the Sun, can beſtow up- 
on us lo much Light as we receive from the Sun: As on the 
contrary, the Sun, at the (ame remoteneſle from us as they are, 
would indeed, as to its Magnitude, appear to us as one of thoſe 
ſtars, .but of a ſplendour much more intenſe than that of theirs, 
So that, now, the Earth is nothing elle but another Moon or ſtar, 
and (o would it appear to us, if we ſhould behold it from a con- 
venient diſtance on high. And init might be obſerved (in that 
varicty of Light and Darkneſs which the Sun produceth in it by 
making Day and Night) the ſame difference ot Aſpeds that arc 
ſcen in the Moon, and luch as are obſerved in tricorporate Ve- 
11s ; in like manner allo 'tis very probable that the ſame mighr 
be diſcerned in other Planets, which ſhine by no light of their 
own, but by one borrowed from the Sun. © What ever there- 
fore may touching theſe matters be delivered in the ſacred Leayes 
or the common ſpeech of men, diſſenting trom the real truth, ir 
ought (as we have laid bcfore) abſolutely to be received aid un- 
derſtood ſecundum wulgi ſententiam, &#- communem loquendi &» 
cencipiendi ſiylum. 

And ſo, to return to our purpole, it, ,all this conſidered; the 
Pythagorian opinion be true, it will be eaſe, according to the 
lame Rule, to reconcile the authority of ſacred Scriptures with 
it, however they ſecm to oppole it, and in particular thoſe of the 
farſt and ſecond Claſlis, ſcilicet by my firſt Maxime : For that in 
thoſe piaces the holy Records {peak according to our manner of 
underſtanding, and according to that which appeareth in reſpect 
of us; For thus it is with thoſe Bodies, in compariſon of us,and 
as they are deſcribed by the vulgar and commune way of humane 
Diſcourſe, So that the Earth appears as if it were ſtanding ſtill 
and immoveable, and the Sun, as if it were circumambent about 
her. And ſo the Holy Scripture is uſed in the Commune and 
Vulgar way of ſpeaking ; becaule in reſpe& of our ſight » the 
Earth ſeems rather ro ſtand fixed in the Centre, and the Sun to 
circumvolye about it, than otherwile : as it happens to thole that 
are purting off trom the Banks of a River. to whom the ſhore 
leems to move backwards, and go from them : * but they do not 


perccive(which yet is the truth)that they themſelves go way 
VW hich 


I: PatLoOSOPH ICAL ConTROYERSIES. 487 


which fallacy of our ſight is noted, and the Reaſon thereof aſ- 
foned by the Opricks 3 upon wich, as being irrange to, and be- 
es my purpole, | will not iray) and on this account is Aneas 
brought i by Virgil, laying 3 


» Toeid. } 


Provebimar portu, terr.eque urbeſque recedunt. 


But it will not be amils to conſider why the ſacred Scripture 
Joh to ſtudiouſly comply with the opinions of the Vulgar, and 
vby ic doth not rather accurately inſtruct men inthe truth of the 
nacrers, and the ſecrets of Nature. The Reaton is, firſt, the be- 
rizairybt Divine Wildome, whereby it lweetly accomodares it 
(cif to all chmgs , in proportion to their Capacity and Nature. 
\Whence in Natural Sciences, it uleth natural and neceſſary cau- 
ſes, but in Liberal Arts it worketh liberally, upon Generous 
P-clons after a ſubIime and loftry manner; upon the Common 
Pcople; familiarly and humbly ; upon the Skiltul, learnedly 
upon the Simple, vulgarly 3 and fo on every one, according to 
his condition and quality. Secondly , becaule it is not its In- 
rention to fill our mindes 1m this life with vain and various curi- 
ofitics, which might occation our doubt and ſuſpenſe. For the (4) Eccle,, cr, 
truth 15, ( a ) He that increaſeth knowledge, increaſeth ſorrow. wir, 
\loreover it did not only permit, but even decree, thatth c 
\Vorid ſhould be very much buticd in Controverſies and Diſpu- 
ations, and rhat it ſhould be imployed about the uncertainty of 
things 3 according to that ſaying of Eccleſiaſtes (b) He bath 26s Hon 
et the World in their heart ; ſo that no man can find out the work | 
that God maketh from the beginning unto the end. And touching 
thole doubts, God will not permit that they ſhall be diſcovered 
tous before the end of the World : (c) At which time be will 
bring to light the hidden things of darkneſſe : But Gods onely 
cope in the ſacred Scripture 1s to teach men thoſe things which 
conduce to the attainment of Eternal Lite; which having ob- (4): Cor.c.13.v. 
rained, (d ) Ie ſhall ſee bim face to face : (e) and ſball be >. 
like bam, for we ſhall ſce him as be is. Then ſhall he clearly 4 (9): ne} 
Priori make known unto us all thole Curioſities, and Dogmati- 
cal Queſtions, which in this life, ( f) inwhich we ſee through a (f)1 Corcc.r3.0, 
Llaſſe darkly, could be known by us but imperteAly and 4 poſte- N 
mort, and that not without much pains and ſtudy. For this 
aulethe Wildome of God, revealed to us in the ſacred Leaves, 
b not filed Wikdome ablolutely, but (g) Saving Wiſdome ; 
Its onely end bcing to lead us to ſalvation. AndS. Paul preach- 
ngto the Corinthians, faith 3 (þ) I determined to know nothing (b) 1 Cor.c, 2.4.2 
among you, ſave Teſ us Chriſt, and him crucified : whereas not- 
*thſtanding he was thorowly inſtructed, and profoundly learned 
To 


— —we—__ ov —_—— oro om 
> 4 A ' - - 


| 


(c) 1 C9 eC,4ﬀ.V.5 


(g)Ecclefait.rs +3 


4 


oe —— : 
: —_ 
_ —_— 


re 


3 Thcfl. 4+ 


7be Authority of ScRipTURE 


in all humane Scicrices ; bur making no account of theſ thin: 
he protcit-ch that it was his delire to teach them no more butche 
way to Heaven. Hence 15 that which God Ipeaketh to us by 
Jſaiab, (1) Ego Donmus Deus, docens te utilia [Tam the Lord 
thy God which teach eth thee profitable things: | Where the Uloſ. 
ſary addeth, non ſulti1, [not ſubtiltics. ]: or God neither taughe 
us, Whether the Materia Prima of Heaven, and the Elemecc; 
be the ſame ; nor Whether Continual be compolcd of [ndiviy. 
blus, or whether it be diviſibie 777 infinitum nor, Whether the 
Elements are formally mxt; nor how many the Caichial 
Spheres, and their Orbs are 3 \Whether there be E picycles or 
Eccentricks ; nor the Vertues of Plants and Stones ; nor the Na. 
ture of Animals 3 nor the Motion and Influence of the Planets: 
nor the Order of the Univerſe; nor the Wonders of Minerals, 
and univerſal Nature : but only | #til:2 - | things profitable, tg 
wit, his Holy Law ordaincd tothe end, that we being put into 
polleſfion of Bleflednets, might at length be made capable of all 
perfea knowledge, and the vilion of the whole Order and ad. 
mirable Harmony, as alio the Sympathy and Antipathy . of the 
Univerie and its parts, an his Word , wherein all thoſe 
things ſhall moſt clearly and diſtinfly, then, appear to us, which 
mean While, in this lite, he hath remitted (as tar as its abilicy 
reacheth) tro humane lcarch and enquiry : Burt it was not his 
purpole to determine any thing, dire&ly or indircCtly, touching 
the truth of them. Becaulc as the knowledge thereot would lit- 
tle or nothing profit Us, but might in ſome calvs prove prejudi- 
cial ; ſo the ignorance thereot-can doubtlets be no detriment, 
but may in ſome cales be very beneficial tous. And therefore 
by his moſt admirable Wildome it comes to pals, that though all 
things in this World are dubious, uncertain, wavering, and per- 
plexed 3 yet his Holy Faith alone is moſt certain ; and although 
the opinions about Philolophical and DoGtrinal points be divers, 
there is in the Church bur one Truth of Faith and Salvation. 


__ Which Faith, as necclsary to Salvation, is ſo ordered by Divine 


— 


Providence, that it might not only be indubitable, but allo un- 
ſhaken, ſure, immutable, and manifeſt to all men : the intallible 
Rule of which he hath appointed the Holy Church, that 15 walh- 
cd with his precious Blood, and governed by his Holy Spit, to 
whom belongs our SanGiification, as being his work. T his there» 
fore is the Reaſon why God would have Speculative Queſtions, 
which nothing conduce to our Salyatjon ar.d Edification;and wh) 
the Holy Ghoſt hath very often condeſccnded to Vulgar Opint 
ons and Capacities, and hath diſcovered nothing that 1 ſingular 
or hidden to us, befides thole things that pertain to Salvation 


So that conſequently it is clear by what hath been laid, how ang 
Will 


In Purto$s0PHICAL ConTtROv FRASIE SC 


why nothing of certainty can be evinced from the foreſaid Au-« 
-horicies to the determining of Controverſies of this Nature ; as 
\lſo with what Reaſon from this firſt Axiome the Obje&ions of 
he firſt and ſecond Claſle are eaſily anſwered, as alſo any other 
authority of ſacred Scripture produced againſt the Pythagorian 
1nd Copernican Syſteme 1o long as by other proofs it is true. 

And the Authorities of the ſecond Claſle in particular by 
this ſame Maxime, Of the ordinary manner of apprehending 
things as they appear to us, and after the common way of ſpeak- 
ing, may be thus reconciled and expounded; namely, Oftentimes 
an Agent 15 commonly,and not improperly {aid to move, (though 
ichave no motion) not becauſe it doth indeed move, but by ex- 
rinſick, Yenomination, becaule receiving its influence and aQtion at 
the motion of the Subze&; the Form and Quality infuſed to 
the Subje& by the {aid Agent doth likewiſe move. As for ex- 
ample, a Fire burning 1n a Chimney is an immoveable Agent, 
bcfore which a man oppreſt with cold fits to warm himſelf who 
bcing warmed on one fide, turns the other to the Fire, that he 
may be warmed on that fide allo, and ſo in like manner he holds 
every part to the Fire {ucceſlively, till his whole body be warm- 
ed. Tis clear, that although the Fire do not move, yet at the 
Motion of the Subje&, to wit the Man, who receiveth the heat. 
and ation of the Fire, the Form and Quality of its Heat doth 
nove ſingulatim, &+ per partes, round about the mans body, and 
alwayes {ecketh out a new place : and fo, though the Fire do 
not move, yet by reaſon of its effe&, itis ſaid to go round all 
the parts of the Mans body, and to warm it, not indeed by a 
rue and real motion of the Fire it ſelf, ſince it is ſuppoſed (and 
that not untruly) not to move, but by the motion to which the 
Body is excited, out of a defire of receiving the heat of the Fire 
in cach of its parts. The ſame may be applied to the Illumina- 
tion impreſicd {ucceſſively on the parts of any Globe , which 
moves Ocbicularly at the aſpe& of a ſhining immoveable 
Light. And inthe ſame manner may the Sun be ſaid to riſe and 
let, and to move above the Earth, although in reality he doth 
not move; nor fuffer any mutation 3 that 1s to ſay, Inaſmuch as 
bis Light (which effe& is the Form and Quality proceeding from 
lim, as the Agent, to the Earth as the Subjea) doth ſenſibly 
vlide forwards, by realon of the Orbicular motion of the Earth; 
and doth alwaycs betake it {elf to ſome new place of her ſurface; 
upon which ground he is truly ſaid ( ſecundum wulgarem ſermo- 
wm) to move above, and revolve about the Earth : Not that the 
un doth move, (for by this Opinion we aftirm the Earth to 
move, that it may receive the Sun one while in one, another 
while in another part of it) but that at the motion of the Earth 


Qqq her 


459 


: 
| 
| 
' 
| 
| 


W—_— 
_ _ " a 


. $—— 
bu pe 


_ 
oy = 
+ PRES "_ _ 
- , + Arr on 


-F 
-- fo 
G o 


| Joſhua C, IO, 
Ver, 12- 


bY exzelted. 


Was Ce 38, V- 8, 


, - 
a n= I TEE epi ee 7 \ a 
OY - _ _ - 
- - 
a 


The eAmboriy of Se xieruns, 


her ſelf a contrary way, the Quality diffuſed into her, and im- 
preſſed upon her by the Sun, namely the Light of the Day is 
moved, whichriſeth in one part of her, and ſets in another COn- 
trary to that,according to the nature and condition of her motion: 
And for this reaſon the Sun it lelt by conſequence is ſaid to rij 
and ſet, (which notwithſtanding ex Hypotheſ: ſtands Immovyez. 
ble) and that no otherwile then per donominationem extrinſecam, 
as hath been ſaid. 

After this manner the command of Joſbuah , Sun ſtand they 
ftill, and the Miracle of the Suns ceſſation of Motion wroughe 
by him, may be ſo underſtood, as thar not the Solar Body pry. 
perly, but the Suns {plendour upon the Earth ſtood ſill ; ſothar 
not the Sun it (elf, (being of it (elf betoce that time immovez- 
ble) but the Earth char receiverth its {! plendour, ſtayed her Mo- 
tion 3 which, as ſhe inccti{antly purtuing her ordinary Motion to- 
wards the Eaſt, * called up the Light or the Sun in the Weſt, (@ 
ſanding Rill, rhe Suns light 10p.f{t upon 1t likewile ſtood ill, 
After the {ame manuer P:OPOrt16114.1Y 15 that Text of I} aiab ex- 
plained, touching the Sut:s going ten degrees backward upon the 

Yial of Aba. So (whick way lerve tor another Example) the 
Hand being inoved about the flame of a burning Candle that 
Rand: fl], the Tiphr muverh on the Hand, that 1s to fay, the 
{vid E216 is Hihlitrated now in one part, anon in another, when 
as the Car:dic :. (oli a!l the while removes not out of its place; 
whercupon per denominationem exirin{ecam, the laid Light ma 
be affirmed ro rile and ſet' vr-on the Hand, namely, by the (ole 
motion of the ſaid Band, the Cardlc it ſelf never moving all the 
while. And let this ſuffice for the explanation of my firſt Prin- 
ciple or Maxime, which by reaſon of its difficulty and extraordi- 
nary weight required ſome prolixity in the handling of it. 

My ſecond Vaaxime is this > Things both Spiritual and Cor- 
poreal, Durable and Corrupiible , Moveable and Immoveable, 
have teceived from God a perpetual, unchangeable, and inviola- 
ble Law, conſtituting the Eflence and Nature of every one of 
them : according ro which Law all of them in their own Na- 
ture pcrſiſting in a certain Order and Conſtancy, and obſerving 
the fame perpetual Courte, may deſervedly be ſtiled moſt Stable 


and Determinate. Thus Fortune (than which there is nothing 


in the World more inconſtant or fickle) is ſaid to be conſtant 


and unalterable in her continual volubility, viciſſitude , and in- | 


conſtancy, which was the occaſion of that Verſe, 


Et ſemper conftans in levitate ſua eſt. 


And thus the motion of Heaven (which by the conſtan Law | 


of 


In Putt oSOPHICAL COnTROV ERsmE Ss: 


.f Nacure ought to be perpetual) may befſaid to be immutable 
ind immoveable, and the Heavens themſelves to be uinmovea- 
bly mnoyed, and Terrene things to be iummutably changed, be- 
aulcthole never ceale moving, nor thele changing, By this Prin- 
ciple or Maxime all difficulties belonging to the firſt Claſſis are 
cared, by which the Earth is ſaid ro be ſtable and immoyeable, 
that is, by underſtanding this one thing, That the Earth, as to its 
own Nature, though it include 1n it ſe]f a local Motion, and that 
threefold, according to the opinion of Copernicus (ſcilicet Diur- 
nal, with which it revolveth about its own Centre; Annnal, 
by which it moverh through the twelve Signes of the Zodiack, 
znd the motion of Inclination, by which its Axis 1s alwayes op- 
poſed to the ſame part of the World ) as alſo other Species of 
Mutation, ſuch as Generation and Corruption, Accretion and 
Piminution, and Alteration of divers kinds ; yet in all theſe ſhe 
;; ſtable & conſtant, never deviating from that Order which God 
hath appointed her, but moveth continually, conſtantly and im- 
matably, according to the fix before named Species of Motion. 
My third Maxime ſhall be this; When a thing 15 moved ac- 
cording to {ome part of it, and nat according to its whole, it 
cannot be {aid to be ſemply & abſolutely moved, but only per acci- 
dens, for that ſtability taken ſimply & abſolutly do-rather accord 
with the ſame. As ſor cxample, if a Barrel or other meaſure of 
Water be taken out of the Sea, and transferred to another place, 
the Sea may not therefore abſolutely & ſemply be ſaid to be remo- 
ied from place to place, but only -per accidens, and ſecundum 
11d, that is, according to a part of it, but rather (to ipeak ſim- 
ly) we ſhould lay that the Sea cannot be carried or moved out of 
ts proper place, , though as to its parts it be moved, and transfer- 
ed ro & again. This Maxime is manifeſt of it ſelf,and by it may 
the Authorities be explained which ſeem to make for the immo- 
biliry of the Earth in this manner 3 namely, The Earth per ſe &+ 
abſolut? conſidered as to its Whole, is not mutable, ſeeing it is 
necher generated nor corrupted neither increaſed nor diminiſhed; 
neither is it altercd ſecundum totum, but only ſecundum partes. 


What is aſcribed ro it out of Eccleſtaſtes,cap. 1.9.4. One Generation 
paſſeth away, and another Generation cometh,but the Earth abideth 
orever: as if he ſhould ſay; although the Earth, according to its 
Pats, doth generate and corrupt,and 1s liable to the viciſlitudes of 
Lencration and corruption, yer in reference to its Whole it never 
v*lrateth nor Corrupteth, but abideth immutable for ever : 
Like ag a Ship, which though it be mended one while in the Sail- 
jard, another while in the Stern, and afterwards in other parts 
yet remains the {ame Ship as it was at firſt. But tis to be ad- 


Q qq 2 vertiſed 


491 


: Several Motions 
of the Earth ar- 
cording to' Copers 
nicus, 


The Earth Se- 


Nowir plainly appears, that this is the genuine and true Senſe of cundum Torum « 


Immutable, 
though not Immy- 
vable. 


—”Yy a” = 
> OO pl 


The Earth care 
wot Secundum T 0+ 
tum, remove ont of 
its Natrral Place, 


The Natnral 
P lace of the Earth» 


The Moon is an 
eEtherial Body. 


The « Antbority of OcRiptuRE, 


vertized, that that Scripture doth not ſpeak of a Local Motior 
} 


but of Mutations of another nature; as in the very ſubſtance 
J 


quantity or quality of the Earth it ſelf. Burt if it be laid, thar 


itis to be underſtood of a Local Motion, then it may he «. 
plained by the inſuing Maxime, that 1s to lay, a reſpe& being had 
ro the natural Place aſſigned it in the Univerſe, as ſhall be ſhewed 
by and by. 

The fourth Axiome 1s this 3 That every Corporeal thing, mo- 
veable or immoveable from its very firſt Creation, is alorted je: 
proper and natural place ; and being drawn or remoyed fron 
thence, its motion is violent, and it hath a natural tendency 16 
wove back thither again : alſo that nothing can be moyed from 
its natural place, ſecundum Totum , For moſt great and dreadfu] 
miſchiefs would tollow from that perturbation of things in the 
Univerſe. Therefore neither the whole Earth , nor the whol: 
Water, nor the whole Air can ſecundum totum be driuen or for- 
ced out of their proper place, ſite, or Syſteme in the Univerſe, 
in reſpet of the order and diſpofition of other mundane Bodies. 
And thus there 1s no Star (though Erratick ) Orb or Sphere that 
can deſert its natural place, although it may otherwiſe have ſome 
kind of motion. Therefore all things, how moveable ſoever, 
are notwithſtanding ſaid to be ſtable and immoveable in their 
proper place, according to the foreſaid ſenſe, i.e. ſecundun to- 
tum; For nothing hinders, but that ſecundum partes they may 
{ome waymove; which motion ſhall not be natural, but violent. 
Therefore the Earth, although it ſhould be moveable, yea i 
might be ſaid to be immoveable, according to the precedent 
Maxime, . for that nsnejther moved in a right Motion nor out of 
chei Come afligned it in its Creation for the ſtanding Rule of its 
motion z but keop: within its own ſite, being placed in that 
which is called the Grand Orb, above YVenzs, and beneath Mars, 
and being in the middle: betwixt theſe (which according to the 
common opimon- is the Suns place) it equally and continually 
moveth abour the Sun, and the two other intermediate Planets, | 
namely Venxs and Mercury, and hath the Moon (which is another 
Earth, but Etherial, as Macrobizs after ſome of the ancient Phi 
lolophers, will have it) about it ſelf. From whence, waſmuch as | 
ſhe perſiſteth uniformly in her Courſe, and never at any time | 
departeth from it, ſhe may be ſaid to be ſtable and immoveabk: 
and in the ſame ſenſe Heaven likewiſe , with all the Elements, | 
may be {awd to be 1mmoveable. | 

The fifth Maxime followeth, being little different from the } 
former. Amongſt the things created by God, ſome are of ſuch a 
natwe, that their parts may be ab invicem, or by turns, {c- : 


parated rom themſelves, and diſ-joyned from their WA: ; 
12>; | OCNCcT> 7 


/n PpritLosoPHICAlL ConTROVERSIES: 


uchers may not, at leaſt, taken collectively : now thole are pe- 
\ihable, but chele perpetual. The Earth therefore ſince it 
reckoned amongſt thole things that are permanent, as hath 
ycen ſaid already, bath its parts, nor diſlipable, nor ab invicem,” 
[parable from irs Gentre (whereby its true and proper place is 
aligned it ) and irom its whole, taken colleGively : becauſe AC= 
cording ro its whole 1t 18 always preſerved, compact, united, and 
-ohzrent 11 it ſelf, nor can its parts be ſeperated from the Cen- 
rc, or from one another, unlels it may fo fall out per accidens, 


ind violently in ſome of its parts; Which afterwards, the obſtacle 


being removed, return to their Natural Station ſpontaneouſly, 
ind without any impulſe. In this Senſe therefore the Earth is 
lid co be Immoveable, and Immutable : yea even the Sea, Aire, 
Heaven, and any other thing ( although otherwiſe moveable ) ſo 
long as its parts are not diſlipable and leperable, may be ſaid to 
he Immoveable, art leaſt taken colleci;vely. This Principle 
or Maxim differeth from the precedent only in that this referrs 

to the parts 1n order to Place, and this, in order to the Whole. 
From this Speculation another Secret is diſcovered. For hence 
itis manifeſt wherein the proper and genuine formality of the 
Gravity aad Levity of Bodyes confiſtethz a point Which is not ſo 
dearly held forth, nor ſo undeniably explained by the Peripatc- 
ack Phylolophy. Gravity therefore is nothing elſe according to 
che Principles of chis new Opinion, than a certain power and ap- 
petice of rhe Parts to rezoyn with their Whole, and there to reſt 
vin. their proper place. Whnch Faculty or Diſpofition is by 
Divine Providence beſtowed not only on the 'Earth, and Ter- 
rene Bodies, but, as is believed, on Caleſtial Bodies alſo, name- 
ly the Sun, Moop, and Starrs ; all whole parts are by this Impul- 
ſion connected, and conſerved together, cleaving cloſely to cach 
other, and on all Gdes preſſing towards their Centre, . until they 
come to.reſt there, From which Concourle and Compreſſion a 
hzrical and Orbicular Figure of the Czleſtial Orbes is produ- 
«d, wherein by this occult Quality naturally incident to 
cach of them they of themſelves ſubliſt, and are alwayes preſer- 
ved, Bur Levity ts the Extruſion and Excluſion of a more te- 
nuole and thin Body from the Commerce of one more Solid and 
denſe, that is Hererogeneal tor, by vertue of Heat. Where- 
upon, as the Marion of Grave Bodies is Compreſſeve, ſo the Mo- 
ton of Light Bodies is Extenſeve : For its the propperty of Hear 
to dilate and rarity thole things to which ic doth apply, conyoine 
and communicate it ſelf. And for this reaſon we find Levity 
and Gravity not only in reſpe& of this our Tereſtrijal Globe, and 
the Bodies adjacent to it, but alſo in reſpeCt of thoſe Bodies 
which are (aid to be in the Heavens, in which thoſe parts which 
| by 


433 


The Earth; Cen+ 
tre keeperh it in 
Its Natriral Place, 


Gravity and Le- 
vity of Boates, 
what it i”, 


All Celeſtial Bo? 
dies have Gravity 
and Levity, 


(ompreſſcve Mo- 
tion, Proper to 
Gravity * the Ex« 
tenfiue, to Levity, 


— Q _  ——— x Ry 


594 


Heaven 34s not 
compoſed of a fift 

ence differing 
from the matter of 


inferior Bodves, 


Nor yet a Solid 
or denſe Body but 
Rave, 


* Delle Macchie 


{olary, 


x Vnites Corporeis 
ſimplicis, nnw eff 
mot we ſimplex, tt 
hyuic due ſpecies, 
R ett us & Circu- 
lars : Rell mw as - 
plex 4 medio, & 
ad medinm ; pri- 
mu levium ut As 
ris & Tons: ſe- 
cundiu graueunm: , 
ut Aque & Ter- 
re: Circulars, 
qui eſt circa medi- 
wm competit Colo, 
guod neque eff - 
grave, neque levee 
Arift. de Cal. 
Lib, r. 

* Vide Coperni- 
cum de Revolutio- 
bus (' leſt. 

Simple Aotion 
peculiar to only 


Smple Bodies. 


T be Amtbority of Sc RieTURE 


by reaſon of their proclivity make towards their Centre are 
Grave, and thoſe that incline to the Circumference Light. Ard 
ſoin the Sun, Moon, and Starrs, there are parts as well Graye a; 
Light. And conſequently Heaven it ſelf that ſo Noble Body, 


and of a fifth Eſſence, ſhall not be conſtituted of a Matter diff. 
rent from that of the Elements, being free from all Mutation ;r 
it's Subſtance, Quantity, and Quality : Nor ſo admirabl« and 
excellent as Ariſtotle would make us to believe ; nor yet a ſolid 
Body, and impermeable ; and much leſle ( as the generality of 
men verily believe) of an impenetrable and moſt obdurate Den- 
ſity : but init (as this Opinion will have it) Comets may be ge- 
nerated 3 and the Sunit elf, as tis probable, exhaling or atra8- 
ing ſundry vapours to the ſurface of its Body, may perhaps pro. 
duce thoſe Spots which were obſerved to be lo various, and ire. 
gular in its Diſcus : of which Galilexs in a perticular * Treatiſc 
hath moſt excellently and moſt accurately ſpoken; inſomuch, 
that though it were not beſides my preſent purpoſe, yet it is con- 
venient that I forbear to ſpeak any thing touching thoſe matters, 
leaſt I ſhould ſeem to do that which he hath done before me : But 
now if there be found in the Sacred Scriptures any Authority 
contrary to thele things , it may be ſalved by the foreſaid Argu- 
ments Analogically applyed. And furthermore it may be ſaid, 
that that Solidity is to be ſo underſtood, as that rt admits of ns 
vacuum, cleft, or penetration from whence the leaſt vacuity might 
procecd. For the truth is, as that cannot be admitted in bodily 
Creatures, lo it is likewiſe repugnant to Heaven it ſelf, being 
indeed a Body of its own Nature the moſt Rare of all 0- 
thers, and tenuole beyond all Humane Conception, and happly 
hath the ſame proportion to the Aire, as the Aire to the 

Water. | 
It is clear alſo from theſe Principles how falſe theſe words of 
Ariſtotle are, that : Of one ſimple Body, there is one ſimple Motion; 
and this is of two kindes, Right and Circular : the Right is two- 
fold, from the medium, and to the medium; the firſt of Light Bo- 
ayes, as the Aire and Fire: the ſecond of Grave Bodyes, as the 
IVater and Earth : the Circular, which is about the medium , be- 
longeth to Heaven, which is neither Grave nor Light : For all this 
Philoſophy is now forſaken, and of it ſelf grown into diſ-eſteem; 
tor though it be received for an unqueſtionable truth in this new 
Opinion, that to a' ſimple body appertains one only ſimple Moti- } 
on,yet it granteth no Motion but what is Circular, by which alone * 
aſimple body is conſerved in its naturall Place, and ſubſiſts in its 
Unity, and is properly ſaid to move in loco [ tn 2 place: ] whereby 
It COMes to pals that a Body for this reaſon doth continue to move | 
in itſelf, [or about its own axis;)] and although it have a Motion ' 
FRY 


| Puit.osoPHICAL ConTROVERSIES. 


vet it abiderh ſtill in the ſame place, as if ir were perpetually im-. 


1oveable. But right Motion, which 1s properly «d locum, | to a 
place] can be alcribed only to thoſe things which are out of their 
\cucall place, being far from union with one another, and from 
uniry with their whole , yea that are ſeperated and divided from 
:: Which being that it is contrary to the Nature and forme of 
he Univerle, it neceſſarily followeth, that right Motion doth in 
hore ſure with thoſe things which are deſtitute of that perfc&ion, 
char according to their proper Nature belongeth to them, and 
yhich by this ſame right Motion they labour to obraine , untill 
they are redintigrated with their Whole, and with one another, 
and reſtored to their Naturall place z in which at the length , 
having obtained their perfeQion,they ſettle and remaine immove- 
ible. Therefore 4a right Motions there can be no Unitormity , 
nor ſimplicity 3 for that they vary by realon of the uncertaine 
Lcviry or Gravity of their reſpe&ive Bodyes : for which cauſe 
they do not perſcvere in the ſame Velocity or Tardity to the end 
which they had in the beginning. Hence we lee that thoſe things 
whoſe weight maketh them tend downwards , do deſcend at firſt 
with a ſlow Motion ; but afterwards, as they approach neerer 
and ncerer to the Centre, they precipitate more and more ſwiftly. 
And on the otherſide, thoſe things which by reaſon of their light- 
neſs are carryed upwards (as this our Terreſtriall fire, which is no- 
thing elſe but a ſmoak that burneth,and is inkindled into a flame ) 
xe no ſooner aſcended on high, but, in almoſt the (elf-ſame mo. 
nent, they fly and vaniſh out of ſight; by reaſon of the rare- 
Gon and extenſion, that they as ſoon as they acquire, are freed 
rom thoſe bonds which violently and againſt their own Nacure 
kept them under, and deteined them here below. For' which 
realOn, it 15 very apparent, that no Right Motion can be called 
vimple, not only in regard that ( as hath been ſaid ) it is nor 
*cyen and uniforme, but alſo becaule it is mixt with' the Circu- 
lar, which lucketh in the Right by an occult conſent, fcil:cet by 
ralon of the Natural affe&ion of the Parts to confarme unto 
their Whole. For when the Whole moveth Circularly, itis re- 
quiiite Iikewiſe that the Parts, to the end that they may beun- 
icd to their Whole, (howbeit per acc:idens they are fometimes 
moved with a Right Motion) do move ( though nor {o appa- 
rently) with a Circular Motion, as doth their Whole. And thus 
at length we have cvinced that Circular Motion only 15 Simple, 
Untorm and * Xquable,and of the ſame tenor | or rate] for that 
t 13 never deſtitute of its Interne Cauſe : whereas on the contra- 
ly, Right Motion, ( which p:rtains to things both Heavy and 
Light ) hath a Cauſe that is imperfeC& and deficient, yea that arj- 
Ih from Defe& it ſelf, and that tendeth to, and ſecketh afrer 
no 


495 


Right Motion 
belongeth to Im- 
per fett Bodicr,and 
that are ons of 
their natural Pla- 
ces, 


. 
Right CAM otion 
cannot be S1mplr, 


Fight Motion it 
ever mixt with 
the Circular, 


x equabilis, 


* Eren, 
Circular MM:+ : 
trons truly Sim« f 


ple and Perpetual. 


496 


'# iculdy Mo« 
tion belongeth to 
the Whole Body, 
and the Right to 


ts parts, 


Circular and 
Right HMotion oo. 
mcedent, and may 
conſeſt together in 
the ſame Body. 


The Amtbority of SckiptTuRE 


nothing elſe but the end and termination of it ſelf : jn regard 
that Grave and Light Bodies, when once they have attained their 
proper and Natural Place, do defiſt from that Motion to which, 
they were incited by Levity and Gravity. Therefore: ſince Cir- 
cular Motion 1s proper to the Whole, and Right Motion to the 
Parts, theſe differences are not rightly referred to Motion, (0 4. 
to call one Motion Right, another Circular, as if they were ny 
conſiſtent with one anorhet : For they may be both together,and 
that Naturally, in the ſame Body ; no lefſe than it js equally 
Natural for a Man to participate of Senſe and Reaſon, leeing 
that theſe differences are not directly oppoſite to one another. 
Hereupon Reſt and Immobility only are oppoſcd to Motion ; 
and not one Species of Motion to another. And for the other 
differences 4 medis, ad medium, and circa medium, they are di. 
ſtinguiſhed not really, but only formally, as the Point, Line and 
Superficies, none of which can be withour the other two, or 
without a Body. Hence it appears, that in as much as this Phy. 
loſophy differs from that of Ariſtotle, ſo in like manner doth this 
New Coſmographical Syſtem vary from the Common one, that 
hath been hicherto received. But this by the way, upon occaſjon 
of explaining the Fifth Maxim : For as to the truth or falſhood 
of theſe foregoing Poſitions (although I conceive them very pro- 
bable ) 1 am reſolved to determine nothing at preſent , neither- 
ſhall I make any farther enquiry into them. 

The Sixth and Laſt Maxim 1s this. Every thing is Simply deno- 
minated ſuch as it 15 in compariſon of all things, or of many 
things which make the greater number of that kinde , but not in 
reſpe& of a few which make but the lefler part of them. As, 
for-inſtance, a Veſlel ſhall not be called abſolutely Great be- 
caule it is ſo whilft it is compared with two or three others : but 
it ſhall be {aid to be great abſolutely, and will be ſo, if it ex- 
cced in magnitude all indivials, or the greater part of them. Nor 
again ſhall a Man be ſaid to be abſolutely Big, becauſe he is big- 
ger than a Pigmey 3 nor yet abſolutely Little, becauſe lefſe than 
a Gyant: but he ſhall be termed abſolutely Big or Little in com- 
pariſon of the ordinary Stature of the greater part of Men. Thus 
the Earth cannot ablolutely be ſaid to be High or Low for that it 
is found to be ſo in reſpe& of ſome {mall part of the Univerle; nor 
again ſhall it be abſolutely affirmed to be High, being compared 
to the Centre of the World, or ſome few parts of the Univerle, 
more near to the ſaid Centre, as is the Sur, Mercury or Fenus: 


7he Earth i» but it ſhall receive its abſolute denomination according as it ſhall 


+ 4t ſenſe it may 
i /.i4urely be ſaid 

- 1% the loweſ* 
{414 *f the World, 


be found to be in compariſon of the greater number of the 
Spheres and Bodies of the Univerſe, The Earth therefore, in 


compariſon of the whole Circuit of the Eighth Sphzre rs 
cludeth | 


In Pu1t0s0PHICAL ContROVERSIES. 
ydeth all Corporeal Creatures, and in compariſon of Jupiter, 
Mars, and Saturn together with the Moon, and much more in 
compariſon of other Bodies, ( if any ſuch there be) above the 
Eighth Sphere and eſpecially the Empyrial Heaven, may be truly 
cid robe in the loweſt place of the World, and almoſt in the 
Centre of it ; nor can it he ſaid to be above any of them, except 
the Sun, Mercury and Venus : So that one may apply unto it the 
-ame of an Infime and Low, but not a Supreme or Mfddle Body. 
And ſo to come down from Heaven, eſpecially the Empyrian,to ic 
(as1t13 accepted in the Deſcent of Chriſt from Heaven to his Hol 
Incarnation) and from it to go up to Heaven (as in Chriſts return 
to Heaven in his Glorious Aſcention) is truly and properly to 
Deſcend from the Circumference to the Centre , and to aſcend 
from the parts which are neareſt. to the Centre of the World 
to its utmoſt Circumference, This Maxim therefore may caſily 
and according to truth explain Theologicall Propoſitions : and 
this is fo much the more confirmed, in that (as I have obſerved 
almoſt all Texts of Sacred Scripture which oppoſe the Earth to 
Heaven, are moſt conveniently and aptly underſtood of the Em- 
pyrial Heaven(being the Higheſt of all the Heavens,and Spiritual 
nceſpeCt of its end\) but not of the inferiour or intermediate Hea- 
yens, which are a Corporeal, and were framed for the benefit of 
Corporeal Creatures: and thus when in the Plural Number 
Heavens are mentioned, then all the Heavens promiſcuouſly and 
without diſtin&ion are to be underſtood, as well the Empyrian 
t ſelf as the Inferiour Heavens. And this Expoſition indeed any 
man (that doth but take notice of it ) may find to be moſt true. 
And lo for this Realon the Third Heaveu into which St. Paul 
was wrapt up, by this Maxim may be taken for the Empyrean : 
it for the the Firſt Heaven we underſtand that immenſe Space of 


are comprehended the Planets, as alſo the Earth moveable, and 
the Sun immoveable , Who like a King upon his Auguſt Tribu- 
na], fits with venerable Majeſty immoveable and conſtant in 
Centre of all the Sphzres, and, with his Divine Beames, doth 
bountifully exhilerate all Cacleſtial Bodies that ſtand in need of 
bis vital Light, for which they cravingly wander about him ; and 
Gth liberally and on every fide comfort and illuſtrate the Thea- 
tre of the whole World, and all its parts, even the very leaſt, like 
a 1mmortal and perpetual Lamp of high avd unſpeakable va- 
lug. The Second Heaven ſhall be the Starry Heaven, common- 
ly called the Eighth Sphzre, or the Firmament, wherein are all 
the Fixed Starrs, which according to this Opinion of Pythagoras, 
k(like as the Sun and Centre) void of all Motion, the Centre 
ad utmoſt Circumference mutually agrecing with each other in 


Rcr Immobilicy 


Erratick and Moveable Bodies illuminated by the Sun, in which 54 


497 


( briſt in ha 
Incarnation tru- 
ly deſcended from 
Heaven, and in 
his Aſcenſion tru- 
ly aſcended into 
Heavu:n. 


2 Cor. c.I 2+ Y- 
3. Whether in the 
body or out of the 
09a), canner tell, 

The Sznig King, 
Heart and Lamp 


of the World hins- 


ſelf being av\apune 


abſolutely indeper- 
dint.) 


| 
| 
j 
| 


Tle/£Cnirnia of 
P[ato. 

(a)( rea omnt- 
tim Renem ſront 
(1.914, C7 SECMUM® 
da circa Sectine 
dum, et Tera 
circa Tentinms 
Wide Ihc-do, de 
Grxc.2ticct.curat, 
lie 2, Stencit» 110, 
de Parenng. Piju- 
lot9s 


Eccleſ.c. v. 2. 3+ 
and almoſt 1h:- 
itt 
» C), Co IF 

Onued Rint, vil 


(art [wb ſcle, 


The Aithority of ScrtpruR 
Immobility. And the Third ſhall be the Empvrean Heaven, tha; 


is the Seat of the Bleſſed. And inthis manner we may comet; 
explain and underſtand that admirable Secret, and Protound \y- 
ſtery xnigmatically revealed by Plato to Dionyſins of SYracnſe : 
(a) All things are about the King of all things, Sccond thins; 
about tbe ſecond , and Third things abont the Third : [og (,; 
God being, the Centre of Spiritual things , the Sun , Of Cor. 
poreal, Chriſt, of thoie that ate Mrxt, or made up of both, thing: 
do doubtleſſe depend of that of thele three Centres that js moſ} 
correſpoadent and proportionable to them , and the Centre ;; 
ever adjudged to be the nobler and worthier place : and therefor, 
in Animals the Heart, in Vegttables the Pith or Kernell where, 
the Seed ]yerth thar conlerverh their perpetuity, and virtually jy. 
cludes the whole Plant, are in the Midiſt; and in the Centre : ang 
thus much ſhall ſuffice to have hinted at, ſince there may another 
occaſion ofterit ſelf for a larger Explication of thele things, By 


| this Maxim the Authorities and Arguments of the Third Fourth 


and Fifth Clafles are reſolved. 

It may be added withall, rhat even the Sun, Mercury and Ve. 
ys ( that 13 to ſay in reſpeR- of the Earth )) are to be thought 
#boue, and not beneath the Earth it (elf, although mn relpett of 
the Univerſe, yea and alſo abſolutely, they are befow. The req- 
ſon 13, becauie in reſpect of the Earth they alwaycs appear aboye 
its Surface : and although they do not environe it, yet by the 
Motion of the {aid Earth they behold one while one part, another 
while another part of its Circumference. Since therefore thoſe 
things which in a Spherical Body are ncarer to the Circumte- 
rence and more remotc from the Cenrre are 1aid to be above, but 
thoſe that arc next adjoyning to the Centre are ſaid to be below; 
it cleatly followeth that whilſt the Sun, Mercury and Ven ate 
not only turned towards the Surface and Circumference of the 
{aid Farth, but are at a very great diſtance without it, jucceffively 
turned about it, and every way have a view of it, and are very 
far remote trom its Centre, they may,in reſpect of che ſaid Earth, 
be {aid to be abowe it; as allo on the other fide, the Farth 
reipecdt of them may bc ſaid to be beneath : howbeit on the con: 
trary, in reſpe& of the Univerſe, the Earth in reality 3 mich 
ligher than they. And thus is falved the Authority ol F crie/1- 
aftes in many places, expreſſing thole things that are, or are done 
on the Fcarh in theſe words, Which are done, or which are under 
the San, And in the ſame manner thoſe words are reduced to thett 
true Senſe wherein it is 1aid, That we are under the $u1, and #- 
der th: \\con, whercupon Terenc things arc expreſſed by the 
name of Sablunary. 


The Sixth Claſlis threatneth a difficulty which 1s common #* 


well 


[a Put. OSOPHICAL WONTRCY ERSIE S. 


well to £118 of Copernicus, as tO the Vulſgar Opinion ; ſo that they 
ire both alike concerned n the loJution of it: But ſo far as it 
oppoleth that of Copernicus, 1s anlwer 1s cal y from the Firſt 
\{[ax11. _ 

But that which 1s added in the Fourth Claſice, That it fofllow- 
»:1 from chis Opinion, that Hell ( for that it is included by the 
F1rthy as 15 Commonly held ) doth move circularly about the 
©, and in Heaven, ard that lo Hell it {elf will be found to be 
1 Heaven 3 diſcovers, in my judgment, nothing but Ignorance 
ind Calur ny, that infinuate the belief of their, Arguments. ra- 
ther by a corrupt (cpvle of the Words, than by ſolid Reaſons 
2:cn from the botome of the Nature of things. For in this 
place Heaven 15 no wile to be taken for Paradice, nor according 
the Sznie of Common Opinion, but (as hath been laid above 
xccording to the Copernican Hypotheſis, for the fubtileſt and 
Purclt Aire, far more tenuous and rare than this of ours ; where- 
upon the Solid Bodies of the Stars, Moon, and Earth, in-their 
Circular and Ordinary Motions, do paſle thorow it, (the Sphare 
of Fice betng by this Opinion taken away.) Andas according 
{2the Commoa Opinion it was no abſurdity to lay, That Hell 
bing demerged in the Centre of the Earth and of the World ir 
c]t,hath Heaven and Paradice above and below it, yea and on, 
ali ſides of it, and that it is in the middle of all the Cacleſtial 
Bodics ( as if it were polited in a more unworthy place) ſo, nei- 
ther ia this will it be deemed an Error, if from the other Syſtem, 
which differeth not much from the Vulgar one, : thoſe or the like 
things follow as do in that. For both in thar of Copernicus, and 
he Vulgar Hypochelis,Hell 15 luppoled to be placed amongſt the 
ery dreggs of the Elements, and 1n.the Centre of the Earth ic 
[1i, for the confinement and puniſhment of the damned. - There- 
lore we ought not for want of Reaſons to trifle away time in 
vain and 1impertinent ſtrite about words, ſince their true Senſe 
: clouded then with no obſcurity, and in regard that it is very 
ar to any man 1adued with a refined Intelle&, and that hath 
but an indifferent judgment in the Liberal Arts, and eſpecially 
n the Mathematicks, rhat the ſame, or not very different Con- 
l:quences do flow from both theſe Opinions: 

By theſe Maxims and their Interpretations it appears , that 
ne Pythagorick, and Copernican Opinion is ſo probable, that its 
polible it may exceed even the Ptolemaick in probability ; and 
ance there may be deduced from it a moſt ordinate Syſteme, and 
i mroe admirable and myſterious Hypothefis of the World 
an from that of Prolomy : the Authorities of Sacred Scripture 
and Theological Tenents iu the mean while not oppoſing it,. be- 
"g opportuanely and appolitely ( as Lhave, ſhown how they may 

Rrr2 be ) 


495 


Heaven accords 
ing to (Copernicus 
« the ſame with 
the moſt , tenuous 
Ether ; but dif+ 
ferent from Parad 

ce, which ſar- 
paſſeth all the 


FaVens, 


— 


The » Autbority of ScRiprukeE, 


be ) reconciled with it : And ſince that by it not only the Pho. 
nomena of all the Celeſtial Bodies are moſt readily jalyed bur 
alſo many Natural Reaſons are diſcovered, which could not 0- 
therwiſe, ( but with extream difficulty) have been found out : 
And ſince it, laſt of all, doth open a more eaſy way into Aſtro. 
nomy and Phyloſophy, and rejeQeth all thoſe ſuperfluous and 
imaginary inventions produced by Aſtronomers to the end only, 
that they might be able by them to render a reaſon of the {© ma. 
ny and {o various Motions of the Catleſtial Orbs. 

And who knows, but that in that admirable compoſure of the 
Candleſtick which was to be placed in the Tabernacle of God, he 
might out of his extraordinary love to us have been pleaſed to 
ſhaddow forth unto us the Syſteme of the Univerſe, and more 


FOC 


(a) Exod.25.31. eſpecially of the Planets? (42) Thou ſhalt make a Candleſtick of 
pure Gold, ( ſaith the Text; ) of beaten work ſhall it be made . 


(b) My Authour 
following the vile 
ar Tranſlation , 
which hath an E- 
ligance in ſome 
things beyond ours, 
cites the word: 
thur,Facics Can- 
delabrum dufti- 
le de auro mun- 
diſſimo, Haſtile 
cjas,& Calamos, 
& Sphzrutas, ac 
Lilia,cXx ipſo pro- 
cedentia- 


(c) verſe 1% 
(4) or Spheres. 

(e) Though our 
A uthour ſpeaketb 
here profprrvel) ef 
nine Months , KC» 
Fathers are not 4- 
greed about the pe” 
riod of this planets 
mor that of Mercu- 
ry 41 you may ſee 
at large in Ricciv® 
lus, Alm agel(t-nvv- 
Tom. 1, part 1. * 
7. ſelt.3. cha. 11, 
pm. l l-page 627+ 
where be maketÞ 
Verus to conſum- 
mate ber Revolur 
Eon $11 meer 22) 
dayes,0r 75 Mon: 
and M:cury in 4» 
bout 88 dayesor 3 
Months : in whic 
he followeth K*pl. 
in Epitome Aſtro- 

nom.p-7600» 


(f) verſ. 3334+ 


;. Text procceds to the deſcription of the Bowls, the Knops, and 


þ wnder two branches of the ſame, and a Knop under two Branches 


his Shaft, and bis Branches , bis Bowls, bis Knops, and hj; 
Flowers(b)ſball be of the ſame. Here are five things deſcribed.the 
Shaft of the Candleſtick in the midle, the Branches on the ſides, 
the Bowls, the Knops and the Flowers. And fince there can be no 
more Shafts but one, the Branches are nnmediatly deſcribed in 
thele (c ) words: Six Branches ſhall come ont of the ſides of it 
three Branches out of the one ſide, and three Branches ont of the 
other ſde : Happly theſe ſix Branches may point out to us ſix 
( d)Heavens, which are moved about the Sun 1n this order;$atury, 
the ſloweſt and moſt remote of all, finiſheth his courſe about the 
Sun thorcow all the twelve Signes of the Zodiack in thirty Years: 
Jupiter, being nearer than he, in twelve Years: Mars, being yer 
nearer than him, in two Years : The Earth, which is ſtill nearer 
than he , doth perform the ſame Revolution , rogether with 
the Orbe of the Moon, in the ſpace of a Year, that is in Twelve 
Months : YVexxs,which is yer nearer than all theſe, in(e)g Months: 
And laſt of all Mercury, whole vicinity to the Sun is the greateſt 
of all, accompliſheth its whole converfion abour the Sun in eighty 
Dayes. After the deſcription of the ſix Branches , the ſacred 


the Flowers, laying , (f') Three Bowls made like unto Almonds, 
with a Knop and a Flower in one Branch ; and three Bowls made 
like Almonds in the other Branch,with a Knop and a Flower: this 
ſhall be the work of the ſix Branches that come out of the Shaft. 
And in the Candleſtick, ſball be four Bowls made like unto Al- 


monds, with their Knops and their Flowers : there ſhall be a knop 


of the ſame, and a Knop under two Branches of the ſame which 
together are fix Branches, proceeding from one Shaft, The eruth 


15,::the ſhallownefſe of my underſtanding cannot _ = 
et 


In PuiLosoPAlCcal ConTROYERSIES: 


Jepth of all the Myſteries that are couched in this moſt wiſt 
iſpoſure of things : nevertheleſſe being amazed, and tranſported 
with admiration, [ will ſay ; Who knows but that thoſe three 
owls like unto Almonds to be repreſented on each of che 
ranches of the Candleſtick may fignifie thole Globes which are 
zprer(as 1s this our Earth)for the receiving than emitting of Influ- 
-nces ? Perhaps allo they denote thoſe Globes of late diſcovered 
yy the help of che Oprick Telelcope , which participate with 
Saturn, Tupiter, Venus, and poſſibly alſo with the other Planers ? 
\Who knows likewiſe,but that there may be tome occult propor- 
oa between theſe Globes and thoke Myſterious Knops and 
Lilics inſinuated unto us in the ſacred Scriptures ? But this 
ſhall here ſuffice to bound humane Preſumptionh, and to reach us 
o expe with an Harporratick filence from Te, the Iadice of 
Truth, a diſcovery of theſe Myſteries: (g) Solomon made ten 
Candleſticks by the ſame Patern of Moſes, which he placed, five 
on one hand and five on another, in the Temple ere&ed by him 
in honour of the moſt High God ; which very thing doth allo, 
without all queſtion,contain moſt abſtruſe fignifications. More- 
over, that Apple of the Knowledg of Good and Evil prohibired 
our firſt Parents by God is not without a Myſtery 3 which ſome 
lay was an Indian Figg. In which theſe things are to be oblery- 
ed: Ficſt, Thatir 1s replete with many Kernels, every one of 
which hath a particular Centre. Secondly, Though of it ſelf it 
be hard and ſolid, yet about its Circumference it is of a more rare 
and tenuouſe ſubſtance ; herein reſembling the Earth, which 
though in its Centre, and thoſe parts which are neareſt to it, it 
be ſtony, Metallick, and compaCt, yet the nearer one approacheth 
to the Circumference, its parts are {cen to be the more rare and 
tenuouſe : and withall it hath another body, more rare than its 
own, namely the Water, above which there is yet another, more 
ſubtil than all the reſt of inferivur Bodyes, that is to ſay, 
the Aire, 

The ſame Repreſentation with that vf the Indian Figg is held 
forth to us by the Malum Pnnicum, or Pomegranate, with its 
innumerable polycentrick Stones qr Kernels,all which in the parts 
more remote from their Centre, and nearer approaching towards 
the Circumference, are of a ſubſtance ſo ſubril and rare,that being 
but lightly comprefled, they in a manner wholly convert intoa 
moſt renuoſe Liquor or juice : Of which fruit it pleaſed Divine 
Wildom to make mention, and otdained that its Figure ſhould be 
mbroidered and wrought with a needle in the ſacerdotal Garment 
of Aaron : (b ) Beneath ( ſaith God ) npos the bem of it thou 
ſalt make Pomegranates of blew, and of purple, and of ſcarlet, 
found about the border thereof , and Bells of yold between them 


round 


Fol 


(gs) 1 Kings c,7. 
v.49. 2 Chron,s, 


4. wverſe7. 


(h) Exod. 28.373, 


34 & 39.1.4; 
25 326, 


OZ 


(: ) Ns Co 18, Vs 


2 4: 

( & ) I:Xodec. 29, 
v, 6,9,17, 36- 

(/) Orgtorzes Or - 
bis Terrarum, as 
the viloar Tran{- 
lation hath It, 


ſ (m) Num'.c.20. 
) V, Co 


(») Joelc, 1,v.1 2. 


(s) Hagg. Co Zo 
V. 19, 


(p) Deu:.c.3.v.3, 


(q) 1 KitivsC 7. 
v.20. & 2 Kjaes 
c..20. V1» 
ff 2 Ch.o. Co Z+eV-I 95 
| 16, &<c. 4, VV 2. 
[38 J-rc mm, C+ 
G2.V. 21g 22+ 


The Authority of Sc riprung 


round about : a golgen bell and a pomegranate, a golden þ;i} FT; 
pomegranate, upon the hem of the Robe round about. Ard that thi. 
was a Myſtical Repreſentation of the Worlds Ethyies, is averted 
by Solomon, ſaying; (1) For inthe long (' k)) Garment that þ, 
bad on was the([)whole World, and in the foure rows of the ſtone, 
was the Glory of the Fathers graven, and thy Majeſty in the Dj. 
adem of his Head. | 

The {ame likewile 1s ſignified to us by the Grape, and jn like 
manner by all other Fruits ; bur eſpecially the Figg, Grape, ard 
Pomegranate : whence thelc three are almoſt alwayes placed to- 
gerher inthe Sacred Scriptures. So Numb. 20. the People of [(14- 
el complain againſt Moſes and Aaron : (m) I berefor, bave you 
made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us into this evil place, 
where there can grow uo Seed , neither 3s there either Figgg ur 
Vines, or Pomegranates ? Intimating that theſe kinds of Fruit; 
were preferred by them for their excellency before all others. 
Andin Joel (n) The Vine s dryed up, and the Figg-tree Languiſh- 
eth, the Pomegranate-trce, the Palm-tree alſo, and the Apple-tree, 
even all the Trees of the field are withercd, becauſe joy is wither- 
ed away from the Sons of Meu. Likewilc in Haggas : (0) Is the 
ſeed yet in the Bud? and hath as yet the Vine and the Fig-tree, 
and the Pomegranate, and the Olive-tree brought forth? 1n like 
manner in Deuteronomie the Land of Promiſe is commended to 
be (p) A Land of Wheat, and Barly, and Vines in which grow, 
Figg-trees, and Pomegranates, and Olive-trees, &c. Andin the 
StrucGure of the Temp le undertaken by Solomon upon Divine In- 
|piration the (q) Chapiters of the Pillars were adorned with (eve- 
ral rowes of Pomegranates : which particular 15 mentioned, not 
in one but many places of Holy Writ. Yea and ſometimes acci- 
dentally and occationally the Holy hath.Ghoſt znigmatically re- 
preſented this moſt admirable ard Moſt Wile Srudure of the 
World, the Order of the Heavens, and the diſpoſure of Crea: 
tures Spiritual and Corporeal by Emblems, Parables, and Figures, 
leaſt they ſhould-be as it were dazled and blinded, by the retul- 
gent 4plcndor of ſo excellent an Obje&. Hence we lee, that in 
theſe Doftrinal & Dubious Points we may diſcourſe in ſuch man- 
ner by help of the Holy Scripture as is meet tor the underſtanding 
of the Prophets; which ſeeing they are very obſcure,they ſhall be 
fully underſtood, and may be aptly applyed only then when they 
ſhall be fultilled, and not before : So alſo when once the truc 
Syſteme of the Univerſe is found our, then, and not till chen, the 
meaning of thcſe Figures, and /Enigma's ſhall be madc known 
unto us : Thus before the coming of the Son of God had dilco- 
vered unto us the Myſtery of the Holy Trinity, none were able 


to comprehend Or 1mNagine what was concealed under my 
| word» 


7 C20 a 
ſy PHIL ISOPHICAL CNTRCY ERSIE Ss. 


ti (r) In Prencipio creavit Elobim Culu;r  Terram : tor 


© ks did not iechow the Noun Plural Elobim{ which is as muct! 
Ee lay Pj, [ Gods | ſhould be joyned with the Verb Singular, 
eT7 - Bar the Myſtery of the Unity of Eilence and Vraity 
+Perton> in God being revealed, 1t was preiently known, thar 
h. Snoular Number, Creaco/7t, had rc{crence to the Unity of EY- 
a o (in regard that the Works of the Trinity ad extra arc in- 
Lyi{tblc) and the Plural, Llebin, to the Pcrions: WW ho, | pray, 
oder times could have found out this Myſtery ? And thus the 
ame of God is thrice repeated in Pſal. 67. (s ) God, even our 
God (hall blefſe us, Coll ſhall bleſje 25, Oc. Which at firft might 
Com a Plconaline, and {uperfluous repetition 3 bur afterwards it 
1cyident that [vid did there tot out the Buncdittions of 1c» 
ral Porions iwplyed, to wit, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghoſt. 
Lmumncrable Examples of the like kind may be found 1n the Sa- 
ad Leaves. Theretore, to conclude, 1 will lay with * David, 
P/.:. 923. Ob Lord bow glorious are thy IWorks ! thy thoughts 
are very dcep: an unwiſeman knoweth not, and a fool doth not 
wderſtand theſe things. 

{hcl are the particulars that I have chought fit to offer , as 
(Divine, concerning the not-1mprobable Opinion of the Mobili- 
of the Earth and Stability of the Sun : which I hope will be 
1ceptable to you, Reverend Sir, out of the Jove and diligence 
(hocyich you perſue Virtue and Learning. But (to the end 
that you may alſo reccive an account of my other Studies ) [ 
hope very ſhoitly to publiſh in Print my Second Tome *Of the In- 
litutions of all Learnings, winch ſhall containe all the Liberall 
Arts, as I have already fipnificd in that Syntax, and Spicimen by 
ne heretoforc pur forth, and publiſhed under your Name. The 
cher five following Tomes by me pronuſed (which ſhall treat of 
Phyloſophy and Theology) arc nor altogether ſo forward, nc- 
verthelets they will be ſpeedily finiſhed. In the mean time there 
will come forth my Book Concerning © Oracles, now finiſhed, to- 
gether with a Treatiſe * Of Artificial Divination. And tor a 
Pedye thereok, I fend y ou at this time annexed to this Epiltle a 
Fatt * Concerntmng Natural Coſmological Divination, or of Natu- 
al Promnofiicks, and Preſages of the Changes of Weather, and 
othe; Wings which tall within the compatle of Natue. God grant 
\vu all HLappincflc. 


| Moſt Reverend Sir 
NAPL '.S, from the Coyent 
ol the Carelites, Jan. Your Mol! Hannble Servant 
6, 161 5. 
PAOLO ANTONIO FOSCARINE. 


FI1NIS, 


503 


\” } W323 e.4.v.1 


" ; 
Inflitutlonums 
omnum Doft;i- 
EIT. 


* De Or««uli;, 

* De Divinatie- 
ne artificioſa, 

* De Devinatic- 


ne Natasrat Caf* 
mologica, 


Imprimatur, P. ANT, GHIBERT, Vic. Gen. 


JOANNES LONGUS Can. £3 Cur. Archep. 


Neep. Txzor. Vidit. 


MAI BEMAELCAL 


COLLECIIONS 


A N D 


TRANSLATIONS: 


THE SECOND 


TOME 


THE SECOND PART: 


Containing, 


{ D, Benevicrus CasTELLus, by DISCOURSE 
of the MENSURATIOSN, f RUN - 
NING WATERS. 

Il. His Geometrical DEMO NSTRATIO NS of 
the Meaſureof RUNNING WATERS. 


I Hr LETTERS and (COM SIDERATIONS 
touching the Draining of FENNS, Drverſions of 
RIVERS, &c. 

[. D. Corsinus, Hy RE LATION of the ſtate of the 
Inundations , &c. in the Territories of BOLOGNA, 
and FERRARA. 


ere — ———— —— 
— ————— 


By THOMAS SALUSPEU URY, Eſq. 


OD O— 
—_— — 


LONDON, 
Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOU RNE, MDCLXI. 


Aaaa 


DK -HP 


MENSURATION 


CEE 


RUNNING WA TILERS. 


in —_ — —_— = _ —_— - _ — _ —— ——_——— _—— — — —— — —— — — > — _— 


An Fxcellent Picce 


Writta mn ITALIAN 
B Y 


ON RENEDEFTTO CASTELLLI 
Abbot of St. BENEDETTO ALOYTSIO, 
and Proteſfſour of the Mathematicks to-- 
Pope URGANVTIIN. m ROME. 


Engliſhed from the Third and beſt Edition, with 
the addition of a Second Book not before extant: 


WT THOMAS SHEUSHURY: 


_ 
Es —_——— —_— 


— OT IE—_———  - —— 
I et a Een ne ee eee egy Ry 0 ct OY EAT 


LE 0 BON; 
Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURN, 16< 


FF E399 


AUTHOURS EPISTLE 


Pope VRBAN VIII. 


— — — 


I oe LAy at the Feet of your Ho- 
A YL | ; 
linefle theſe my Conkide- 


rations concerning the 


MENSURATION OF 


RUNNING W ATERS: 
Wherein if I {ſhall have ſucceeded, being a 
matter ſo difficult and unhandled by W ri- 
ters both Ancient Modern , the diſcovery of 
any thing of truth hath been the Effect of 
Your Holinefſes Command ; and if through 
inability I have nufled the Mark , the fame 
C 5 Com- 


Command will ſerve me for an Ixcuſe with 
Men of better Judgment ; 2NU n.Ore elpeci. 
ally with Your Holinefle , towhom1 humbly 
proſtrate my felt , and kifle Your Sacred 


Feet, 


From ROME. 


Your Fioi:niffes 


_ 


Moſt bumble $ er vant 


BENEDETTIO. 


A Monk of C:ſſins- 


ON BENE DETTO CASTELLT, 
the famous Authour of theſe enſuing 
Diſcourſes of the Menluration of 
Running Waters, zs deſcended from 
the Worſbipful FAMILY of the 
CASTELLII, and took by. 
firſt breath near to the lake T HR A- 
SIMENTUS,( where Hanibal gave 
a fatal overthrow to the Roman 
Legions )in that ſweet and fertile part 
of happy ITALY.called the Territory 

of PERUGIA, a mo of the I \ukedome of TUSCANY, which 

t preſent ſubmitteth to the FuriſdiStion of the Church, as being a 

dre of St. PETERS Patrimony. Hes Parents , who were more 

lon; of the good of his Soul than obſervant of the Propenſion of 
bis Genius, dedicated bim (according to the Dewvotron of that Coun - 

'ry) to the Service of the Church ; and entered him iuto the F lou- 

ſin Order of Black- Friers', called from ihe place Moncks 
f Monte Caiino, and from the Founder Benedictines. Na- 

"re, that She might conſummaie the Profuſioa of her Fa- 

 VWars upon him . ſent Dim into the |i'orid in an Age that was ſo 

emnobled an1 Muwiaatrd with Eminent Scholars in all Kials of 

p ature, that hardly any Centary ſince the Creation can boaſt 


h like. 


1F8, 


An Account Or 


64. In particular, the SCIENCES MATHEMAT{j. 
C AL had then got that Fame and Efteem in the Learned }4r14 
that all men of Spirit or Quality became either Students jy , * 
Patrons of thoſe Sublime K nowledges. On this occaſton the Cyrj. 
oſity of ow AUTHOUR being awakened , bis Alive Wit 
rould not endure to be any longer confined to the Slawviſh Tuition 
of Hermetical Pedagogues ; but in concurrence with the Genjyg 
of the Age , be alſo betook himſelf to thoſe moſt Generous ang 
Liberal Studies. His helps in this his deſign were ſo many, and 
ſo extraordinary , that had bis Inclination been weaker ,' 5+ hi 
Apprehenſuon l:ſſer , be could hardly hawe failed attaining more 
than a Common Eminency in theſe Sciences. For beſides the De. 
luge of Learned and Uſeful Books , which the Preſſe at that 
time jent forth from all parts of EURO.PE , be bad the good 
Fortune to fall into the Acquaintance , and under the Inſtrucion 
of the moſt Demonſtrative aud moſt Familiar Man an the World, 
the Famous GALILEO : whoſe ſucceſſe being no leſſe upon 
this bis Fupil than upon the reſt of theſe Illuſtrions and Ingenz- 
ous Perſons that reſorted from all parts te ſit under bis Admi- | 
rable Lectures, hein a ſhort time attained to that Name in the | 
Mathematicks, that he was invitedto ROME ,, Complemen- 
ted, and Preferred by his then Holineſſe the Eighth URBAN, 
apon his wery firſt Acceſſion to the Papacy , which was in the 
Tear 1623. | 

d. This Pope being moved with a Paternal Prowidence for the 
Concerns of his Subjects in that part of ITALY about BO- 
LOGNA, FERRARA, and COMMACHTO, hb. ? 
ing between the Rivers of PO and RENO, which is part of | 
Lo Stato della Chieſa , or the Church Patrimony , appoints thi 
our CASTELLI #n theTear 1625 , to accompany the Kight | 
Honourable Monlignore CG ORSINI (a moſt obſervant and | 
intelligent perſon in theſe aff aires , and at that time Superinten- | 
dent of the General Draines , and Preſident of ROMAGN A) 3 
in the Grand Viſitation which he was then ordered to make con- | 
cerning the diſorders occaſioned by the I aters of thoſe parts. : 

d. CASTELLI, having now an Opp ortunity to employ, | 
yea more, to improve ſuch Notions as be had imbued from the * 
Lectures of his Excellent MASTER, falls to bs work witb : 
all induſtry : and in the time that bis Occaſions detained him in © 
ROMAGNA he perfeGed the Firſt Book of this bis Dij- | 
courſe concerning the Menſuration of Running Waters. He con- L 
felſeth that he had ſome years before applyed himpelf to this part Y! 
of Practical Geometry , and from ſeveral Obſervations collected b] 
part of that Dofrine which at this time be put into Method , an# |} 
which had procured him the Repute of ſo much Skill that he began | 


to 


Tus AuTnOuR AnoDd Work, 


10 be Courted by ſundry Princes , and great Prelates. In particu- 
[ir abont the beginning of the Tear 1623. and before bjs Inwita- 
tionto ROME he was employed by Prince Ferdinando I, Grand 
Puke of TUS C ANY , to remedy the Diſorders which at that 
time happened in the Valley of PISA in the Meadows that lye 
upon the Banks of Serchio and Fiume Morto : and in the pre- 
ſence of the Grand Duke, Grand Dutcheſſe Mother , the Commiſ- 
oners of Sewers , and ſundry other Perſons in a few hours he 
made ſo great a progreſſe in that affair , as gave his Moſt Serene 
Highneſſe high ſatisfaGtion, and gained himſelf much Honour. 

hq. No ſooner bad he in bis fore-mentioned Vorage to R O- 
MAGNA (which was but few Moneths after , inthe ſame 
Tear) committed his Conceptions to paper, but he communicated 
them to certain of bis Friends, In which number we finde Signo- 
re Ciampoli Secretary of the Popes Private Aﬀaires ; whom in 
the beginning of the Firſt Book he gratefully acknowledgeth to 
have been contributary, in his Purſc , towards defraying the 
charge of Experiments, and in bis Perſon, towards the debating 
and compleating of Arguments upon this SubjeG. Some few years 
ifter the Importunity of Friends, and the Leal be had for the 
Publique Good prevailed with him to preſent the World with bis 
Firſt Diſcourſe, accompanied with a Treatiſe of the Geometrical 
Demonſtrations of his whole Do@Grine. What Reception it found 
vith the Fudicious muſt needs be imagined by any one that hath 
obſerved bow Novelty and Facility in conjunction with Verity 
ncke a Charm of irreſiſtable Operation. 

h, New it was, for that no man before him bad ever attemp- 
ied to Demonſtrate all the three Dimenſions, to wit, the Length, 
Breadth and Profundity , of this Fluid and Curreat Ele- 
ment. And he deteGteth ſuch groſſe Errours in thoſe few that 
bad untertook to write upon the Subject ( of which he inſtan- 
ceth in Frontinus and Fontana , as thoſe that include the ret 
and delivereth ſuch ſingular and unbeard-of Paradoxes (for ſo 
they ſound in Vulgar Eares) as cannot but procure unſpeakable 
delight to bjs Reader. 

4. Eaſle it is lrkewiſe and True; and that upon ſo Familiar 
Experiments and Manifeſt Demonſtrations , that I have oft que- 
ſftioned with my ſelf which merited the greater wonder , he, for 
diſcovering , or all men that handled the Argument before hint 
for not diſcovering a DoGrine of ſuch ftrange Facility and Infal- 
libility. But yet as if our Authour deſigned to oblige the whole 
World to him by ſo excellent a Preſent, be elects a SubjeG& that 
he knew would be carreſſed by all perſons of Nobler Souls, uport 
the accounts afore-named , and by all Mankind in General, as 


gratifying them in their much adored Idol Utility, And to ren- 
der 


An Account Os 


der his Art the more profitable, he reduceth the lofty, and eaſie-to. 
be-miſtaken Speculations of the Theory, into certain and facule 
DircHions for PraGtice;, teaching us how to prevent and repaire 
the Breaches of Seas , and Inundations of Rivers; to drain, 
and recover Fenns and Marches ; to divert, conveigh and (;. 
ſtribute Waters for the Flowing and Stcrcoration of Ground, 
ſtrengthening of Fortifications , ſerving of Aquadudis , preſer- 
ving of Health ( by cleanſing Streets, and ſcowring Sewers ) and 
maintaining of Commerſe ( by defending Bridges , cleering Ri- 
vers , and opening Porcs and Channels) with innumerable other 
Benefits of the like nature. And, that | may omit no circumſtance 
that may recommend my Authour , the Fortune of this bis Treq- 
tiſe bath been ſuch , that as if be intended a Plus ultra by it, 
or as if all men deſpaired to out-dot , or laſtly, as if C A- 
S'] El, LI hath been ſo great & Maſter that none bave preſu- 
med to take Pencil in hand for the finiſhing of what be Four- 
toild , this ſmall Tra&i like the Arabian Phiwnix (of which it 5s 
faid Unica ſemper Avis) did for ſeveral years together continne 
fingle in the World , till that to werifee it to be truly Phaenician, 
it renewed its Age by undergoing a ſecond Impreſſion. And as if 
this did not make out the Immortal wertue of it , it bath bad 
Anno 1660 a third Circulation, and riſen in this laſt Edition as 
it were from the Urne of its_Authour ' and that ſo improved by 
the Addition of a ſecond part , that it promiſeth to perpetuate 
his Merits to all Poſterity. To be brief , the meer Fame of this 
i/ ork reſounded the Honourable Name of CASTELLIw 
to all the Corners of Italy , 1 may ſay of Euiope inſomuch, 
that, in hopes to reap great benefit by bis Art , the reſpeChive 
Grandees of the adjacent Countries courted his Judgment and 
Adwice about their Draining of Fenns. , iverſion of Rivers, 
Evacuation of Ports, Preventing of Inundations, @c. So that 
every Summer he made one or more ot theſ e Journies or Vifttatt- 
ons. Particularly, the Senate of Venice conjulted him about their 
Lake; to whom be delivered hzs Opinion in May 1641. and up- 
on farther thoughts he preſented them with another Paper of Con- 
ſiderations the 20 December following. Prince LL OPOLDO 
of TUSCANY likewiſe requeſte! his Advice in the begin- 
ning of the enſuing year 1642, wr: occaſivned bis Letter 1» 
Father Francelco di San Giuſeppe , bearing date February 1; 
To which Signore Bartolotti eppoſirg , be writes a ſecond Let- 
ier , directed to one of the Commuſitoners of Sewers , windiating 
bis former, and refuting Bartolo:t1t, both which I bere give 

JOHh. | 
d. The Preferments which his \icrits recom menaed bim urlo, 
were firſt to be Abbot of Caſhino {rot which be was removed 
| Anno 


1ut AuThoOurR And Work, 


Anno 1640, 07 thereabouts, unto the Abbey of Santo Benedet- 
4 Aloylſio - and much about the ſ ame time preferred to the Dig- 
nity of Chief Mathematician to bs grand Patron Pope URBAN 
VIIL and Pabliquc Profeſſour of Mathematicks in the Uni- 
verſity of R O ME. 

$. Here a Stop was put to the Carier of his Fortun:s and be- 
ng fuller of Honour than of Tears, was by Death, the Importu- 
nate Intrernupter of Generous Deſigns, prevented in doing that 
farther Good which the World had good reaſon 10 promiſe it ſelf 
from ſo Profound and Induſirious a Perſonage , leaving many 
Friends and Diſciples of all Degrees and Q nalities to lament 
his loſſe , and honour bis Memory. 

z. His fengular Virtues and Abilities had gained him the 
Friendſhip of wery many 3 as to inſtance in ſome , he had con- 
traFed ſtrict Amity with Monſignore Maffei Barberino a Floren- 
tine, Prafett of the Publique Wayes, and afterwards Pope with 
the Name of URBAN VIIL. as was ſaid before ; with the 
chove-named Monſignore Corſini Superintendant of the General 
Draines : with Monſignore Piccolomini Arch-Biſhop of Siena : 
with Cardinal Serra : with Cardinal Caponi, who bath ftudied 
much and writ well upon this Subject; and with Cardinal Gae- 
tano who frequently conſulted with bim in hs deſagn of” Drain- 
mg the Feuns of RO MAGN A. Moreover Pririce L FE O- 
?O0LDO, and bis Brother the Grand Duke had very great 
lindneſſe for bim; which ſpeaks no ſmall attractions in bim , 
unſudering bim as @ favourite of the Famtily of Barberini , be- 
ween whom and the Houſe of Medeci hers is an itveterate 
Fewd. Among ſt perſons of a lower Quality be acknowledgeth 
ignore Ciampoli the Popes Secretary , Sig. Ferrante Cefarini, 
ig. Giovanni Baſadoina Senator of Venice ; and I find menti- 
med Sig. Lana , Sig. Albano , Padre Serafino , Pad. Franceſco 
& Saf, Giuſeppe, and many others. 

v. The Works in which he will ſurvive to all ſucceeding Ages 
re firſt His ſolid and ſober Confutation of the Arguments of 
ignore Lodovico dell Columbo , and Signore Vincentio di 
Gratia egarnſt the Traf of Galileo Delle cofe che ftanno ſopra 
Aqua, wherein he vindicates bis ſaid Maſter with 4 Gratitude 
that Tutors very rarely reap from the pains they take in Culti- 
vating their Pupils. This Apology was farſt Printed Anno 16 5. 
ad was a ſecond time publiſhed , as alſo thoſe of his Antagg- 
Nl fs, amongſt the Works of GALILEO, ſet forth by the 
Y Learned Viviani 1656. He bath likewiſe writ. ſeveral other 
} ious Pieces, as I am informed by the moſt Conrteous Carolo 
Y Manolegi of Bologna ; amongſt others an excellent Treatiſe 
} Prerning Colours, which he putteth me in hopes to ſee printed 
very 


(a)N-i!a continu- 
a'jone dill Nun- 
to h1d:110, 


(6) L-rthra ol DP, 
Abba: ID. ÞB. Co. 
elit 1>*Arcertro ; 
li 2. Deccemb, 


IC 9, 


An Account Or 
wvery ſpeedily. And laſt of all theſe Diſcourſes and Refle;ons 


upon the Menſuration of Running Waters, with the addition , 
a Second Book , three Epiſtles, and four Conſiderations upon 
the ſame Argument , which conduce much to Illuſtrate js Do- 
Girine and Facilitate the Practice of it ; and which with a Rel. 
tion of Monſiguore Coylint , make the ſecond part of my Firſt 
Tome. 

d. I might here ſally forth into the Citation of ſundry Ay. 
thours of Good Account , that bave tranſmitted his Charger 
to Poſterity , but ſhall confine my ſelf to onely two, the one is 
of bis Maſter , the other of his Scholar 3 than whom there can- 
not be two more competent Tudges of his Accompliſhments. Ty 
begin with his Maſter, the Quick-ſighted , and truly Lyncean 
GALILEO, who ſpeaking of bis Abilities in Aſtronomy ſaith 
(4) Che la tclicica del ſuo ingegno non la fa bilognola dell' 9- 
pera fuo. And again, ſubmitting a certain Demonſtration, 
which he intended to divulge, to the Judgment of this our Abbot, be 
writes to him inthis manner : (b) Queſto lo comunico a V. S. 
per Icttera prima, che ad alcun altro, con attenderne principal- 
mente 1] parer ſuo , e doppo quello de noſtri Amici diſcoſti, 
conpentiero d' inviarne poi altre Copie ad altri Amici d lralia, 
c di Francia, quando 1o ne venga da ]ci confiyliato : e qui pre- 
gandola a farci parte d alcuna delle ſue peregrine {peculationt; 
con {inceriflimo affetto, &c. And the moſt acute Mathematician 
Signore Evangeliſta Terricelli , late Profeſſour to the Grand 
Duke in immediate Succeſſion after GALILEO), makethibs 


- Honourable and Grateful Mention of him, and his Book : (c) O- 


' micto magnum illum qutantis Maris motum; Prztcreo etiam 


omncem Fluminum , Aquarumque Currentium tum menſurum, 
tum ulum , quarum omnis doctrina reperta primum fuit ab 
Abbate BHNEDICTO CASTELLIO Preceptore 
meo. Scripſicille Scientiam luam, & illam non ſolum demopſtra- 
tione , verum etiam opcre confirmavit , maxima cum Princi- | 
pum & populorum utilitate , mazore cum admiratione Phylo- 

{ophorum. Extart illus Liber , vere aureus. 
$. 1 bave onely two particulars more to offer the Engliſh Rea- 
der : The one concerns the Book, and it is this , That after the | 
general Aprobation it bath had in Italy , Icarinot but think it | 
deſerveth the ſame Civil Entertainment with us , inregardibat | 
it cometh with no leſſe Novelty, Facility , Verity, and Urility to Þ 
us than to thoſe whom the Autbour favoured with the Origimal. | 
Our Kivers and Sewers through Publique Diftra&ions and Pri- | 
wate Incroachments are in great diſorder , as thoſe Channels for Þ 
ruftance which formerly were Navigable unto the very mou el ; 
or 


- on ed 3 RS. RARE SF RIA» 


Tue AuThOUR And Work, 


\ ork an Salisbury Fc : Our Ports are choaked and obſtructed 
by Shelfes and Setlements : Our Fennsdo in a great part lie waſte 
ind unimproved : Now all theſe may be (and, as | fiud by the 
Confe ſion of ſome whoſe Practiſes upon the Copy of the Firſt 
Book onely of our Aut bour bath got them both Money and Repu- 
tion, in part have been) remedied by the Ways and Means he 
cre ſets down, The truth is the Argument hath been paſt over 
with an Univerſal Silence; ſo that to this day I bawe not ſeen 
ny thing that hath been written Demonſtratively and with Ma- 
thematical Certainty concerning the ſame , ſave onely what this 
Learned Prelate hath delivered of his Own Invention in theſe 
Treatiſes : who yet bath ſo fully and plainly bandled the Whole © 
Po$rime, that I may affirm his Work to be every way abſolute. It 
;1"ſt be confeſt the Demonſtration of the Second Propoſition of the 
Sond Book did not well pleaſe the Authour , and had he lived 
i world have ſupplyed that defef , but being prevented by 
ſeath , the Reader muſt content himſelf with the Mechanical 
Proof that he giveth you of the truth of ſo Excellent a Con- 
cluſron, | 

: The other particular that I am to offer is, that out of my de- 
re to contribute what lyeth in me tothe compleating of this Piere 
for Engliſh PraGlice , I hawe exeeded my promiſe not onely in gi- 
reng you the Second and following Books which were not extant at 
the time of tendring my Overtures , but alſo in that I have added 


i Map or Plat of all the Rivers, Lakes, Fenns, &vc. mentioned 
torowout the Work, And if I bhawe not kept touch in point of 
lime , let it be conſidered that I am the. Tranſlator and not the 
Printer, To conclude, according to your acceptance of theſe my 
endeavours , you may expe& ſome other Tratis of noleſſe Proft 
ud Delight. Farewell. 


Ti 3s 


FRRATA of the ſecond Parr of the firſ® TOME. 


In Pxeracr , rcad Ferdirando 11, ibid. Agua, oO 

Pacr 2, Lixz 26, for muſt read much. P.3.1.22,r.andlet.1.25.r.water,from 1, 41, # 
7, Tappe, { 4s every where elſe ). Page 4.1.18.r cords, Page8.1.9.r. acquire,or, 
Page g.1-1. r. irreperable. P.1o.l.1 3-7. diſhmboguementr. For Page 19.,P. 15, | 
P.15.1.27,7.in.1.36,7.isas. 1.38,7. Panaro. P.17.1.12 Giultes, 1. 17.7, Meaſurers.|, 
25,7.n.ca(ured it,.,r.neceſſarily. P.23.1.19. r.tor help. for Page 31.r.P.32.P. 24, | 
| 14,7.10, 1.17,7.namly,of the, 1.2 3,r,cafic. P.25.1.38.7.Cock.p.29.1,7.r.laſted,, 
P-31.1.32:r7.Soc.p.41.1.20.7.to the line.p.q8.1.19.7.us the *. id. Figure falſe p, 52, 
1.30, and 31, for Theorem r.Propoſition, p.5 3.1. 29.7.again. p.57-l.19, r.lameif, 
1.44.7.bodily. p.z $.1.9,7.gathering.1.40.omit;. p.60.1.2, omit , it. p« 65.1. 1.,.tide 
dele;. p.66 .1.35. r. Stoppage of. p.68.1.12, for Lords ther, Lords. 1.uls. forthey 
r.it. p.69.l. 14.7.t0 one-:d. carried dele to. p.71.1.20,7,and that. 1.25 ,7.Braces,it,], 
29.1.Braces.1.94,r thc Brext. p.7 2.1.23.7.Serene Highnefe.p.73-1.24r.dcliberation:, 
1.26for ſummer, Moddei.1.40.7.Months. p.79.1.18.,,that into.p.82.l.22.de{; p. 
$5.1.9,10.,de/ a free drame. p. 88.1.5.r.Palmes.p.$9.1.8.r.Princes.p.92.l.3,,Dil- 
courſes. p.93.1.31.7,Tautologie. p.94-1.9.7.miracle;, p.97.1. 13.7, weighty. p.tol, 
L.21.,.Marrara.p 107.1.28,7.Patrimony.l.40,r.above.p. 111.1, 16.r.ſa1d, For P.432, 
7.Þ.114- P.114-1.35.7.0t 200,1.41.r.cloled. p.115.1.29,7.conſtant;, 


<. 
ay A "A / 7 
En LY 


- y 
"* -. a” + 


OF THE 


MENSURA IION 


Running Waters: 


LIB. I. 


Hat, and of how great moment the conſi- 
deration of Motzon is in narural things, 
1s {ſo manifeſt, that the Prince of Per;- 
pateticks pronounced that in his Schools 
now much uſed Sentence : Ignorato no» 
In, wgnoratur natura. Thence it is that 
true Philoſophers have ſo travailed in the 
contemplation of the Celeſtial motions, 
and 1n the ſpeculation of the motions of 

Y Animals, that they have arcived to a wonderful height and fub- 

Y linity of underſtanding. Under the fame Science of Motron 

FY + comprehended all that which is written by Mechanitians con- 

Y cerning Engines moving of thethſelves , Machins moving by the 

'Y force of Air, and thoſe which ſerve ro move weights and im- 

'Y menſe magnitudes with ſmall force. There appertatneth to che 

Science of Motion all that which hath been written of the 

alteration riot onely of Bodies , but of our Minds allo; and 

n ſum, this ample matter of Motion is ſo extended and di- 

ated , that there are few things which fall under mans no- 

tice , which are not conjoyned with Motion , or at leaſt de- 
pending thereupon , or to the knowledge thereof direQted ; 
and of almoſt every of them, there hath been . written and 
compoſed by ſublime wits , learned Treatifes and InfttaQions. 
Bbbb And 


—_ 


_—_ — 


Of the MEnSURAT 10x Lih 


And becauſe that inthe years paſt 1 had occaſion by Order of 
our Lord Pope Urban 8. to apply my thoughts to the motion of 
the Waters of Rivers, (a matter ditficult, moſt important, and 
lircle handled by others) having concerning the ſame obſerved 
ſome particulars not well obſerved, or conſidered till now. but of 
great moment both in publick and private affairs; I have thought 
good to publiſh them, to the end that ingenious ſpirits might 
have occaſion to diſcuſle more exactly then hitherto hath been 
done, ſo neceſſary and profitable a matrer, and to ſupply alſo my 
defefs in this ſhort and difficult Tractate... Dithculr I ſay, for 
the truth is, theſe knowledges, though of things next our lenſes, 
are ſometimes more abſtruce and hidden, then the knowledge of 
things more remote 3 and much better, and with greater exquilit- 
nels are known the motions of the Planets , and Periods of the 
Stars, than thoſe of Rivers and Seas: As that fingular light of 
Philolophie of our times, and my Maſter S$7gnore Galtleo Galilet 


| wilely obſerveth in his Book concerning the Solar ſpots. Ayd 


to procecd with a due order 1n Sciences, I will take ſome ſuppo- 
ſions and cognitions ſufficiently clear ; from which I will after- 
wards proceed to the deducing of the principal concluſions. But 
to the end that what I have written at the end of this dilcourſe in 
a demonſtrative and Geometrical method , may alſo be under- 
ſtood of tholc which never haye appiyed their thoughts to the 
ſtudy of Geometry ; I hav e endeavoured to explain my conceit 
by an example, and with the coniideration of the natural things 
them(clves, muſt after the fame order in which I began to doubt 
in this matter ; and have placed this particular Treatiſe here in 
the beginuing 3 adverting nevertheleſs, that he who deſires more 
full and abſolute folidity of Realons, may overpals this prefatory 
diſcourſc,and onely conſider what 1s treated of in the demonſtra- 
tions placed towards the end,and return afrerwards to the confi- 
deration of the things collected in the Corollaries and Appendices 
which demonſtrarions notwithſtanding, may. be preterinitted by 
him that; hath not lcen at leaſt the firſt fix Books of the Elements 
of Euclid; ſo that he diligently oblervech that which fol- 
loweth. | __ 

I ſay theretore , rhat having in times paſt , on divers occaſi- 
ons heard ſpeak of the mealures of the. waters of Riyers , and 
Fountains, ſaying, ſuch a River is two or.three thouſand teet of 
water ; fuch a {pring-water is twenty, thirty, or forty inches, @c. 
Although in ſ.ch manner I have found all to treat thereof in 
word and writing, without varicty , and as we are Wont to lay, 
conſtanti ſermone, yea even Artiſts and Ingeneers, as if it were 
a thiug ihat admitted not of any doubt., yet howloever I rc- 
majned ſtill utolded in ſuch an obſcurity , that I well knew Tun: 
ES. aa dcrſtood 


Li 
* 


Lib. '. Of Ruxxing W arttas, 


derſtood nothing at all, of that which others pretended full and 
clearly tro underſtand. And my doubt aroſe from my frequent 
obſervation of many Trenches and Channels, which carry 
water to turn Mills, 1n which Trenches, and Channels, the 
water bcing mcalured, was found pretty deep ; bur if afterwards 
the fame water was mealured in the fall it made to turn the 
\Whecel of the Mill, it was much lefle, not amounting often to the 
tench part , nor lometimes to the rwentieth, inſomuch , that the 
ſamc running water came to be one while more, another while leſs 
in meaſure,in divers parts of its Channel; and for that reaſon this 
vulgar manner of mcaſuring running Waters,as indeterminate and 
uncertain, was by me jultly juſpected, the meaſure being to be de- 
terminate, and the fame. And here l freely contefle that 1 had fin 

gular help ro reſolve this difficulty from the excellent & accurate 
way of dilcourſing , as in allother matters, ſo allo in this, of the 
Riyht Honourable and Truly Novle Signior C:ampoli,Secretary 
of the Popes ſecret affairs. Who moteover,riot ſparing ſor the coſts 
of the ſame, generouſly gave me occafion a few years paſt to try by 
exa&t experiments that which paſt concerning this particular. And 
to explain all more clearly with an example 3 we ſuppole a Veſſel 
filled with W ater, as for inſtance a Butt, whichis kept full, though 
ſtill water runneth out, and the Water run out by two Taps equal 
of bignef{e, one put in the bottom of the Veſlel , and che other in 

the upper part 3 it is manifeſt that in the time wherein from the 
upper part ſhall iflue a determinate meaſure of water ſrom 
the inferiour part there ſhall iſſue four, five, and many more of 
the ſame mcalures , according to the difference of the height of 
the Taps , and the diſtance of the upper Tap from the Superficj- 
es and [level of the water of the Veſſel : and all this will alwayes 
follow , though, as harh been {ajd, the Taps be equal , and the 
water in dilcharging keep the {aid Taps alwayes full. Where firſt 
we note, that, although the mcaſure of the Taps be equal, never- 
thelefſe there ifſucth trom them in equal times unequal quantities 
of water, Andif we ſhould more attentively conſider this buſi- 
neſſe, we ſhould find, that the water by the lower Tap , run- 
neth and paſlſeth with much greater velocity , then it doth by the 
upper , whatever is the reaſon. If thereiore we would have 
luch a quantity of Water diſcharge from the upper tap , as 
would diſcharge from the neather in the ſame time, it 1s plain, that 
either the upper Taps muſt be multiplyed in ſuch ſort, that fo 
many more Taps in number be placed above than below, as the 
neather tap ſhall be more {wift than the upper, or the upper Tap 
made {o much bigger than the nether, by how much that be- 
neath ſhall be more (wift than that above 3 and fo then in equal 
times,the ſame quantity of Water ſhall diſcharge from the upper 

as doth fromth e neather parc. Bbbb 4 f 


Of the MEnSURATION Lib.1 


I will declare my ſelf by another cxample. If we ſhould ima. 


pine, that two cords or lincs of equal thickne(s, be drawn thro 
two holes of equal bore ; but ſo that the firſt pals with quadruple 
velocity to the ſecond : It is manifeſt, that if in a determinate 
time, we ſhall by the firſt bore have drawn four Ells of the line, 
in the ſame time, by the ſecond hole we ſhall have drawn but on« 
Ell of cord onely 3 and if by the firſt there paſſe twelve Ells,then 
through the ſecond there ſhall paſſe onely three Ells ; and jn 
ſhort the quanrity of cord ſhall have the lame proportion to the 
cord, that the volocity hath to the velocity. And therefore we 
deſiring to compenſate the tardity of the lecond cord, and main. 
taining the {ame tardity to draw through the {econd hole as much 
cord as through the firſt, it will be neceflary to draw through the 
ſccond bore tour ends of cord ; ſo that the thickneſs of all the 
cords by the ſecond hole, have the lame proportion to the thick. 
neſs of the cord which paſleth onely by the tirſt, as the velocity 
of the cord by the tirſt hole barh reciprocally to the velocity of 
the cod s by the ſecond hole. And thus ics clear, that when 
there is drawa through two holes equal quantity of cords in 
equal time, but with unequal velocity, it will be neceſſary, that 
the thickneſs of all the four cords ſhall have the ſame reciprocal 
proportion to the thickneis of the {wifrer cord , that the vclo- 
cicy of the ſwifter cord hath to the velocity of the flower. The 
which is verified likewiſe in the fluid Element of Water, 

And to the end that this principal tundamental be well unde. 
ſtood, 1 will alſo note a certain obſervation made my me in the 
Art of Wyer-drawing, or {pinning Gold, Silver, Braſs, and Iron, 
and it is this ; That ſuch Artificers defiring more and more tg 
diſgrotle and ſubrillize the ſaid Metals, having wound about a 
Kocker or Barrel , the thread of che Metal, they place the Roc- 
ket in a frame upon a ſtedtaſt Axis, in tuch fort that the Rocket 
may turn about init (elf; then making one end of the thread to 
paſle by force through a Plate of Steel pierced with divers holes, 
greater and Jefler, as need requireth, faſtning the ſame end of the 
thread to another Rocket, they wind up the thread, which paſ- 
ſing through a bore leſs than the thickneſle of the thread, 1s of 
force conſtrained to diſgrofſe and ſubtillize. Now that which js 
intenſly to be obſerved in this buſineſs, is this, That the parts of 
the thread before the hole, are of ſuch a thickneſſe, but the parts 
of the ſame thread after it is paſled the hole, are of a leſſer thick- 
nefſe : and yet nevertheleſſe the maſſe and weight of the thread 
which is drawn forth, is ever equal to the maſſe and weight of the 
thread which is winded up.But if we ſhould well conſider the mat- 
ter, we ſhould finde,that the thicker the thread before the hole is, 

than the thread paſſed the hole, the greater reciprocally is the 


velocity 


ugh 


Lib.t Of RuxxinoG Wartks. 
vclocity of the paits of the thread paſſed the hole, than the volo- 
city of the parts b-fore the hole : Infomuch that if verb gratia 
the thickneſle of the thread betore the hole, were double to the 
thicknefle after the hole, in ſuch caſe the velocity of the parts of 
the thread patled the hole, ſhould be double to the velocity of the 
parts of the thread before the hole; and thus the thickneſſe 
compentates the velocity, and the velocity compentares the thick- 
nelſe. So that the ſame occurreth in the folid Metals of Gold, 
Silver, Braſs, Iron, &c. that eveneth alſo in the fluid Element of 
Water, and other liquids, namely, Thar the velocity beareth the 
ſame proportion to the velocity, that che thickneſlſe of the Me- 
tal, or Water, hath to the thicknefle. : 

And thercfore granting this diſcourſe, we may fay, that as of- 
ten aztwo Taps with different velocity diſcharge equal quanti- 
ties of Water in equal times, it will be neceſſary that the Tap 
Icfſe {witt be fo much greater, and larger, than the Tap more 
ſwift, by how much the (witter ſuperates 1n velocity the flower ; 
and to pronounce the Propoſition in more proper terms, we ſay; 
That if rwo Taps of uncqual velocity , diſcharge in equal times 
equal quantities of Water, the greatneſle of the firſt ſhall be to 
the greatnefle of rhe ſecond, in reciprocal proportion, as the ve- 
lociry of the ſecond ro the velocity of the firſt. As for example, 
if the firſt Tap ſhall be ten times {wifter than the {ſecond Tap, it 
will be neceflary, that the ſecond be ten times bigger and larger 
than the firſt ; and in ſuch caſe the Taps thall diſcharge equall 
quantities of water 1n equal times; and this is the principal and 
moſt important point, which ought to be kept alwayes in minde, 
for that on it well underſtood depend many things profitable, 
and worthy of our knowledge. 

Now applying all that hath been ſaid neerer to our purpoſe, I 
conlider, that it being moſt true, that in divers parts of che ſame 
River or Current of running water, there doth always paſſe equal 
quantity of Water in equal time (which thing is allo demon- 
ftrated in our firſt Propoſition) and it being alſo true, that in di- 
vers parts the ſame River may have various and different veloci- 
ty; it follows of neceſſary conlequence, that where the River 
bath lefſe velocity, it ſhall be of greater meaſure, and in thoſe 
parts, in which it hath greater velocity, it ſhall be of leffſe mea- 
lure; and in fum, the velocity of {cveral parts of the ſaid River, 
ſhall have eternally reciprocall and like proportion with 
their meaſures. This principle and fundamental well eſtabliſh- 
ed, that the ſame Current of Water changeth meaſure, accor- 
ding to its varying of velocity ; that is, lefſening the meaſure, 
when the velocity encreaſerh, and encreaſing the meaſure, when 
the velocity decreaſcth; I paſſe to the conſideration of many 

par- 


of the MEnSuURAaTION Lt.x 


patticular accidents in this admirable matter, and all depending 
on this ſole Propoſition, the {ſenſe of which 1 have oft repeated 
that it might be well underſtood. ; 


COROLLARKIE I 


Nd firſt , we hence conclude, that the ſame Streams of ; 

Torrent, namely,thole ſtreams which carry equal qua nity of 
Water in equal times, make not the lame depths or meaſures in 
the River, in which they enter, unlefle when in the entrance in- 
ro the River they acquire 3 or to ſay better, keep the ſame yelo- 
city 3 becauſe it the velocicitics acquired in the River ſhall be 
different, allo the meaſures ſhall be diverle ; and conſequently 
the depths, as is demonſtrated. 


COROLLARIE Il. 


' A Nd becauſe ſucceſſively, as the River is more and more full, 

it is conſtituted ordinarily in greater & greater velocity :hence 
It 15 that the ſame ſtreams of the Torrent, that enter into the Ri- 
ver, make lefſe and lefle depths, as the River grows more and 
more full ; ſince that alfo the Waters of the Torrent being en- 
tered into the River, go acquiring greater and greater velocities, 
and therefore diminiſh in meaſure and height. 


COROLLARKIE 1II. 


| E obſcrve alſo, that while the main River is ſhallow, if there 
fall but a gentle rain,it ſuddenly much increaſeth and riſeth; 
but when the River is already ſwelled, though there fall again a- 
nother new violent ſhower, yet it increaleth not at the ſame rate 
as before, proportionably to the rain which fell : which thin 
we may affirm particularly to depend on this, that in the fr 
caſe, while the River is low, it is found allo very ſlow, and there» 
fore the little water which entereth into ir, paſſeth and runs with 
little velocity, and conſequently occupieth a great meaſure : 
But when the River is once augmented, by new water being alſo 
made more ſwift, it cauſeth the great Flood of water which fal- 
[cth, to bear a lefſe meaſure, and not to make ſuch a depth. 


COROLLARIE IV. 


Þ Rom the things demonſtrated is manifeſt alſo, that whilſt a 
® Torrent entereth into a River, at the time of Ebbe, then the 
Torrent moveth with ſuch a certain velocity, what cver it be, 


paſſing 


Lib.x: Of RunninoG Warttsks. 


paſſing by its extrcameſt parts, wherewith it communicateth with 
he River ; in which parts, the Torrent being meaſured, ſhall 
have ſuch a certain mcalure : but the River (welling and riſing, 
alſo thoſe parts of the Torrent augment 1n greatnefſe and mea« 
ſure, though the Torrent, in that 1nſtant, dil-imbogue no more 
water than it did before : fo that the River being (welled, we 
are to conſider two mouths of the ſame Torrent, one lefſe be- 
fore the riling, the other greater afrer the riſing, which mouths 
diſcharge equal quantities of water in equal times 3 therefore the 
velocity by the lefler mouth ſhall be greater than the velocity by 


the greater mouth ; and thus tlie Torrent ſhall be rctarded from 
its ordinary courle. 


COROLLARIE V. 


PRom which operation of Nature proccedeth another effe& 

worthy of conlidcration; and it 1s, that the courſe of the water 
retarding, as hath been faid in thole ultimate parts of the Tor- 
rent, if it ſhall happen that the Torrent grow torbid and mud- 
dy, and its ſtreame be retarded in ſuch a degree, that it is not 
able to carry away thoſe minute grains of Earth , which com- 
pole the muddineſle ; in this caſe the Torrent ſhall clear away 
the mud, and carry away the Sand at the bottome of its own 


Chanel, in the extream parts of its mouth, which raiſed and 
voided Sand, ſhall again afterwards be carried away, when the 


River abating) the Torrent ſhall return to move withits primitive 
velocity. 


COROLLARIE vVy. 


Hilſt it is demonſtrated , that the ſame water hath different 
meaſures in its Chanel or courſe, according as it varieth in 
velocity;ſo that the meaſure of the watet is alwayes greater, where 
the velocity is leſſer ; and on the contrary, the meaſure lefler, 
where the velocity is greater : from hence we may moſt ele- 
gantly render the reaſon of the uſual Proverb, Take heed of the 
full waters : For that if we conſider the felt ſame water of a 
River in thoſe parts, wherein it 15 leſs Twift, and thence called ſtill 
or ſmooth watcr , it ſhall be, of neceſſity, of greater meaſure 
than in thoſe parts, in which it is more ſwift, and therefore ordi- 
nanily ſhall be alſo more deep and dangerous for paſſengers ; 
whence it is well ſaid, Take beed of the flill Waters; and this 
laying hath been ſince applicd to things moral. 


<< 


Of tbe MensuRaTloON, Lib. 
COROLLARIE VIL 


L Ikewiſe, from the things demonſtrated . may be concluded, 
that the windes,which ſtop a Kiver,and blowing againſt the 
Currenr, retard its courſe and ordinary velocity ſhall neceſſarily 
amplife the meaſure of the ſame River, and conſequently ſhall 
be, 11 great part, Cauſes 3 Of. WE Way lay, potent Con-caules of 
making the extraordinary inundations which Rivers uſe to make. 
Aud its moſt certain, that as often as a ſtrong and continual wing 
ſhall blow agaiuſt the Current of a River, and ſhall reduce the 
water of the River to ſuch raidiry of motion, that in the time 
wherein before it run five miles, it now moveth but one, ſuch a 
River will increaſe to tive times the meaſure, though there ſhould 
not be agded any other quanti: y of water; which thing indeed 
hath in it ſomething of ſtrange, out it 1s moſt certain, for that 
look what proportion the waters velocity betore the winde, hath 
to the velocity after the winde, and lueh reciprocally is the mea- 
ſure of the ſame water after the winde, to the meaſure before 
the winde ; and becauſe it hath been ſuppolcd in our caſe that the 
velocity is diminiſhed to a fifth part, therefore rhe meaſure ſhall 
be increaſed five times more than that, which it was before. 


COROLLARIE VIII. 


E have alſo probable the cauſe of the inundations of Tyber, 
VV which befel at Kome,in the time of Alexander the Sixth, & of 
Clement the Seventh ; which innundarions came 1n a ſerene time, 
and without great thaws of the Snows; which therefore much 
puzzled the wits of thoſe times. Bur we may with much pro- 
bability athrm, That the River role to ſuch a height and excre(- 
cence, by the retardation of the Waters dependant onthe 
boiſtrous and conſtant Winds, that blew in thoſe uimes, as is no- 


red ih the memorials. 


* 


COROLLAKIE. Ix. 


JT being moſt manifeſt, that by the great abundance of Water 

the Torrents rtiay increaſe,and of themſelves alone exorbitantly 
ſwell the River ; and having demonſtrated that alſo without new 
Water, bur onely by the notable retardment the River riſeth and 
increaſeth in meaſure, in proportion as the velocity deerealeth : 
hence it is apparent, that cach of theſe cauſes being able of it ſelf, 
and ſeparate from the other to ſwell the River 3 when it ſhall 
hapygen that both theſe two cauſes conſpire the augmentation s 

SO [ne 


bh a 
E 
© 
by 
£ 
C., 
| A 
We; 
IS 
| | 
ey 
4 


Lik.1, {© Of Running Wir rks. 


the River, in ſuch a caſe there muſt follow very great and irre- 
pablc innundations. 


COROLLARIE K. 


F Rom what hath been demonſtrated, we may with facility re- 
ſolve the doubt which hath troubled,and ſtill poſeth che moſt 
diligent » but incautelous oblervers of Rivers , who micaluriug 
the Streams and Torrents which fall into another Rivet ; as ii.o(e 
for inſtance,which enter into the Po, or thoſe which fall into [+:- 
ber; and having ſummed he rotal of thele meaſuses, and con- 
fecring the mealures ot th. Kivers and Brooks, which fall into 
Tiber, with the meaſure of ? /b2r, and the meaſures of thoſe which 
diſimbogue into Po,with th. meaſure of Po, they find them not 
equal, as, It leems to them, they ought to be, and this is becauſe 
they have not well noted the moſt important point of the varia- 
tion of velocity, and how that it 1s the moſt potent cauſe of won- 
derfully altering the meaſures of running Waters 3 but we moſt 
facilly reſolving the doubt, may ſay that theſe Waters diminiſh 
the meaſure, being once entered the principal Channel , becauſe 
they increale in velocity. 


COROLL ARIE XVI. 


Hrough the ignorance of the force of the velocity of the Wa- 
ter,in altering 1ts mealure,& augmenting it when the velocity 


diminiſhech ; and diminiſhing it when the velocity augmenteth : 


The Archite& Giovanni Fontana, endeavoured to meaſure, and 
and to cauſe to be mcaſured by his Nephew, all the Brooks and 
Rivers which diſcharged their Waters into Tiber , at the time of 
the Innundation ; which happened at Rome in the year t5g98, 
and pabliſhed a (mall Treatite thereof, wherein he lummerth up 
the meaſures of the extraordinary Water which fell into Tiber, 
and made account that it was about five hundred Ells more than 
ordinary ; and in the end of that Treatiſe concludeth, that to re- 
move the Innundation wholly from Rome, it would be neceflary 
to make two other Channels, equa] to. that at. preſent, and that 
lefle would not ſuffice ; and finding afterwards that the whole 
Stream paſſed under the Bridge Q #attro-Capi, (the Arch where- 
of is ofa far ]cls .mealure then five hundred Ells ) conctudeth, 
that under the (aid Bridge paſt a hundred fifty one Ells of Water 
compreſled, (1 have ſer down the precite term of compreſt Wa- 

ter, written by Fontana) wherein I finde many errors. | Y 
The firſt of which is to think that the meaſures of thele Wa- 
ffs compreſſed in the Channels of thoſe Brooks and Rivers, 
Gece ſhould 


IO 


Of the McenzuratION Lib.x, 


ſhould maintain themſelves the ſame in T ber, which by his leave, 


is moſt falſe, when ever thoſe waters reduced into Tiber , retain 
not the ſame velocity which they had in the place in which Fox. 
tana and his Nephew meaſured them: And all this js manifeſt 
from the things which we have above explained for, if the W.- 
ters teduced into Tiber increale ih velocity, they decreaſe in mea. 
ſure 3 and if they decreaſe 1n velocity, they increaſe in mea. 
ſure. or 

Secondly, I conſider that the meaſures of thoſe Brooks and 
Rivers, which enter into Tiber at the time of Innundation , are 
not between themlelves really the ſame, when their velocities are 
not equal , though they have the ſame names of Ells and Feet; 
for that its poſlible that a dilinboguement of ten Ells requadrated 
(to ſpeak in the phraſe of Fontana) of one of thole Brooks, 
might diſcharge into [ber at the time of Innundartion, tour, ten, 
and twenty times lets Water, than another mourh equal to the 
fiſt in greatneſs, as would occur when the firſt mouth were four, 
ten, or twenty times Jeſs {witt than the ſecond. Whereupon, 
whilſt Fontana ſummes up the Ells and Feet of the meaſures of 
thoſe Brooks and Rivers into a total aggregate , he commits the 
ſame error with him, which would add into one {umme diverſe 
moneys of diverle values, and diverſe places, but that had the 
ſame name 3; as if one ſhould {ay ten Crowns of Roman money, 
four Crowns of Gold, thirteen Crowns of F lorence, five Crowns 
of Venice, and eight Crowns of Mantua , ſhould make the ſame 
ſumme with forty Crowns of Gold, or forty Crowns of Mantna. 

Thirdly, It might happen that ſome River or Current in the 
parts nearer Rome, in the time of its flowing , did not ſend forth 
more Water than ordinary ; and however, its a thing very clear, 
chat whilſt the ſtream came from the ſupe1ior parts, that ſame 
Brook or River would be augmented in meaſure , as hath been 
noted in the fourth Corollary ; in ſuch ſort, that Fontane might 
have inculcated, and noted that ſame River or Current as con- 
curring to the Innundation, alrhough it were therein altogether 
unconcerned. 

Moreover, in the fourth place we muſt note, That it might 
{o fall out, that ſuch a River not onely was unintereſſed in the 
Innundation, though augmented in meaſure, but ir might 1 lay 
happen, that it was inſtrumental to the aflwaging the Innunda- 
tion, by augmenting in the meaſure of its own Channel ; which 
matter is {ufficiently evident ; for if it be ſuppoſed that the Rt- 
verin the time of tlood, had not had of ir ſelf, and from 1ts pro- 
per ſprings more Water than ordinary, its a thing certain, that 
the Water of Tiber riſing and increaſing ; allo that River, to le- 


vel it ſclf with the Water of Tiber, would have retained ſome of 
its 


Lib. t. Of Ruinino VVatruks. 


1s Waters in its own Chanel, without diſcharging them ints Ty- 
ber, or elſe would have ingorged and (wallowed (if I may ſo ay) 
ſome of the water of Tyber ; and in this caſe, at the time of Iti- 
1ndation» lefſe abundance of water would have come to Rome 


and yet neverthelefſe the meaſure of that River would have been 


increaſed. | | 

Fifthly, Fontana deceiveth himſelf, when he concludeth, that 
ro remove the Inundation from Rome, it would be neceſſary to 
make two other Chanels of Rivers, that were as large as that, 
which is the preſent one, and that leſs would not luffice, which, 
I ſay» is a fallacy : and to convince him ealily of his errour, It 
ſuficeth to ſay, that all the Streams being paſſed under the Bridge 
Quattro-Capt, as he himſelf atteſts, a Channel would ſuffice on- 
ly of the capacity of the ſaid Bridye, provided that the water 
there might run with the ſame velocity, as it did under the Bridge 
at the time of Inundation 3 and on the contrary, ewenty Cur- 
:ents of capacity equal to the preſent one, would not ſuffice, if 
the water ſhould run with twenty times leſs velocity; than ic made 
at the time of the Inundation. | 

Sixthly, ro me it ſeemeth a great weakaneſle to (ay, that there 
ſhould paſſe under the Bridge Qnattro-Capi, an hundred fifty one 
ells of water compreſſed; for that'I do not underſtand that wa- 
teris like Cotton or Wool, which matters may be preſt and trod, 
asit happeneth allo to the air, which receiveth compreſſion in 
ſach ſort, that after that in ſome certain place a quantity of air 
ſhall be reduced to its natural conſtitution ; and having taken up 
all the ſaid place, yet nevertheleſſe compreſling the firſt Air 
with force and violence, it is reduced into far leſs room, and will 
2dmit four or ſix tunes as much air, as before, as is experimen« 
ally * leen in the Wind-Gun, invented in our dayes by M. Vin« 
cenz0 Viicenti of UVrbin, which property of the Air of admit- 
ting condenſation, is alſo ſeen in'the portable Fountains of the 
ſame M. Vincenzo : which Fountains ſpirt the Water on high, 
by force of the Air compreſſed, which whilſt -it ſeeks to reduce 
ts ſelf ro its natural conſtitution, in the dilation cauſeth that vi- 
olence. But the water can never, for any thing | know, crowd, 
or preſs {o, as that if before the compreſlion it held or poſleſt a 
place, being in 1ts natural -conſtitution, I believe not, I ſay, that it 
1s poſlible, by preſſing and crowding to make it poſlels leſs room, 
for if it were poflible to comprel(s the Water, and make it to oc- 
cupy a leſs place, it would thence follow, that two Veſſels of e- 
qual meaſure, but of unequal height, ſhould be'of unequal capa- 
city, and that ſhould hold: more water which was higher 3 alſo a 
Cylinder, or other Vefle} more high than broad, would containe 
more water erected, than being laid along ;; for that: being tereR- 


GCecc 53 = - * 


* Andas is at 
large demonſtrated 
by that moſt excel- 
lent and Honours 
avle perſonage Mr, 
Boile in the indu- 
ſtrious experiment 
of his Pneumarical 
Engine, 


- ww _ 2 a+ wage 
w = Fi ens Mo a 


12 


Of the MEnSURAT ION Lib-1 


ed, the water put therem would be more preſſed and crowded. 

And therefore, in our caſe, according to our principles we will 
ſay, that the water of that Stream palseth all under the (aid 
Bridge uattro-Capi, for that being there moſt {wift, it ought of 
conſequence to be leſs in meaſure. 

And here one may ſee, into how many errours a man may ryn 
through ignorance of a true and real Principle, which once known 
and well underſtood, takes away all miſts of doubting, and ea. 
ily reſolveth all difficulries. 


COKROLLARIE. XII. 


Hrough the ſame inadvertency of not regarding the variation 

of velocity in the ſame Current,therea re committed by lngi- 
neers and Learned men, errours of very great moment (and [ 
could thereof produce examples, but for good reaſons 1 paſ; 
them over in ſilence) when they think, and propole, by deriving 
new Channels from great Rivers, to diminiſh the meaſure of the 
water in the River, and to diminiſh it proportionally, according 
to the meaſure'of the Water which they, make to paſs through 
the Channel, as making v.g. a Channel fifty foot broad, in which 
the derived water is to run waſte,ten foot deep, they think they 
have diminiſhed the meaſure of the Water 1n the River five hun- 
dred feet, which thing doth not indeed (ſo fall out ; and the rea- 
ſon is plain; for that the Chanel being derived, the reſt of the 
main River, diminiſheth in velogity, and therefore retains a grea- 
ter meaſure than it bad at firſt before the derivation of the Cha- 
nel ; and moreover, if the Chanel being derived, it ſhall not 
conlerve the ſame velocity which it had at firſt in the main Ri- 
ver, but ſhall diminiſh it; it will be neceſſary, that it hath a grea- 
ter. meaſure than it had before in the River ; and therefore 
to accompt aright, there ſhall not be ſo much water derived into 
the Channel, as ſhall diminiſh the River, according to the quantj: 
ty of the water in the Channel, as is pretended. - 


COROLLARIE XIIL. 


His ſajme conſideration giveth me occaſion to diſcover a moli 

ordinary errour; qbſerved by me in the buſineſſe of the wa- 
ter of -Ferara, when 1 was inthoſe parts , in ſervice of the molt 
Revercndand Hluſtcious Monſignor Corſeni,; the ſublime wit of 
whom hath been A very great help to me in theſe contemplations; 
its very true, L have been much perplexed , whether: | ſhould 
commit.this particular to papet-, or paſſeit over in filence , for 
that 1 have ever. doubtcd |, [that the opinion ſo. common and 


more- 


Lib.t: Of RuNnNIxG Warts s: 


moreover confirmed with a moſt manifeſt experiment , may not 
onely make this my conjecture to be eſteemed far from true, 
Mut alſo to diſcredit with the World the reſt of this my Treatiſe: 
Neverthelefſe I have at laſt reſolved not to be wanting to my 
ſelf , and ro truth in a matter of it ſelf , and for other conſe- 
quences moſt important ; nor doth it ſeem to me requiſite in 
dificule matters, ſuch as theſe we have in hand, to retipne our 
ſelves ro the common opinion, fince it would be very ſtrange if 
che multitude in ſuch matters ſhould hit on the truth , nor ought 
that to be held difficult, in which even the vulgar do know the 
cruth and right 3 betides that I hope morever to prove all in ſuch 
ſort , that perſons of ſolid judgment , ſhall reſt fully perſwaded, 
ſo that they but keep in mind the principal ground and foundation 
of all this Treatifſezand though thar which I will propoſ+be a par- 
cicular,as I have {aid, pertaining onely to che intereſts of Ferara ; 
yet neverthclefſe from this particular Dofrine well underſtood, 


good judgement may be made of other the like cafes in general. | 


[ {ay then, for greater perſpecuity, and better underſtanding 
of the whole, That about thirteen miles above Ferere, near to 
Steltata, the main of Po, branching it ſelf into two parts, with one 
of its Arms it cometh cloſe to F erarg, retaining the name of the 
Poof Ferara ; and here again it divideth it ſelf into ewo other 
branches, and that which continneth on the right hand, is called 
the Po of Argenta, and of Primaro ; and that on the lefr the Po 
of Volana. But for that the bed of the Pos of Ferara being- here- 
tofore augmented and raiſed, it followeth that it reſteth wholly 
deprived of the W zter of the great Po, except in the time of irs 
greater ſwelling ; for in' that cafe, this Po of - Ferars being re- 
{trained with a Bank near to Bondeno, would come alſo in the 
overflowings of the main Po, to be free from its Waters :- But the 
Lords of Ferara are woht at ſuch time as the Po threateneth to 
break out , to cut the bank ; ''by which cutting, there dif- 
gorgeth ſuch a Torrent of Water,” that it 1s' obſerved, that the 
main Po in.the fpace of ſome few hours abaterK -near a fobt, and 
all perſons that 1 have ſpoken wit hitherto, moved by this ex- 
periment, think that it 15 bf great profit and benefit to keep ready 
this Vent, and to make uſe of it ir the time of'its fullnefſe. And 
indeed, the thing confideted fimply, and at the firft appearance, 
It ſeemeth thar none tah think” orherwile'; the' rather, for that 
many examining the matter narrowly, meaſure that body of 
Water which runoeth bYthe Chiitel, or Bed of the Po of Fera- 
72, and make actotint; that the butty of the Warer of the great 
Po, is dimmiſhed the Quintity 'of the body of the Water which 


runneth by the'Ps of Ferara. 'But' if we well remember what 
hath been{aid in the beginning of the' Trearife, #nd how med 
che 


og wer E- 2 _ 


— nm - 


—_ 
» 


—o—_— 


= © * = © © 
ww aa. We ee 8. = = - 


Of the Mensunatlon. Lib. x 


the variety of the velocities of the ſaid Water importeth, and the 
knowledge of them is neceſſary to conclude the rrue quantity of 
the running Water , we ſhall tinde it manifeſt, that the benefit of 
this Vent is far leſle than it is generally thought : And mereover 
we ſhall finde,if I deceive not my elf, that there follow _ 
thence lo many milchiefs, that I could greatly incline to believe, 
that it were more to the purpole wholly to ſtop it up, than to 
maintain it open : yet 1 am'not lo wedded to my opinion, by + 
that I am ready to change my judgement upon ſtrength of better 
reaſons ; eſpecially of one that ſhall have firſt well underſtood 
the beginniag of this my dilcourle, which I frequently inculcate, 
becaulec its abloJucely impoſlible without this advertiſement to 
treat of theſe matters, and not commit very great errours. 

I propole theretoce to conſideration, that although it be true, 
that whilſt the water of the main Po 1s at its greateſt height, the 
Bauk and Dam then cut of the Po of Ferara, and the Sas 
waters having a very great fall into the Channel of Ferara, they 
precipitate ito the ſame with great violence and velocity, and 
with the ſame 1a the beginning, or little Icfle, they run towards 
the Po of Volana, and of Argenta on the ſea coaſts ; yet after the 
ſpace of ſome few hours, the Po of Ferara being full, and the ſy- 
perior. Waters not finding {o great a diclivity there, as they had 
at the beginning of the cutting, they fall not into the ſame with 
the former velocity, but with far lefſe, and thereby a great deal 
lefſe Water begins to iflue from the great Po; and if we dili- 
gently compare the velocity at the firſt cutting, with the velocity 
of the Water after the cutting made, and when the Po of Ferara 
ſhall be full of Water, we ſhall finde perhaps that to be fifteen or 
ewenty. times greater than this , and conſequently the Water 
which.tfſues from the great Po, that firſt imperuoſity being paſt, 
ſhall be onely rhe fifreenth or twentieth part of that which iſſued 
at the beginning 3 and therefore the Waters of the main Po will 
return.in a ſmall time almoſt to the firſt height. And here I will 
pray theſe who reli not wholly ſatisfied with what hath been ſaid, 
that for the love of truth, and the common good , they would 
plea(c to make diligent oblervation whether in the time of great 
Floods, the ſaid Bank or Dam at Bondeno is cut , and that in few 
hours the main Po diminiſheth,as hath been ſaid about a foot in 
its heighrz that they would obſerve I ſay, whether, a day or two 
bing paſt,the Waters of the main Po return almoſt to their firſt 
height ; for if this ſhould follow, it would be very clear, that the 
benetit which reſulteth from this diverſion or Vent, 1s not ſo great 


as js, univerſally preſumed; I ſay, it is nor ſo great as,8 _ | 


preſumed becauſe, though it be granted for true , that 


che , Waters of the main Po , abatc at the beginning F 
the 


Lib. tr. Of Running W artens, 


the Vent, yet this benefit happens to be but temporary and for a 
f-w hours: If the riting of Po, and the dangers of breaking forth 
were of ſhort duration, as it ordinarily betalleth in the overflow- 
ings of Torrents, 1n luch a caſe the profit of the Vent would be 
of ſome eſteem : But becauſe che {wellings of Po continue for 
chirty, or lomerimes for forty dayes, therefore the gain which 
reſults from the Vent proveth to be inconfiderable. It remain«- 
eth now to conſider the notable harms which tollow the 1a;jd 
Sluice or Vent, that ſo refle&ion being made, and the profit aud 
the detriment compared, one may rightly judge, and cttvoſe that 
which ſhall be moſt convenient. The firſt prejudice therefore 
which ariſeth from this Vent or Sluice, is; Chat the Channels of 
Ferara, Primaro, and Volang filling with Water, all thoſe parrs 
from Bondeno to the Sea fid-: are allarmed and endangered 
thereby. Secondly, The Waters of the Po of Primzaro having 
free ingreſle 1nto the upper Valleys, they fill them to the preat 
damage of the Fields adjacent , and obſtru& the courſe of the 
ordinary Trenches in the {ame Valleys; inſomuch chat all the 
care, coſt, and labour about the draining, and freeing the upper 
Valleys from Water, would alſo become vain and ineffectual. 
Thirdly, I conſider that theſe Waters of the Po of Ferara being 
paſſed downwards towards the Sea, at the time that the main Po 
was in its greater excreſcences and heights, it is manifeſt by expe« 
rience, that when the great Po dniniſherh, then theſe Waters 
paſſed by the Po of Ferara begin to retard in their courſe, and 
finally come to turn the current upwards towards Stellata,reſting 
firſt ju the intermediate time, almoſt fixed and ſtanding , and 
therefore depoling the muddineſle, they fill up che Channel of 
the River or Current of Ferara. Fourthly and laſtly, There 
followeth from this ſame diverſion another notable damage , and 
it is like to that which followeth the breaches made by Rivers; 
near to which breaches in the lower parts, namely below the 
breach, there 13 begot in the Channel of the River, a certain ridge 
or ſhelf, that is, the bottom of the River is raiſed, as is ſufficiently 
manifeſt by experience; and thus juſt in the ſame manner cutring 
the Bank at Bondeno, there is at it were a breach made,from which 
followeth the riſing in the lower parts of the main Po, being paſt 
the mouth of Pamaro; which thtng,how pernitious it is,let any one 
judge that underſtandeth theſe matters. And therefore both for 
the [mall benefit, and ſo many harms that enſue from maintain- 
ing this diverſion, I ſhould think it were more ſound advice to 
keep that Bank alwaics whole at Bondeno, or in any other conve- 
nent place, and not to permit that the Water of the Grand Po 
ſhould ever come near to Ferars. 


C 0. 


7 


| 


| Of the MensuratlIoRN Lib.x. 


COROL LARKIE XIV. 


N the Grand Rivers, which fall into the Sea, as here in ] taly 
T:., Adige,* and Arno,which are armed with Banks againſt their 

excreſcencies, its obſerved that far from the Sea, they need 
Banks of a notable height 3 which height gocth afterwards by 
degrees diminiſhing , the more 1t approacheth to the Sea-coaſts: 
in ſuch ſort, that the Po, diſtant from rhe Sea about fifty or fixt 
miles at Ferara , ſhall have Banks that be above twenty feet 
higher than the ordinary Water-marks ; but ten or twelve miles 
from the Sea, the Banks are not twelve feet higher than the (aid 
ordinary Water-marks, though the breadth ot the River be the 
ſame, ſo that the excreſcence oi che fame Innundation happens 
to be far greater in meaſure remote from the Sea, then near; and 
yet it ſhould ſeem, that the ſame quantity of Water paſling by 
every place the River ſhould need to have the {ame altitude of 
Banks in all places : But we by our Principles and fundamentals 
may be able to render the reaſon of that cffeQ , and fay ; That 
that exceſlſe of quantity of Water, above the ordinary Water, 
goeth alwaies acquiring greater velocity 3 the nearer it approach- 
eth the Sea,and therefore decrealeth in meaſure, and conlequenly 
in height. And this perhaps might have becn the cauſe in great 
part, why the Tyber in the Innundation Arno 1578. iffucd not 
forth of its Channel below Rome towards the Sea. 


COROLLARIE XV. 
Rom the ſame Dodrine may be rendred a moſt manifeſt rea- 
ſon why the falling Waters go leſſening in their deſcent , fo 
that the lame falling Water , meaſured ar the beginning of 
its fall, is greater, and bigger, and afterwards by degrees lefſeneth 
in mcalure the more it is remote from the beginning of the fall. 
Wuich dependeth on no other, than on the acquiſition, which 
it lucceſii ;ely makes of greater velocity ; it being a moſt fami- 
liar concluſion among Philoſophers , that grave bodies falling, 
the m:;re chey remove from the beginning of their motion, the 
more they acquire of {wiftneſle ; and therefore the Water, as a 


grave body , talling, gradually velocitates , and therefore dc- 
crealeth in meaſure, and leffeneth. 


COROLLARIE XVI. 


AX on the contrary » the ſpirtings of a Fountain of Water, 


which ſpring on high, work a contrary eftic ; pe 
n 


Of Runntno 


in the beginning they are ſmall , and afterwards become greater 
and bigge 3 and the realon is moſt manifcſt , becauſe in the be- 
pinning they are very {wift , and afterwards gradually relent 
cheir impetuoſity ; and morion , lo that in the beginning of the 
excurſion that they make , they ought to be (mall , and after- 
wards to grow bigger , as in the ceftect 1s (een. 


Lib. rt. VVaress. 


APPENDIX. I. 


\ 


Neo the errour of not conlidering how much the different 
velocities of the {ame running water in ſeveral places of 
its current , are able to change the meaſure of the ſame 
water, and to make it greater , or lefle, I think, it I be not 
deceived , that Ginlzo Frontrno a noble antient Writer, may 
have faln in the Second Book which he writ , . of the Aquedu&s 
of the City of Rome : Whilſt finding the meaſure of the Water 
"Commentarizs lefſe than it was in erogatione 1263. Qninaries, he 
thought that ſo much difference might proceed from the negligence 
of the Meaſures ; and when afterwards with his own induſtry he 
meaſured the {ame water at the beginnings of the AqueduRs, 
finding it neer 1 0000. (2 «inaries bigger than it was in Commenta- 
rijs he judged , that the overplus was imbeziled by Miniſters and 
Partakers; which in part might be ſo, for itis but too true, that 
the publique is almoſt alwayes defrauded ; yet nevertheleſſe, I 
verily believe withal , that belides the frauds of theſe Officers, 
the velocities of rhe water in the place wherein Fronteno meaſu- 
red , it might be different from thoſe velocities } which are 
found in other places before meaſured by others ; and there- 
fore the meaſures of the waters might , yea ought necſlarily to 
be diffcrent, it having been by us WR El , that the mea- 
ſures of the ſame running water have reciprocal proportion to 
their velocities. VV hich Frontino nor well conſidering; and find- 
ing the water in Commentariis 12755. Quinaries in erogati- 
one 14018, and in his own micaſure ad capita dxciuum , at the 
head of the fountain 22755. Quznaries, or thereabouts , he 
thought , that in all thele places there paſt different quantities of 
water 3 namely, greater at the fountain head then that which was 
in Erogatione , and this he judged greater than that which was 
mn Commentariis. | 


APPENDIX I 

Like miſtake chanced lately in the Aquedu& of Acqua- 

Paola, which Water ſhould be 4000 Inches, and fo many 

effeQively ought to be allowed ; and it hath beers given in 
Dddd a 


* Comment ar 1s: 
beareth many ſen- 
ſes , but in this 
place "— a 
certain Regiſter of 
the quantities of 
the Waters in the 
ſeveral publique A 
quiduRts of Rome ; 
which word 1 find 
frequently uſed in 
the Law-books of 
antient Civilans : 
Andby errogation 
we are to under- 
ſtand the diltribu- 
tion or delivering 
out of thoſe ores 
of Watcr. 


Of the MEensunraTtlON: Lib.z, 
ſo to be by the Signors of Bracciano to the Apoſtolick-Chamber, 
and there was a meaſure thereof made at the beginning of the 
Aquedu& ; which meaſure proved afterwards much lefſe and 
ſhort, conſidered and taken in Rome, and thence followed gif. 
contents and great diſorders , and all becaule this property of 
Running-W aters, of increaſing in meaſure, where the velocity 
decreaſed ; and of diminiſhing in meaſure , where the velocity 
augmented, was not lookt into. 


APPENDIX LIIL. 


A Like errour,in my judgement, hath beeen committed by 
Ai thoſe learned men , which to prevent the diverſion of 

' the Reno of Bologna into Po by the Channels, through 
which it at preſent runneth, judged, that the Reno being in its 
greater excreſcence about 2000. feet , and the Po being near 
L000. feet broad, they judged I ſay, that letting the Reno into 
Po, it wonld have raiſed the Water of Po two feet ; from which 
riſe, theyy:ooncluded afterwards moſt exorbitant diſorders, either 
of extraprdinary Inundations, or elſe of immenſe and intolera- 
ble expences to the people in raiſing the Banks of Po and Reno, 
and with ſuch like weakneſſes, often vainly diſturbed the minds 
of the perſons concerned : But now from the things demonſtra- 
ted.ir is manifeſt, That the meaſure of the Reyo in Reno, would 
be different from the meaſure of Reno in Po; in cafe that the 
velocity of the Reno 1n Po, ſhould differ from the velocity 
of Reuo in Reno,as is more exaaly determined in the fourth Pro- 
poſition. 


APPENDIX IV. 


J O leſs likewiſe are thoſe Ingeneers and Artiſts deceived, 
chat have affirmed, That letting the Reno inco Po , there 
would be no riſe at all in the Water of Po: For the truth 

is, That letting Reno into Po,there would alwaies be a rifing ; but 
ſometimes greater, ſometimes leſle, as the Po ſhall have a (wifter 
or (lower Current ; ſo that if the Po ſhall be conſtituted in a great 
velocity, the riſe will be very ſmall ; and if the ſaid Po ſhall be 
flow in its courſe, then the riſe will be notable. 


\ 
APPENDIX V. 


Nd here it will not be beſides the purpoſe to advertiſe, That 
"A the meaſures, partments, and diſtributions of the Waters 


of Fountains, cannot be made exaAly , unleſs there be con- 
ſidered 


[iþ. 7. Of Eorknino Warens 


idered , beſides the meaſure , the velocity alſo of the Water 
which particular not being rhorowly oblerved , is the cauſe of 
-ontinual miſcariages in (uch like affairs. 


APPENDIX VL. : 

Ike conſideration ought to be had with the greater diligence, 

for that anerrour therein 15 moce prejudicial 3 1 ſay, ought to 

be had by thole which part and divide VVaters ; for the 
watering of fields, as is done in the Territories of Breſcia, Ber- 
rvama, Crema, Pavia, Lodigiano, Cremona, and other places : 
For if chey have not regard to the moſt important point of the 
variation of the velocity of the V Vater, but onely to the bare 
Vulgar meaſure, there will alwaies very great diſorders and pre- 
judices enlue to the perſons concerned. 


APPENDIX VII. 


T ſeemeth that one may obſerve, that whilſt the Water run- 
neth along a Channel, Current, or Conduit, its velocity is 
retarded, withheld, and impeded by its touching the Bank or 
ſide of the ſaid Channel or Current ; which, as immoveable, not 
following the motion of the V Vater, interrupteth its velocity : 
From which particular, being true; as 1 believe it to be moſt 
true, and from our conſiderations, we have an occaſion of dil- 
covering a very nice miſtake , into which thoſe commonly fall 
who divide the V Vaters of Fountains. V Vhich divifion is wont 
to be, by what I have ſeen here in Rome, performed two wayes; 
The firſt of which is with the meaſures of like figures , as Cirs 
cles, or Squares , having cut through a Plate of metal ſeveral 
Circles or Squares , one of halt an-1nch, another of one inchi; 
another of two, of three, of four, &xc. with which they after- 
wards adjuſt the Cocks to diſpence the VVaters. The other 
manner of dividing the VV aters of Fountains, is with retangle 
paralellograms, of the ſame height, but of different Bales, in ſuch 
fort likewiſe, that one paralellogram be of half an inch, another 
of one, two, three, &*c- In which manner of meaſuring and 
dividing the Water, it ſhould ſeem that the Cocks being placed 
in one and the ſam? plain, equidiſtant from the level, or ſuperior 
ſuperficies of the water of the Well ; and the ſaid meaſures be- 
Ing moſt exatly made, the V Vater ought conſequently alſo to 
be equally divided, and parted accordivg to the proportion of 
the meaſures. But if we well conſider every particular, we ſhall 
finde, that the Cocks, as they ſucceſſively are greater, diſcharge 
alwaics more V Vater than the juſt quantity, in comparifon of 
Dddd 3 tlie 


19 


_—_ PI ” - , 
b a4 -» bY —_ ae” 
o 
- ——Q= - = 4 b - —*. - - + 
— —_ Z 


Of the MEnSURAT ION Lib.r 


the leſſer 3 that is, to ſpeak more property, The VVater which 
paſſeth chrough the greater Cock, hajh alwaies a Lreater 'pro- 
portion to that which paſſerh through the lefler, than'the greater 
Cock hath to the lefler. All which I will declare by an exam. 


le. 
P Let there be ſuppoſed for more plainneſs two Squares ; (rhe 


ſame may be underſtood of Circles, and other hike Figures) Theb 
firſt quare 15, as we will ſuppoſe, quadruple to the*other; ang; 


[ 


theſe,Squares are 'the mouths of two Gotks; one of fonr inch =, 
the other of one :, Now its manifeſt by What hath beeh'ſaid; that” 
the V Vater which paſſeth by, the leſs Cock, findeth its velotity 


impeded in the circumference” of the” Cock 3 which 'impedinlejht | - 
15 morred by the ſaid circtimfte- | ) 7 1206 


s \A@ ++4 BT 3+ ' 
rence. Now it 1s to be* confider- 
cd, that if we would have the'Was- 


FEET 


a  —_— — — - 


ter which paſlſeth throygh me: | | 
greater Cock, to be onely qua- = | 
druple to that , which paſſeth TT | 
though the leſſe, in.c ual ſpaces of time, it would' be necelliry; 
that nor onely the capacity and the meaſilre of the 'preater Cock 
be,q1aGuple to the lefſet Cock, but that alſo the impedimekitbe 
quadrupled. Now in our”.cale it is' true, That the'belly and 
Noth of the Cock 1s uadrupled, and yet the impediment a GE 
qu4yrupled,but is onely doubled ; iceing that the | Indic feree 
ol the greater Square, is onely double to the circumference of 
the leſter Square 3 for the greater circumference containeth eight” 
of choſe parts, of which the leſſer containeth but four ., asis ma- 
nifeſt by the delcribed Figure 3 and for that cauſe' there ſhall 
aſs by the greater Cock, above four times as much VVater, at 
Ca pals by the Icfſer Cock. 
ſhe like errour occurreth alſoin the other manner of meaſu- 
ring the V Vater ofa F ountain, as may eaſily be colleRed from 


what hath been {a1d and obſerved above. 


4-6 


be APPENDIX VIIL 


d bv ſame contemplation diſcovereth the errour of choſc 
Architects, who being to ereft a Bridge of ſundry Arches 
over a River, conſider the ordinary breadth of the River 
which being v. g. fourty fathom, and the Bridge being to conhiſt 
of four Arches, it {ufficeth them, that the breadth of all the four 
Arches taken together, be fourty fathom ; nor conſidering that 
in the ordinary Channel of the River, the Water hath onely 
ewo impediments which retardits velocity ; namely, the touching 
and gliding along the two ſides or ſhorts of the River : _ 

: (NEC 


Lib 1. Of Runnixo Wargrs 2t 


che ſame water 10 paſſing under the Bridge, in our caſe meeteth 
wich cight of the fame 1mpediments, bearing, and chruſting upon 
wo lides of each Arch (to omit the unpediment of the bottom, 
to; that it 15 the fame in the River, and under the Bridge) from 
which inadvertency lometimes follow. very- great diſorders, as 
quotidian p1actice ſhews us. 


1h as, 1 PENDIX- IX: 


[ T is alſo worthy to-confider the great :and;;admirable benefir 
thar thoſt feds receive, wineh ave wont todrink up the, Rains, 
water with difficulry; through: the- height -of | the water, in the, 
principat Ditches';in which cale the carctul Hasbandman cutteth 
away the reeds and';rufſhes 1n'the:: Ditches, through. which the : 
waters pals ;\whereupon may be preſently :ſeen, to. ſoon as the, 
reeds and ruſhes are cat;'a- notable Ebb inthelevel of the water 
in the Dieches 3 infomivel that/lomerimes it is oblerved, that the: 
water 15 abated aftes the/{q1d cutting a thicd arid mare, of what it; ; 
was befote'the cutting + Thewhwh'cffcX ſeemingly might der, 
pend on this,” Thae, before'thote!:weeds took. up. room, in the, E 
Ditch, and for that eanſe the water 1kept a- hagher level, and the) 
{aid Plants being afterwards cut and removed; the water;cametg 
abate; poſſcſfing /\the place. that-before-: was Occupied, by the 
weeds: ' Which opinion, thoughiprobable,/and at fuſt; ſight j{a- 
tisfaQory; 4s nevertheleſs inſufficient to give--the total reaſon of| 
that notable abatementyrhich -hath:been ipoken of : But it is ne-; 
ceſſary tb have recourte-to. cur-confideration of the velocity. in 
the courſe of the water, the chieteſt and true cauſe. of. the. vari-. 
ation'of the meaſure 'of. the ſame - Running- Wateri; for, that 
multitudes'of reeds; weeds, and plants dilpericd through. the cur- 
rent of the Ditch, do chance votably toretard the courke. of the; 
water, and therefore the'mealure -of rhe water increaleth; and 
thoſe impeditnents removed, the {ame water gaineth velocity, 
and therefore decteaſcth in mealure , and. conſequently in 
height; 

And perhaps this point well underſtood, may be of great 
profit to the fields adjacent to the Pontine Fens, and 1 duubt not 
but if the River Ninfa-, and the other principal Brooks of choſe 
Territories were kept well cleanied from weeds , their waters + 
would be at a lower level , and; conſequently the drains of the 
fields would run ito them more readily ; it being alwayes to be 
held for undoubted, that the meature of the water before the 
cleanſing, hath the ſame proportion to the meaſure after clean- 
Wh that the velocity after the cleanſing. hath to the vclocity 
before the cleanſing : Andbecauſe thoſe weeds being cleanſed 

away. 


Of the MEnsSuraTION WT - 73 


away, the courſe ef the water notably increaſeth, it is therefore 
neceſlary that the laid water abate in meaſure, and become 
lower. 


APPENDIX. %. 


E having above obſerved ſome errors that are commit. 

red in diſtributing the waters of Fountains, and thoſe 

that ſerve to water fields ; it ſeemeth now fit.by way of 
a cloſe to this diſcourle, to advertiſe by what means theſe divi. 
fons may bg made juſtly and without error... 1 therefore think 
that one might two leveral wayes exquiſitly divide the water of 
Fountains 3 The firſt would be by diligently examining, Firſt, 
how much water the whole Fountain dilchargeth in a determi- 
nate time, as for inſtance : How many Barrels, or Tuns. it carri- 
eth ina'ſet time; and in cale you are afterwards to diſtribute 
the water, diſtribute it at the race. of ſomany Barrels or Tuns,in 
that ſame time 3 aud in this caſe. the participants would haye 
their pariual ſhares : Nor could it ever happen to ſend out more 
water, than is reckoned to be inthe principal Fountain as befel 
Giulio Frontino, and as alſo it frequently happeneth in the Mo- 
dern AqueduRts, to the publick and private dettiment. 

- The other way of dividing the ſame waters of a Fountain, is 
alſo ſufficiently exaQ and eaſic, and may be, by having one one- 
ly ſize for the Cock or Pipe, as ſuppoſe of an inch, or of half an 
inch ; and when the caſe requireth ro diſpence two, three, and 
more inches, take ſo many Cocks of the ſaid meaſure as do eva- 
cuate the water, which 1s to be emitted ; and if we are to make 
uſe onely of one greater Cock, we being to place one to diſ- 
charge for example jour inches; and having the former ſole mea- 
ſure of aninch, we muſt make a Cock that 1s bigger, its true, than 
the Cock of one inch; but not ſimply in a quadruple propor- 
tion, for that it would dilcharge more than juſt ſo much water, 
as hath been ſaid above ; but we ought ro examine diligently 
how much water the little Cock emitteth in an hour; and then 
enlarge ; and contract the greater Cock, ſo, that it may dil- 
charge four times as much water as the leſſer in the ſame time; 
and by this means we ſhall avoid th: diſorder hinted in the 
ſeventh Appendix. It would be neccflary nevertheleſs, to ac- 
commodate the Cocks of the Ciſtern fo, that the level of the 
water in the Ciſtern may alwayes reſt at one determinate mark 
above the Cock , otherwile the Cocks will emit ſometimes 
greater , and ſometimes lefſe abundance of water : And becauſe 
it may be that the ſame water of the Fountain may be ſometimes 
more abundant, ſometimes leſs 3 in ſuch caſe it will be neceſſary 

to 


i 


Lib. t. Of R uxnnino VV ir ne: 


to adjuſt the Ciſtern ſo, that the exceſs above the ordinary wa« 
cr, diſcharge into the publick Fountains, that ſo the particular 
participants may have alwayes” the ſame abundance of 


WATLCT> 


APPENDIX XEL. 


Uch more difficult is the diviſion of the waters which 
ſerve to water the fields, it not being poſſible ro oblerve 


ſo commodioufly, what quantity of ' water the -whole _. 


Ditch ſends forth in one dererminare time, as may be done un 
Foantaigs : Yet nevertheleſs, if che ſecond propolicion by us a 
licle below demonſtrated, be well underſtood, there may be 
thence taken a very fafe and juſt way to diſtribute ſuch warers. 
The Propoſition therefore by us demonſtrated is this: If there 
be two Seftions, (namely two mouths of Rivers) the quanticy of 
the water which paſſeth-by the firſt, harh a 6 pau to that 
which paſſeth by the ſecond , compounded of the proportions of 
the firſt Se&ion to the. ſecond, and of the velocity through 
the firſt, to the velocity through the ſecond : As will declare 
for example by help of praQiice, that I may be underſtood by 
all, ina matter ſo important. Ler the two mouths of the 
Rivers be A, and B, and let ____ 
the mouth A be in meaſure 
and content thirty two feet, Ne - 33 | 
and the mouth B, eight fteer. —_ 
Here you muſt take notice, 
that ih not alwayes true, that | B. 5. | ae +: $ 
Ae Water which pafſſeth by A, . 
hath the ſame proportion to that which pafleth by B, that the 
mouth A hath to the mouth B ; but onely when the velocityes 
by each of thoſe paſſages are equal : But if the velocityes ſhall 
be unequal, it may be that the ſaid mouths may emit equal 
quantity of Water 1n equal times, though their meaſure be un- 
equal ; and it may be allo, that the bigger doth diſcharge a great- 
er quantity of Water : And ]aſtly, it may be, that the lels mouth 
diſchargeth more Water than the greater 3 and all this is mani- 
teſt by the things noted in the beginning of this diſcourſe, and 
by the ſaid ſecond Propoſition. Now to examine the propor- 
tion of the Warcr that paſſeth by onc Ditch, to that which pal- 
leth by another , that this being known , the ſame Waters and 
mouths of Ditches may be then adjuſted ; we are to keep ac- 
count not onely of the greatneſs of the mouths or paſſages of the 
Water, but of the velocity alſo ; which we will doy, by firſt fgnd- 
mg two numbers that have.the ſame proportion a A 
elves; 


—_ 


Fi 


. Of the MensunatlioN, Lib x. 


ſelves, as have the mouths » _ which are the numbers 32 arg £ 
in our example..: Then this WEIEYY: 
being done , let the velocity 
of the Water by the paſla- 
ges A_ and B, be —_— FRE) nap 
which may be done keeping 7-757. 
_— Sit (pace a plece B. 5. 32. B. 4. 
of Woad, or other body that | nt 
(wimmeth, is carried by the ſtream in one determinate time ; a: 
for inſtance in 50 pulſes) and then work by the golden Rule, as 
the velocity by A, is to the velocity by B, lo is the number $, to 
another number; which is 4. Ir is clear by- what is demonſtra- 
red in the (aid ſecond Propoſition, that the quantity of water, 
which paſleth by the mouth A, ſhall have the lame proportion of 
that which paſleth by the mouth B, that 5 hathto 1. Such pro. 
portion being corapoled of the proportions of 32 to 8.,and of $ to 
4znamely,tothe greatneſs of the mouth A, to the greatneſs of the 
mouth B,and of the velocity in Azto the velocity in B. This being 
done , we muſt then contrad& the mouth which dilchargeth more 
then its juſt quantity of water,or enlarge the other which diſchar» 
geth le(s,as ſhal be moſt commodious in praQice, whichto him that 
hath underſtood this little that hath been delivered , will be very 


ahe. 


WEE»: | 


| 


APPENDIX XII. 


T Hele opperations about Water, as I have hitherto on ſun- 


dry occaſions oblerved, are involved in ſo many difficul- 
ties, and ſuch a multiplicity of moſt extravagant accidents, 
that itis no marvel it continually many, and very important et\ 
rours be therein committed by many , and even by Ingeneers 
themielves, and Learned-men ; and becauſe many times they 
concern not onely the publique, but private intereſts : Hence it 
1s, that it not onely belongeth to Artiſts to treat thereof, but very 
oft even the vulgar themſelves pretend to give their judgement 
therein: AndI have been troubled many times with a neceſſity 
of ticating, not onely with thoſe , which either by praQtice, or 
particular ſtudy, underſtood ſomewhat in theſe matters; but allo 
with people wholly void of thoſe notions, which are neceſſary for 
one that would on good grounds diſcourſe about this particular ; 
and thus many times have met with more difficulty in the thick 
$kulls of men, than in precipitous Torrents, and vaſt Fennes. 
And in particular, I had occation ſome years paſt to golec the 
Cave or Emiſſary of the Lake of Perugia, made many years agon 
by Brarcio Fortobraccio, but for that it was with great ruines by 
Tune decayed, and rendred unulſeful. it was repaired " o 

| wnrry 


Lib.t. Of Running Wartrs. 


duſtry truly heroicall a ad admirable, by Monlignor Maffei Bar- 
Lerino, then Preie& tor rhe Wayes, and now Pope. And bein 
neceflitated, that I might be able to walk inthe Cave, and for 
other caules,l ler down the Sluices of the 1aid Cave, at the mouth 
of the Lake : No ſooner were they ſtopt, but a great many of the 
pcople of the Towns and Villages coaſting upon the Lake 
flocking thither, began to make grievous complaints,thart if thoſe 
Sluices were kept ſhut, not onely the Lake would wanrt.its due 
Vent, but allo the parts adjacent to the Lake would be over 
flown to their very great detriment. And becaule at firſt appea- 
rance their motion lcemed very realonable, I found my lelt hard 
put to it, ſeeing no way to perſwade ſuch a multitude, that the 
prejudice which they pretended I ſhould. do them by keeping 
the Sluices ſhut for two dayes, was ablolutely inſentible ; and that 
by keeping them open, the Lake did not chb in the ſame time ſo 
much as the thicknels of a ſheet of Paper : And therefore I was 
neceſlitated to make ule of the authority I had, and fo followed 
my buſineſs as cauſe required, without any regard to that Rab- 
ble tumultuouſly afſembled. Now when I am not working with 
Mattock or Spade, but with the Pen and Diſcourſe, Ft intend to 
demonſtrate clearly to thoſe that are capable of reaſon, and that 
have well underſtood the ground of this my Treatiſe, that the 
fear was altogether vain which thoſe people conceited. And 
therefore I ſay, that the Emiſfary or Sluice of the Lake of Pers- 
gia, ſtanding w the {ame mannaner as at preſent, and the water 
paſſing thorow it with the lame velocity as now ; to examine 
how mach the Lake may abare in two days ſpace, we ought to 
contider, what proportion the ſuperticies of the whole Lake hath 
ro the meaſure of the Section of the Emillary, and afterwards to 
infer, that rhe velocity of the water by the Emiſlary or Sluice, 
ſhall have the ſame proportion to the abatement of che Lake, 
and to prove thorowly and clearly this diſcourſe, I intend to 
demonſtrate the following Propolition. 

Suppole a Veſſel of any bignefle, and that it hath an Emiſlary 
or Cock, by which it diſchargeth its water. And look what pro- 
portion the ſuperficies of the 
veſſel] hath to the meaſure of PR A 


the {e&ion of the cock,fuch pro- Th nk 


portion ſhall the velocity of the  FEDLLEL® A — 
Water in the Cock have to the F | —_——— 
abatement of the Lake. Let the 

Veſſel be ABCD, HILB, through which the Water runneth; 
the ſuperficies of the Water in the Veſſel A D, and the (e&ior 
of the Cock H L : and let the Water in . the Veſſel 
be ſuppoſed ro have falne in one determinate time from A' co F. 


Beee 


x 


*5 


Of the MEnSuraTloON. LS; 
I (ay that the proportion of the ſuperficies of the Veſſel A D . 


in proportion to the meaſure of the ſe&ion of the Emiſſary 
H L; as the velocity of the Emiflary or Cockto the line A F; 
which is manifeſt, for that the Water in the Velzel moving by 
the line AF; as farasF, and the whole mals of Water A CG 
diſcharging it ſelf, and in the lame time the lame quatity of 
Water being diſcharged by the leCtion of the Emiſſary HL: it 
is neceſſary by what I have demonſtrated in the third Propoſition, 
and alſo explained in the beginning of this Treatiſe, that the ye. 
locity by the Emiſſary or Cock be in proportion to the velocity 
of the abatement, as the ſuperficies of the Veſſel to the mea- 
ure of the ſe&ion of the Emiſlary, which was to be demon-. 
ſtrated. 

That which hath b :en demonſtrated in the Veſſel, falls out ex- 
atly alſo in our Lake of Perugra, and its Emilsary ; and becauſe 
the immenſity of the ſuperficies of the Lake is in proportion to 
the (uperficies of the Emiſsary or Sluice, as many millions to 
one, as may be eaſily calculated ; ir is manifeſt, that ſuch abate- 
ment ſhall be imperceptible, and almoſt nothing, in two dayes 
ſpace, nay in four of fix: and all this will be true, when we 
{uppoſe that for that time there entreth no other Water into the 


Lake fromDitches or Rivolets,which falling into the Lake would 
render ſuch abatement yet leſs. 


Now we ce, that it's neceſcary to examine ſuch abatements 
and riſings, with excellent reaſons, or at leaſt, with accurate ex- 
periments, before we reſolve and conclude any thing ; and how 


farce the vulgar are diſtant from a right judgement in ſuch 
matters. 


APPENDIX XIII. 


OR greater confirmation of all this which I have ſaid, I 
will inſtance in another like caſe, which allo I met with here- 
tofore, wherein, for that the buſineſs was not rightly un- 
derſtood, many diſorders, vaſt expences, and conſiderable mil- 
chiefs have followed. There was heretofore an Emiſsary or 
Sluice made to drain the Waters, which from Rains, Springs, and 
Rivolers fall intoa Lake; to the end, the ſhores adjoyning on 
the Lake, ſhould be free from the overflowing of the Waters3 
but becauſe perhaps the enterprize was not well managed and 
carricd on, it fell our, that the Fields adjacent to the ſaid Chanel 
could not drain, but continued under water 3 to which diſorders 
a preſent remedy hath been uſed, namely, in a time convenient 
to ſtop up the Sluice, by meanes of certain Floodgates kept on 
purpole for that end and thus abating the Level of the Water 


in 


\ 


[ ib. 1. Of RunninoW artEtRs. 


i the Emillary, 11 the |pace of three or four dayes, the Ficlds 
have been haply drained. Bur on the other part, the proprietor 
ordering, On the Lake oppoled tins, gricvouſly complaining,that 
wilt the Floodgartes are ſhut, and the courle of the Water of 
che Sluice hindered, the Lake overtlowes the Lands adjacent, by 
mcancs of the Rivers that fell into it, ro their ver y great damage; 
and 10 contming their luirs, they got more of vexation than 1a- 
u-tafon. Now, being asked my opinion herein , | judged Ti 
1cquilire (lince the point in controverſie was about the riſing 
and talling of the Lake) that the faid abatement, when the 
' Floodgates are open, and increale when they are ſhut ſhould be 
exactly mealured, and rold them, that it might be calily done ar 
a time when no extraordinary Waters tell into the Lake, neither 
of Rain, or otherwiſe; and the Lake was undiſturbed by winds 
that might drive the Water to any fide, by planting neer to an 
Iler, which is about the middle of the Lake, a thick poſt, on 
which ſhould be made the marks of the Lakes rifing and falling 
for two or three dayes. I would not, at that time, pawn, or re- 
lolutely declare, my judgment, in regard I might be, by divers 
accidents miſled. But this I told them, that (by what I have 
demonſtrated , and particularly that which I have ſaid above 
touching the Lake of Perugia) I inclined greatly to think, 
that theſe riſings and fallings would prove imperceptible, and 
inconſiderable 3 and therefore, that in caſe experience ſhould 
make good my reaſon, it would' be to no purpoſe for them to 
continue dilptting and wrangling, which cauſeth, ( according 
to the Proverb) A great deal of cry, but produceth not much 
IV ool. 

Laſtly, it importing very much to know what a Rain conti- 
nued for many dayes can do in raiſing thele Lakes, I will here in- 
ſert the Copy of a Letter, which I writ formerly to Signior Ga- 
lileo Galilei, chief Philoſopher to the Grand Duke of Tuſcany, 
wherein I have delivered one of my conceits in this bufineſſe, and 


it may be, by this Letter, I may, more ſtrongly, confirm what I 
have {aid above. 


Ecce 2 The 


E7 


JO 


S " bs 4 A—— = - 1 s < B- 
CT OE... EE. EN. IO 


Of the MENSURATION Lih: x 


The Copy of a Letter 10 Signore Gatit xo 
GaLlit #1, Chief Philoſophcr 10 the moſt Serene 
Great Duke of 1 © SCANT. 


Worthy and moſt Excellent S 1 8, 


» N fati-faction of my promile, in my former Letters of 

k rcprelenting unto you {ome of my Conſiderations 

made upon the Lake Thraſtmeno, 1 ay, That intimes 

paſt, being in Perugia, where we held our General 
Convention, havig underſtood that the Lake Ihraſomen, by 
the great drought of many Moneths was much abated, lc came 
inco my head, to go privately and ice this wovelty, both for my 
particular fatisfaCtion, as allo that I might be able to relate the 
whole to my Patrons, upon the certitude of my own light of the 


place. And fo beiug come to the Emillary of the Lake, I found 


that the Level of the Lakes ſurface was cbbed about five Ro- 
man Palmes of its wonted watermark, inlomuch that it was lower 
than the tranſome of the mouth of the Emiſſary, by the length 


Se A NODINTIR this deicribed line, and there- 
fore wo Water ifſued out of the Lake, to the great prejudice of 


all the places aud viliages circuinyacent, in regard that the Wa- 
ter which uſed to run from the {aid Lake turned 22 Mills, which 
nor going , neceſſitated the inhabitants of thole parts to go a 
daycs journcy and more, to grinde upon the Tiber. Being retur- 
ned ro Peruga, there tollowed a Rain, not very great, but con- 
ſtzi:t, and even, which laſted for the ſpace of eight. hours, or 
thercabouts; and it came into my thoughts to cxamine , bein 

in Perxgia, how much the Lake was increaſed and railcd by this 


Rain, ſuppoſing (as it was probable enough) that the Rain had 


been, univerſal over all the Lake; and like to that which fell in 


Perugia, and to this purpoſe I took a Glaſſe formed like a Cy- 
111,der, about a palme high, and halt a palme broad ; and having 
put in water {ufficient to cover the bottome of the Glaſſe, I no- 
cd diligently the mark Cf the height of the Water in the Glaſle, 
and afterwards expoled it to the open weather, to receive the 
Raine-water , Which fell into it 3 and I let it ſtand for the 
{pace of an hour ; and having obſerved that in that time the Wa- 
ter was riſen in the Veſſel the height of the following line—; 
I conſidered that if I had expoſed to the ſame rain ſuch other vel- 
(cls equal to that, the Water would have riſen in them all accor- 
ding to that meaſure : And thereupon concluded, that 21ſo1n all . 


the 


Lib 1. Of R unx1x6 WareRs. 


cY 


the whole extent of the Lake, it was neceflary the Water ſhould” 


be railed in the {pace of an hour the ſame mcature. Yet here | 
contidered two dithculcices that might diſturb and altar ſuch an 
effect, or at leaſt render it 1n0bleryeable, which atterwards well 
weighed, and relolved, leit me (as I will tell you anon) 1n the 
concluſion the more contirmed ; that the Lake oupht iO be 10- 
crealed in the {pace of eight hours, that the rain laſted cipht 
c©mes that mcealure. And whilſt I again expolcd the Gial to re- 
peat the experiment, there came unto me aa Ingenecr to talk 
with me touching certain affairs of our Moaſtary of / erxgia,and 
ditcourſing with him, I ſhewed him the Glaſs our at my Cham- 
ber- window, exPoled in a Court-yard ; and commuuicared to 
him my tancy, relaung unto bum all thac | had doi:c. But 1 
ſoon perceived that tis brave tellow conccited mc to be but of 
a dull brain, for he (miling ſaid unto me; Sir, you deceive 
your ſelf : I am of opinion that the Lake will not te increal- 
cd by this rain,, lo much as the thickne(l: of a + Fulio. 
Hearing him pronounce this his opinion with freenets and 
confidence, I urged him to give me {ome realon tor what he 
ſaid, aſſuring him, that I would change my judgement , when | 
ſaw the ſtredgeh of his Arguments : To which he anſwered, that 
he had been very converiant about the'Lake, and was every day 
upon it,and was well aflured that it was not at all iacrealed. And 
importuning him further, that he would give me ſome reaton 
for his ſo thinking, he propoled to my coalideration the great 
drought paſled, and that that ſame rain was nothing for the 
great parching : To which I an{wered, 1 believe Sir thac the tur- 
tace of the Lake, on which the rain had fallen was moiſtned; and 
therefore {aw not how its drought , which was nothing. at all, 
could have drunk up any part of the rain. For all this he per- 
ſiſting in his conceir, without yielding in the leaſt ro my allega- 
tion 3 he granted in the end (1 believe in civility tro me) that 
my realon was plautible and good, but that in praGtile ir could 
not hold. Ar Jaſt roclear up all, I madeone be called, and 
ſent him ro the mouth of the Emiſſary of the Lake , with o:der 
to bring me an exa& account, how he found the water of the 
Lake, in re{pe& of the Tranſ{ome of + the Sluice. Now here, 
Signore Gali{e0,] would not have you think that I had brought 
the matter in hand to concern me in my honour ; but believe me 
(and there are witneſles of the {ame ſtill living) that my mefſen- 
Fer returning in the evening to Ferrgia, he brought me word, 
that the water of the Lake began to run th:ough the Cave, and 
that it was riſen almoſt a fingers breadth above the Tranſome : 
Intomuch, that adding this meaſure , to that of the lowneſs of 
the ſurface of the Lake, beneath the Tranſome before the rain, 
it 


» A Coyn of Pore 
fulins Worth iy 
pence 


E 


Of the MrixzunatloN 31 


it was manileſt that the riting of the Lake cauſed by the rain.was 
to a hair thole tour fingers breadth that 1 had judgcd ir " be. 
Two daycs after I had another bout with the Ingencer , and rc. 
lated ro him the whole butinels, to which he knew ror what to 
anlwcr. 

Now the two difficulties which I thought of, able to impede 
my concluſion, were thele following: Firſt, 1 conlidered thar 
It might be, that the Wind blowing trom the fide where the 
Sluice ſtood, to the Lake-ward ; the mole and mals of the Wa- 
ter of the Lake might be driven to the contrary ſhore ; on which 
the Water riſing, 1t might be fallen at the mouth of the Emiſſa- 
ry, and lo the oblcrvation might be much obicured. But this 
difficulty wholly vaniſhed by realon of the Aires great tranqui- 
lity 3 which it kept art that tine, for no Wind was ſtirring on any 
ſide, neither whilſt it rained, nor afterwards. 

The (econd difficulty which put the rifing 10 doubt, was, That 
having oblerved in Florence, and cl{ewhcre , thoſe Ponds into 
which the rain-water , falling from the houſe , is conveyed 
through the Common-ſhores: And that they are not thereby 
cver filled, but that they (ſwallow all that abundance of water, 
that runs into them by thoſe conveyances which ſerve them with 
water ; inlomuch that thole conveyances which in time of 
drought maintain the Pond, when there comes new abundance 
of water into the Pond, they drink it up, and (wallow it : A like 
cffe& might allo fall out in the Lake, in which there being many 
veins (as 1t 15 very likely )that maintain and feed the Lake ; thele 
veins might imbibe the new addition of the Rain-water , and ſo 
by that means annull the riſing ; or elſe diminiſh it in ſuch ſort, as 
to render it inoblervable. Bur this difficulty was eaſily reſolved 
by conſidering my Treatiſe of the meaſure of Running-Warters 3 
foralmuch as having demonſtrated, that the abatement of a Lake 
beareth the reciprocal proportion to the velocity of the Emiſla- 
ry, which the mealfure of the SeCtion of the Emiſlary of the Lake, 
hath to the meaſure of the {urtace of the Lake : making the 
calculation and account, though in grols ; by ſuppoſing that its 
veins were ſufficiently large, and that the velocity in them were 
notable in drinking up the water of the Lake 3 yet I found never- 
theleſs, that many weeks and moneths would be ſpent in drink- 
ing up the new-come abundance of water by the rain, lo that 
I reſted ſure, that the riſing would cnſue, as in cffe& it did. _ 

And becauſe many of accurate judgement, have again cauſed 
me to queſtion this riſing, ſetting before me, that the Earth be- 
mg parched by the great drought, that had fo long continued, it 
might be; that that Bank of Earth which environed the brick of 


the Lake; being dry, and imbibing great abundance of our 
rom 


Lib. t. of R unninc VVarins. 


from the increaſing Lake, would not (uffer it to increaie in 
height : 1 ſay theretore, that it we would rightly conſider this 
doubt here propoſed, we ſhould, in the very confideration of ir, 
ſee it reſolved ; for, it being ſuppoled that that liſt or border of 
Banks which was to be occupicd by the increaſe of the Lake, be 
a Brace in breadth quite round the Lake, and that by reaſon of 
its dry neſs it ſucks in water, and that by that means this propor- 
tion of water co-operates not in railing of the Lake : It is abto- 
lutely necefſary on the other hand, that we conſider, That t. e 
Circuit of che water of the Lake being thirty miles, as 118 com« 
monly held, thar is to lay, Ninety thouſand Braces of F lorence 
in compals ; and therefore admirting for rrue, that each Brace of 
this Bank drink two quarts of water, and that for the {p eadu:'s 
ie require three quarts more, we ſhall tinde, that the wholc agre- 
gate of chis portion of water, which is not imployed in rhe raiti 


of the Lake , will be four hundred aud tifty thouſand Quaiis of 


water ; and {uppoling that the Lake be fixty ſquare miles, three 
thouland Braccs long, we ſhall tinde, that ro diſpence the water 


poſſeſt by the Bank about the Lake, above the total ſurface of 


the Lake, it ought ro be {pread ib thin, that one ſole quart of 
water may over-{pread ten thouſar.d fquaie Braces of fhrface : 
ſuch a chinneſs, as muſt much exceed that of a leat of beaten 
Gold, and alſo leſs than that s kin of water which covers the Bub- 
bles of it : and ſuch would that be, which thole men would have 
ſubſtraed from the riling of the Lake : But again, in the (ſpace 
of a quarter of an hour ar the beginning'of the rain, all that 

Bank is ſoaked by the fatd rain , ſo that we need not for the 
moiſtning of it, imploy a drop, of that water which falleth into 
the Lake. Beſides we have tdt brought ro account that abun- 

dance of water which runs in iime of rain into the Lake, from 
the ſteepneſs of the adjacent Hills and Mountains ; which would 

be enough to {upply all our occafions : do that, neither oughr 
we for this reaſon to queſtion our pretended riting. Aud chis 
is what hath fallen in my way touching the confideration of the 
Thrafimcnian Lake. 

After which, perhaps ſomewhat raſhly,wandring beyond my 
bounds, I proceeded to another contemplation, which I will re- 
late to you, hoping that you will receive it, as colle&cd with 
theſe cautions requiſite in ſuch like affairs ; wherein we ought 
not too poſitively to affirm any thing of our own heads for cer- 
tain, bur onght to ſubmit all to the ſound and ſecure delibera- 
tion of the Holy Mother-Church , as I do this of mine, and all 
others ; moſt ready to change my judgement, and conform my 
ſelf alwates to the deliberations of my Superiors. Continu- 


ing 


;t 


: « - 
_ p.- -—_ 
— 7 is D WS 


Iz 


Of the MENSURAT 1ON Lib.\ 


ng therefore my above-laid conceit about the riling of the Wa: 
ter in the glaſs tried before, it came into my minde, that the 
forementioned rain having been very gentle, it might well he 
that if there ſhould have faln a Rain titty, an hundred, gr a than, 
ſand times greater than this » and much more intenle (which 
would inſue as oft as tholc falling drops were four, ſive or cy 
times bigger than thoſe of the above-mentioned rain, keepin 

the ſame number) in {uch a calc its manueſt, that in the ſpace 
of an hour the Water would rile in our Glaſs, two , three, and 
perhaps more Yards or Braces ; and conlequently, if ſuch a 
Rainc ſhould fall upon a Lake, that the faid Lake woulg 
riſe , according to the ſame rate : And likewiſe, if ſuch a 


Rain were univerſall , over the whole Terrcſtriall Globe, it 


would neceſſarily , in the ſpace of an hour , make a rj: 
fiog of two , or three braces round about the ſaid Glohe. 
And becauſe we have from Sacred Records , that jn the 
time of the Deluge) it rained fourty dayes and fourty nights ; 
namely, for the ſpace of 960 houres; its clear, that if the ſazd 
Rain had been ten times bigger than ours at Perugza, the rijin 
of the Waters above the Terreſtrial Globe would reach and paſs 
a mile higher than the tops of the Hills and Mountains that are 
upon the ſuperficies of the Earth 3 and they alſo would concyj 
to increaſe the riſe. And therefore 1 conclude, that the riſe of 
the Waters of the Deluge have a rational congruity with naturg| 
Diſcourſes, of which I know very well that the eternal truths of 
the Divine leaves have no need ; but however I think fo clear an 
agreement is worthy of our conſideration, which gives us occa- 
fion to adore and admire the greatneſſe of God in his mighty 
Works, in that we are ſometimes able, in ſome ſort, to mealure 
them by the ſhort Standard of our Reaſon. 

Many Leſſons alſo may be deduced from the ſame Dodtrine, 
whuch 1 paſle by , for that every man of himſelf may eafily know 
them, having once ſtabliſhed this Maxime ; That it is not poſſi 
ble to pronounce any thing, of a certainty,-touching the quantity 
of Running Waters, by con{idering only the ſingle vulgar mea- 
{ure of the Water wichour the velocity 3 and ſo on the contrary, 
he that computes only the velocity, without the meaſure, ſha} 
commit very great errours; for treating of the meaſure of Run- 
ning Waters, it is neceflary, the water being a body, in handling - 
Its quantity, to conſider in it all the three dimenſions of breadth, 
depth, and length: the two firſt dimenſions are obſerved by all 
in the common manner, and ordinary way of meaſuring Runnzog 
Waters ; but the third dimenſion of length is omitted ; and hap- 


ly ſuch an overfight'is committed, by reaſon the length of Rug- 


ning 


Lib. 1. Of RunxinGg WHILE 


ning Water 1s reputed in lome lenſe infinite, in that it never cea- 
ſeth to move away, and as infinite 15 judged incomprehenſible 
and ſuch as that there 15 no exact knowledge to be had thereof ; 
 & ſo there comes to be no account made thereof , but it we ſhould 
make ſtri refleion upon our contideration of the velocity of 
Water, we ſhould find, thar keeping account of the ſame , there 
is a reckoning allo made of the length ; foralmuch as whilſt we 
ſay, the Water of {uch a Spring runs with che Ve.iOCity of palliog 
a thouſand or two thouſand paces an hour : this in {ubſtance is 
no other than if we had ſaid, tuch a Fountain dilchargerh jn an 
hour a Water of a thouland or two thouland paces long. So 
that, albeit the total Jengch of Running water be 1tacomprehen- 
ſible, as being infinite, yer nevertheleſle irs rendered intelligible 
by parts in its velodty. And'ſo much ſufficeth to have hinced 
about this matter, hoping to impart on ſome other occalion other 
more accurate Obſervations in this affair. 


LAUS DE0O. 


Fiit 


33 


ll... —{. i . . a. 


GEOMETRICAL 
DEMONSTRATIONS 


MEASURE 


Running Waters. 


B Y 


' D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, 
Abbot of CAassINA, and Mathematician to 


P. URBAN. VIIL 


DEDICATED 
To the moſt Illuſtrious , and moſt Excellent Prince 


DON THADDEO BARBERINIT, 
; PRINCE OF - 


PALESTRINA, 


| AND *' | 
GENERAL of the HOLY CHURCH. 


FX md 
—— _ i 


LONDON, 


Printed Anno Dom, MDC LXI. 
Ffffa 


—_— 
_ 
' 
- 

= 

% 
z 
” 

» y 

# . —- 

a 
vs 
P \ 
= * 
_—_ 
- 
« 
ws - Rd 
"om. 
— - _ - & _- _ - 4 
- - —— —_ - P 4 - — - _— co _ p_y———_y 
_— - _ _y In —_— - , hy DF = 
has ——— —_ gd - _ſ — - ha 
® - - -— 
—- —_—_ - - - 7 . . = - _— - 
RI —_— OS SES. —- = a —_ - - me 
b” mmm _— kad 


Lib.1. 
OF THE 


MENSURATION 


Running Warers.- 


— _ 


—  — 


— , 


SUPPOSITION LI.:. 


we [peak be erected perpendicular to the plane of the up- 


l Et it be ſuppoſed, that the banks of the Rivers of which 
per {uperficies of the River. 


SUPPOSITION IL 


7 E ſuppoſe that the plane of the bottome of the River, of 
which we ſpeak is at right angles with the banks. 


SUPPOSIEION LIL 


Y 1s to be {uppolgd, that we ſpeak of Rivers, when they are at 
edbe, in that ſtate of ſhallowneſle, or at flowing in that ſtate 
of deepneſle, and not in their tranſition from the ebbe to the 
flowing, or fr mr the flowing to the'ebbe. 


Declaration of Termes, 


FiksT- 
F a River ſhall be cut by a Plane at right angles to the ſurface 
of the water of the River, and to the banks of the River, 
that ſame dividing Plane we call the Se&ion of the River; and 
this Section, by the Suppoſitions above, ſhall be a right angled 


Parallelogram. 


SECOND». 


E call thoſe Sefions equally Swift, by which the water runs 
with equal velocity 3 and more ({wift and leis iwift that 


Section of another, by which the water runs with greater or lefle 
velocity. 


AX 


bb 


Of the MEnSURATION Lib, 


AXIOME LI. 


Ections equal, and equally ſwift, dilcharge equal quantities 
of Water in,equal times. 


5 


AXIOME IL. 


*EGions equally ſwift, and that diſcharge equal .quantity of 
Water, in equa] tume,ſhall be equal. | 


AXIOME III. 


GEttions equal, arid that diſcharge equal quantities of Water 
in equal times, ſhall be equally {xitc, 
I EF ou > | 


of þ 1 AXIOME IV. 
Hen Sc&ions are unequal, but equally ſwift, the quanti- 

y y ty of the Water that paſlith through the tuſt SeRion, 
ſhall bave the lame proportion to the quantity that paſ- 
{rh hrough the Secord, that the firſt SeGion hath to the ſecond 
Settion. Which is manifeſt, becauſe the velocity being the 


ſame, the difference of the Water thar paſſeth ſhall be according 
to the difterence of the Sections-» 


ts _ AXIOME VV. 
2467) 50468 
FF cthe Sefions ſhall be equal, and of unequal velocity, the 
| oma ot the Water that paſſeth through the firſt, ſhall 
have the {ame proportion to that which paſſeth through the 
iecond, that the velocity of the firſt Se&ion, ſhall have to the 
velocity of the {econd Seftion. Which allo is manifeſt, becauſe 


the Sections bcing equal, the difference of the Water which 
pafſeth, dependeth on the velocity. 


PETITION. 


A Section of a River being given, we may ſuppoſe another 


equal to the given , of different breadth, heigth, and ve- 
focity. 


PRO- 


Of Runxninoe W, arts, Libr. 


PROPOSITION L 


TheSettions of the ſame River diſcharge equal auan- 
tities of Water in equal times, although the Sedti- 
ons themſelves he unequal. 


Et the two SeCtions be A and B, in the River C, running 
from A, towards B ; Iay, that they diſcharge equal quan- 
tity of Water in equal times ; for it greater quantity of Wa- 
ter ſhould paſs through A, than paſleth chrough B, it would 


follow that the Water in the intermediate ſpace of the River C, 
would increaſe continually , which is manifeſtly falſe, but if 
more Water ſhould iflue through the SeQtion B, than entreth at 
the SeQion A, the Water in the ,intermediate ſpace C, would 
grow continually leſs, and alwaies ebb, which is likewiſe falſe ; 
therefore the quantity of Water that paſleth through the Sefti- 
- onB, is equal ro the quantity of Water which raſter chrough 
the Seion A, and therefore che Sections of the fame River dif. 
charge, &*c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 


PROPOSITION HII. 


Which paſſeth by one Seftion, is to that which paſ- 


the proportions of the fr Sefion to the ſecond,and 
the firt, to the yelocitie 


Et A, and B be two Sections of a River ; I ſay , that the 
quantity of Water which paſſeth through A, is to that whicti 
Paſſerth through B, in a proportion compounded of the pro- 
portions of the firſt Seftion A, to the Seftion B; and of the vyelo- 
city throuph A, to the velocity through B : Let a Sc&ipn be 


ſuppoſed 


* 27 


__ —-2 


40 


Of tbe Mz nSuRATION [ibn 


ſuppoſed equal to the Seftion A, in ma nitude 3 but of velocity 
equal to (he Seion B/ andlet it be G ; arill as the Section A 


to the Scion B, ſo let the line F be to the line D ; and as the 
velocity A , 15 to the velocity by B, lo let the line D be to the 
line R : Therefore the W atcr which patteth thorow A, ſhall be 
ro that which paſicth through CG (in 1cgard the SeGions A and 

G are of equal bignels, but ot unequal velocny) as the veJocity | 
through A, to the velocity through GC ; But as the velocity | 
through A\,1s to the velocity through G, ſo is the velocity through 
A, to the velocity through B ; namely, as the lice D , to the 
hne R : therefore the quantity of the Water which paſſe the 
through A, ſhall be to the quantity which paſſeth though G, as | 
the line D is to the line R; but. the quantity which paſſerh 
th.ough G, is to that which paſſeth though B, (in regard the 
Seftions C, and B, are Equally {witt) as the SeEjon G to the Se- 
frion B ; that is, as the SeGion A, to the Scftion B that is, as 
the line F, to the line D : Therefore by the equal and perturbed 
proportionality, the quantity of the Water which paſſeth thi ough 
A, hath the ſame proportion tro that which paſleth through B, | 
that the line F hath to the line R; butFtoR, hatha Proportion | 
compounded of the proportions of Fto D, andof D toR; that | 
is, of the Scion A to the Section B ;and of the velocity through | 
A, to the velocity through B - Therefore alſo the quantity of | 
W ater which pafſeth through the SeQion A,ſhall have a propor- 
tion tw that which paſſ*th through rhe SeGion B, compounded of 

the proportions 'of the Se&ion A, to the Section B, and of | 
the velocity through A , to the velocity through B: And 
therefore in two SeQions of Rivers, the quantity of Water which 


paſſeth by the fiſt, &*c. which was to be demonſtrated. 


COROLL ARIE. 


He ſame followeth, though the quantity of the Water which 
pafſeth through the Setion A, be equal to the quantity of 


Water which paſlcth through the SeQion B, as is manifeſt by the 
ſame demonſtration. P R OPO- 


ww 


Lib.1. Of Ruxxino Wargks. 
PROPOSITION IIL. 


ly two Settions unequal, through Which paſs equal 

antities of Water im equal times , the Seftions 

Fes to one another, reciprocal proportion to their 
ypelocitie. | 


* Erthe two unequal Sections, by which paſs equal quantities 
of Water in equal times be A, the greater ; and B, rhe letter: 

I ſay, that the Section A, ſhall have the ſame Proportion 

to the Section B, that reciprocally the velocity through B, hath i 
the velocity through A ; for \uppo'ing that as the Water that 
paſſeth through A, is to that which paileth through B, to 15 the 


line E to the line F : therefore the quantity of water which pal- 
{ech through A, being equal ro that which paſſeth chrough B, 
the line'E ſhall allo be equa] co the line F : Suppoling moreover, 
That as the Seton A, 1s to the Seton B, lo 1s the line F, to the 
line G ; and becauſe the quantity of water which paſſeth 
through the Section A, 15 to that which paſſeth through the 
Section B, in a proportion compoled of the proportions of the 
Section A, to the Section B, and of the velocity through A, to the 
velocity through B 3 theretoce che line E,ſhall be the line to Fm 
a proportion compounded of the {ame proportions 3 namely, of 
the proportion ot the Seton A, to the Seftion B, and of the ve- 
locity through A, to the velocity through B ; but the line E, hath 
to the line G, the proportion of the SeCtion A, to the SeGion B, 
the:etore the proportion remainiag of the line G, to the line F, 
(hall be the proportion of the velocity through A, to the velocity 
through B ; therefore allo the line CG, ſhall be ro the line E, as 
the velocity by A, to the velocity by B: And converſly, the ve- 
locity through B, ſhall be to the velocity through A, as the line 
E,rtothe linc G ; that is to ſay; asthe Sefton A, to the Se&on B, 
and therefore in two Secions, &c. which was to be demonſtrated. 

Geege : COR 0 L- 


] 
H 
f 
fl 


i\4 


Of the MEensnrartl1oN, Lib x, 


COROLLAKIE. 


Ence it is manifeſt, that Sections of the ſame River (which 
are no other than the vulgar meaſures of the River) have 
betwixt themſelves reciprocal proportions to their veloc;. 
ties; for in the Rift Propoſition we have demonſtrated that the 
Seftions of the ſame River, diſcharge equal quantities of Water 
in equal times 3 therefore, by what hath now been demonſtrated 
| the Sedtions of the ſame River ſhall have reciprocal proportion 
to their velocities 3 And therefore the lame running water chan. 
geth meaſure, when it changeth velocity 3 namely, increaſeth the 
meaſure, when it decreaſeth the velocity , and decreaſeth the 
meaſure, when it increaſeth the velocity. 
On which principally depends all that which hath been C.id 
above in the Diſcourſe, and obſerved in the Corollarics and Ap- 
pendixes ; and therefore is worthy to be well underſtood and 


heedcd. | | 


PROPOSITION IV. 


If a Rrver fall into another River, the height of the 

4 Fr its own ( banel Pall to the height that it 
ſhall make in the ſecond ( hanel, in a proportion 
compoxnded of the proportions of the breadth of 
the Chanel of the ſecond, to the breadth of the 
Chanel of the firſt, and of the velocitie acquired in 
the ( hanel of the ſecond , to that which -it had in 
its proper and firit Chanel, | 


Et the River A B, whole height is A C, and breadth CB : 
| (2'® is, Whole Seftion is ACB; let it enter, I ſay, into a- 

nother River as broad as the line E F, and let it therein make 
the riſe or height D E, that is to ſay, ler it have its Scion in 
the River whereinto it falls DE F ; I ſay, that the height AC 
hath to the height D E the proportion compounded of the pro- 
portions of the breadth E F, to the breadth C B, and of the ve- 
locity through DF, to the velocity through A B. Let us Tup- 
pole the Section G,-equal in velocity to the Seftion A B , andin 
breadth equal to EF, which carrieth a quantity of Water e- 
qual to that which the SeQion AB carricth, in equal times, 
and conſequently, equal to that which D F carrieth. Moreover, 
as the breadthE f is to the breadth C B, ſo let the line H be to 


the 
0 _ ; 


Of R UNNING W115 as. 


ve lincl 5 and as the velocity of DF is to the velocity of A B, 
4 : che line | be to the line L 3 becauſe therefore rghe two 
Hoch A Band G areequally {wift, and diſcharge equal quan- 
i y of Warer in equal times; they ſhall be equal Se&ions ; and 


CS A IE I —— — 


CE ©'©])y* 


"as TTY = 
| I ——- 
| 
C B L 
py 4 ON 
El = ' 


therefore the height of A B to the height of G, ſhall be as the 
breadth of G, ro the breadth of A B, that is, as E F to C B, 
that is, as the line H to theline I : but becauſe the Water which 
paſſerh through G, is equal to that which paſſeth through D E F, 
therefore the Seion G, to the Seftion D E F, ſhall have the re- 
ciprocal proportion of the velocity through D E F, to the velo- 
city through G ; but allo the height of G, is to the height D E, 
as the Seftion G, to the Settion D E F : Therefore the height of 
G, is to the height D E, as the velocity through DE F, is to the 
velocity through G ; that 1s, as the velocity through D EF, is to 
the velocicy through A B 3 That is, finally, as the line I, to ghe 
line L; Therefore, by equal proportion, the height of A B, that 
5, A C, ſhall be to the height DE; as Hto L , that is, com» 
pounded of the proportions of the breadth E F, to the breadth 
C B, and of the velocity through D F, to the velocity through 
A B : So that if a River fall into another River, &c. which was 
to be demonſtrated. 


F, 


Of the MensSukation Li * 
PROPOSITION YV, F 


If a River diſcharge a certain quantitie of Water 

7 in pil time ; and after that there come into it 
a Flood, the quantity of Water which i diſchar- 
ged in as much time at the Flood, 'ss to that which 
was diſcharged before, THI River Was low, 
in a proportion Com ounded of 'the proportions of 
the velocity of the Flood, tothe velocity of the firi 
Water , and of the: height of the Flood, to the 
beight of the frit Vater. 


Uppoſe a River, which whilſt it is low, runs by the Se&ion _] 
A F ; and after a Flood cometh into the ſame, and runneth 
chrough the Sefton D F, I ſay, that the quantity of the Wa- 
ter which is diſcharged through D F, 15 to that which is diſcharged 


chrough A F, in a proportion compounded of the proportions of * 
the velocity through D F, to the velocity through AF, and of : 
the height'D B, to the height A B; As the velocity through DF | 
isto the-velocity through AF, ſo let the line R, to the lineS; 
and as the height D B is to the height A B, {o let the line S, to 
che line T 3 and let us ſuppoſe a Se&ion L M N, equal to D F 
in height and breadth; that is L M cqualtoD B, and MN equal 
toB F; burtlet it bein velocity equal ro the Scion A F, there- 
fore the quantity of . Water whichrunnerh through D F, ſhall be 
to that which runneth through LN, as the velocity through DF, 
15 tothe velocity through LN, that is, to the velocity through 
AF, and theline R being to the line, as the velocity through 
D F, to the velocity through A F ; therefore the quantity which 
runneth through D F, to that which runneth through LN, ſhall 
have the proportion of R toS z but the quantity which runneth 
through LN, to that which runneth through A F, (the _— 
is, eing 


{ib. 1. Of Runninoe W arttss. 


»cing equally ſwift) ſhall be in proportion as the Seftion LN, to 
he Scion AF ; that 15,as D Byto AB; that is as the line S, to 
hc line T: Theretore by equal proportion, the quantity of the 
water which runneth through D F,ſhall be in proportion to that 
which runnech through A F,as R 1s to T; that is, compounded of 
che proportions of the height D B, to the height A B, and of the 
vclocity through D F,to the velocity through A F;and therefore 


if a River diſcharge a certain quantity, &*c. which was to be de- -- 


monſrcared. 
ANNOTATION. 


He lame might have been demonſtrated by the ſecond 
Propoſicion above demonſtrated, as is manifeſt. 


PROPOSITION VL 


If two equal ſtreams of the ſame Torrent, fall into 
Ryver at divers times, the heights made in the Ri- 
ver by the Torrent , ſhall have berween them- 
ſelves the reciprocal proportion of the velocities 
acquired in the River. 


; Et A and B, be two equal ſtreams of the ſame Torrent, 


which falling into a River at divers times, make the heights 

C D, and F G; that is the ſtream A, maketh the height 
C D, and the ſtream B, maketh the height F G; that is, Let 
their Sections in the River, into which they are fallen, be C E, 
and F H ; 1 ay, that the height C D, ſhall be to the height F G, 
In reciprocal propo. tion, as the velocity through F H, to the ve- 
locity through CE ; for the quantity of water which paſſeth 
through A, being equal to the quantity which pafleth through B, 
11 equal rimes;alſo the quantity which paſſeth through C E, ſhall 


on mT | | 


-— * = A RESIN 
D| TO NE, fs 
TS” INT 5 

— Er pew REPS —Ja 


be equa] to that which paſſeth through F H : And therefore the 
proportion that the Se&ion C E, hath to the Seton F H; ſhall 
be the ſame that the velocity through F H, hath to the velocity 
through CE ; Bur the Sefion C E, is to the Section F H, as 
CD, toF G, by reaſon they are of the ſame breadth : Therefore 
C D, ſhall be to F G, in reciprocal proportion, as the velocity 
through F H, is to the velocity through C E, and therefore if twa 
equal ſtreams of the ſame Torrent, @-c. which was to Þc de- 
monſtrared, 2g 


Lib.2. | 
OF THE 


MENSURATION 


O F 
Running Waters. 


Lib. 1]. 

7 Aving, in th- cloſe of my Treatiſe of the 

ſl Menſuration of Running Waters promiſed 
all to declare upon another occaſion other par- 

ticulars more obſcure, and of very great 
| concern upon the ſame argumement: I now 
do perform my promiſe on the occafion 
| that 1 had the paſt year vo + . to opoond 
* my thoughts touching the ſtate of the Lake 
of Venice, a buſineſs certainly moſt important, as being the 
concernment of that moſt noble and moſt admirable City ; and 
indect of all Italy, yea of all Europe, Aſra,& Africa ; & one may 
truly ſay of all the wholeWorld. And being to proceed according 
the method neceſſary in Sciences,T wil propole,in the firſt place 
certain Definitions of thoſe Terms whereof we are to make uſe 
n our Diſcourle : and then, laying down certain Principles we 
will demonſ{tratc [oe Problemes and Theoremes neceſſary for 
the und{1{tandivg of thole things which we are to deliver; and 
moreover, recounting {ſundry calecs that have happened , we will 
prove by practice, of what utility this contemplation of the 
Meaſure of Running Waters is in the more important affairs both 
Publique and Private. 


DEFINITION L 


FT Wo Rivers are ſaid to move with cqual velocity, whenin e- 

qual rimes they paſſe ſpaces of equal length. 
| DEFINITION Il. - | 

{it Ivers are {aid to move with like velocity when their propor- 

tional parts do_ move alike, that is, the upper parts alike to 

. the upper, and the lower to the lower ; (o that if the upper 

parfof one River ſhall be more ſwift than the upper part of ano- 

ther; then alſo the lower part of the former ſhall be more ſwift 

than the part correſpondent to it in the ſecond, proportionally. 


DEFL 


*® (); Juice. 


Of the MENSURAT1ON Libr 


DEFINITON Ill. 


T9 meaſure a River, or running Water, is in our ſcnſe to finds 

out how many determinate mealures , or Weights of \atg; 
in a given time paſicth through the River, or Channel of th 
Water that is to be meaſured. 


DEFINITION IV. 


ET F a Machine be made either of Brick , or of Stone , or gf 
Wool, ſo compoſed that two ſides of the laid Machine he 
placed at right angles upon the ends of a thid ſide, that jy 

ſuppoſed to be placcd in the botrom of a River , parallel to the 

Horizon, in ſuch a manner , that all che water which runneth 


through the ſaid River, paſſcch tliorow the ſaid Machine: Ang 


if all the water comi.g to be diverted 
thac runneth through the laid River, the 
upper ſuperficies of that thi.d fide placed A]. 
li the bottom do remain uncovercd 
and diy, and that the dead water be not #: 
above it; . Tliis lame Machine ſhall be 
called by us*REeE curator: And that third ſide of the 
Machine which ſtandeth Horizontally is called the bGttom of 
th; Regulator; andrhe other two ſides, are called the banks of 
the I\cgulator 3 as 1s ſeen in this firſt Figure : AB CD, ſhall be 
the Kegulator ; B C the bottom; and the other two ſides AB, 
and C D arc its banks. 


DEFINITION YV. 


Y the quick height, we mean the Perpendicular from the upper 
luperticies of the River,unto the upper ſuperficies of the bot- 
ton ot the Regulator ; 'as 1Nn the foregoing Figure the line. GH, 


DEFINITION VL 


Ih the water of a River be luppoſed to be marked by three 
lides of a Regulator , that Rightangled ParalleJogram compre- 
hended between the banks of the Regulator, and the bottom, 


and the {uperfticies of the Water is called a Se&ion of the 
River. 


Lib. 2. Of RuxNnINnG W arzrs 


ANNOTATION. 


Ere it is to be noted, that the River it ſelf may have lundry 
and divers heights, in ſeveral parts of its Chanel, by reafon of 
he various velocities of the water , and its meaſures ; as hath 
cen demonſtrated in the firſt book. 


SUPPOSITION [. 


[ T is ſuppoſed, that the Rivers equal in breadth, and quick 

height, that have the ſame inclination of bed or bottom, ought 
alſo ro have equal velocities, the accidental impediments being 
removed that are diſperſed throughout the courſe of the water, 


and abſtrating alſo from the external windes, which may velo- ' 


citaie, and retard the courſe of the water of the River. 
SUPP OSITION II. 


Er us ſuppoſe alſo, that if there be two Rivers that are in 

their beds of equal length, and of the ſame inclination , but of 
quick heights unequal, they ought to move with like velocity 
according to the ſenle explained in the ſecond definition, 


SUP POSI TION Ilft. 


Ecaule it will often be requiſite to meaſure the time' exaQly 
in the following Problems, we take that to be ar excellent 
way to meaſure the time, which was ſhewed me many years ſince 
by Signore Galileo Galilei, which is as followeth. | 
A ſtring is to be taken three Roman feet long, to the end of 
which a Bullet of Lead 1s to be hanged, of about two or three 
ounces ; and holding it by the other end, the Plummer 1s to be 
removed from its perpendicularity a Palm, more or leſs, and then 
let go, which will make many ſwings to and again , paſſing and 
repaſling the Perpendicular, before that it ſtay in the ſame : Now 
it being required to meaſure the time that is ſpent in any what- 
tocver operation, thoſe vibrations are to be. numbred, that are 
made whilft the work Jaſteth 3 and they ſhall be ſo many ſecond 
minutes of an hour, if ſo be,that the ſtring be three Roman feet 
long , butin ſho:ter ſtrings, the vibrations are more frequent, and 
in longer, leſs frequent ; and all this ſtill followeth, whether the 
Plummer be lirtle or much removed from its Perpendiculatity,or 
whether the weight of the Lead be greater or leffer. 
Thele jhings being ee-ſatuales. we will lay down ſome fa- 
H hk hh milzzr 


Of the MEenSuraTloON, Lib 2 


miliar Problems, from which we ſhall pals to the Notions and 
queſtions more ſubt1] and curious 3 which will alſo prove profi- 
table, and not tobe fleighted in this buſineſs of Waters. 


PROPOSITION I. PROBLEME 1. 


A Chanel of Running -W ater being viven.thebreadih 
of which paſsing through a Regulator , is three 
Palms; and the height one Palm, liitle more gx 
leſs , to meaſure what water paſſeth through the 
Reomlator in a time gIven. 


FE! we are to dam up the Chanel 3 fo that there paſs not any 
water below the Dam then we muſt place in the fide ot the 
Chanel, in the parts above the Regulator three, or four, or five 
Bent-pipes, or Syphons,according to the quantiry of the water 
that runneth along the Chanel ; in ſuch fort, as that they ma 
drink up, or draw out of the Chanel all the water that the Cha- 
nel bearcth (and then ſhall we know that the Syphons drink up 
all the water, when we (ce that the water at the Dam doth nei- 
the riſe higher, nor abate, bur alwaies keepeth in the ſame Le- 
vel.) Theſe things being prepared, taking the Inſtrument to 
meaſure the time, we will examine the quantity of the water that 
ifſueth by one of thole Syphons in the {pace of twenty vibrations, 
and the like will we do one by one with the other Syphons; and 
then colleing the whole ſumme, we will lay , that ſomuchis 
the water that paſſech and runneth thorow the Regulator oc 
Chanel (the Dam being taken away) in the {pace of twenty (e- 
cond minutes of an hour ; and calculating, we may eaſily reduce 
it to hours, dayes, months, and years: And it hath fallen to m 
turn to meaſure this way the waters of Mills and Fountains, and 1 


bave been well aſſured of its exafneſs, by often repeating the 
{ame work. 


CONSIDERATION. 


Nd this method muſt be made uſe of in meaſuring the waters, 
that we are to bring into ConduRts , and carry into Cities 
and Caſtles, for Fountains 3 and that we may be able afterwards 
to divide and ſhare them to particular perſons juſtly ; which will 


prevent infinite ſuits and controverſies that every day happen in 
theſe matters.. 


Lib. 2. Of Runnino Warers: 
PROPOSITION II. THEOREM IL 


If a River moving With ſuch a certain velocitie 
through its Regulator , ſhall have a grven quick, 
hesht, and a eta tracs, new water ſhall increaſe 
to be double , it fhall alſo increaſe double -in ve- 
locitie. 


Ec the quick height of a River in the Regulator AB C D, 
be the perpendicular F B, and afterwards,by new water that 
is added to the River, let the water be ſuppoſed to be rail- 
d to G, fo that G B may be double toEB. I lay, that all the 
water G C ſhall be double in velocity to | 

that of E C : For the water G F, having A, D 
for ics bed the bottom E F, equally in- 
clincd as the bed B C, and its quick 


height E-C,and having the ſame breadch y\__ F 
B C, it ſhall have of it ſelf a velocity "c- | 

qual to the velocity of the firſt water B —C 
F C : but becaule, beſides its own moti- 

on , which is imparted to it by the motion of the water E C, it 
hath alſo over and above its own motion,the motion of E C. And 
becauſe the two waters G C, and E C, are alike in velocity, b 
the third Suppoſition ; therefore the whole water G C ſhall be 


double in velocity to the water E C ; which was that which we 
were to demonſtrate. 


This demonſtration is not here inſerted,as perfe&, the Anthour ba- 
ving by ſeveral letters to his friends confeſſed bimſelf unſatisfi- 
ed therewith, and that he mtended not to publiſh the Theorem 
without a more ſolid demonſtration, which pe was in hope to light 
upon. But being overtaken by Death, he could not give the 
pniſhing touch either to this, or to the re$t of the ſecond Book. In 
Yooonſederation of which, it ſeemed good tothe Publiſber of the 
/ſame, rather to omit it, than to do any thing contrary tothe mind of 

Y/ the Authour. And this be hints, by way of advertiſement , to 
tboſe that have Manuſcript Copies of this Bodk , with the ſaid de- 
wonſtration. For this time lct the Reader content bimſelf with 
the knowledge of ſo ingenious and profitable a Concluſion ;, of the 
truth of which be may, with ſmall expence and much. pleaſure, be 
aſſured by means of the experiment to be made in the ſame man- 
ner , with that which is laid down iz the ſecond Corollary of 
Hhhh 3 . the 


beight G E being equal to the quick - + _ H 


5 


Of the MENSURATION LF 


the fourth Theorem of this , with its Table, and the uſe there- 
of annexed. 


COROLLAKIE, 


Ence it followeth, that when a River increaſcth in quick 

height by the addition of new water, it alſo increaſeth in ye. 
locity ; ſo that the velocity hath the ſame Proportion to the yelo- 
city that the quick height hath to the quick height ; as may be 
demonſtrated in the fame manner. 


"PROPOS. IIkL PROBLEME 11 


A Chinel of Water being given whcſe b: eaath exceeds not 
twenty Palms, or 1Lereabouts and whoſe quick beight 
is hſs than five Palms, to meaſure 16e quantity of the 
Water that runneth throw the Chanel in a time 
pruen, * 

Y Lace in the Chanel a Regulator , and obſerve the quick 

| Divewd in che aid Regulator 3 then let the water be turned 
AW, f:om the Chanel by a Chancllet of three or four Palms 

in breadth, or thereabouts : Arid that being done , meaſure the 
quantity of che water which paſſeth thorow the ſaid Chaneller, 
as hatch been cavghr in the ſecond Propoſition ; and at the ſame 
tiwc vbſerve exactly how much the quick height ſhall be abated 
in the greater Chanel, by means of the diveriion of the Chanel- 
ſer; and a'l chefe particulars being performed, mulciply the quick 

Þcig/»r of the greater Chanel into it felt, and likewiſe multiply 

int {6 1024 che ictier height of the laid bigger Chanel, and the 

leftcr {qttare being taken, from the greater , the remainder ſhall 
ha-c tar 4amme proportion to the whole greater {quare, as the wa- 
cr of the Chaneller diverted , hath to the water of the bigger 

Canal: And becaule the water of the Chancellet is known by 

tie Yichod aid down in the firſt Theorem, and the terms of the 

Fac orcm beiay allo known, the quantity of the water which run- 

r.cth thorow the bigger Chanel, ſhall be alſo known by the Gol- 

den Kuic, which was that that was deſired to be known. We 
will explain the whole bulinels by an example. 
Lect a Chanel be,for example, 15 Palms broad, its quick height 

beforc its diverſion by the Chanellet ſhall be luppoled to bc 24 

lches ; but after the diverſion, let the quick height of the Chanel 

bc onely 22 inches. Therefore the oreater height to the leſler; 
is as the number 1x. to 12.But the ſquare of 11. 15121 and the 


{quare of 1 2. is 144 , the difference between the ſaid lefler 
{quare 


Lib.x; Of R unx1xG W arfrs. 


[quare and the greater is 23. Therefore the diverted water, is 
-0 the whole water, as 23. to144 : which is well nears t to 
6-*: and thar 15 the proportion that the quantity of the water 
which runneth through the Chaneller ſhall have, A all the water 
char runncth thorow the great Chanel Now if we ſhould finde 
by the Rule mentioned above in the firſt Propoſition , that the 
quantity of rhe water that- runneth through the Chanellet, + 
v. 7. an hundred Barrels, in the ſpace of 15 ſecond minutes of 
an hour, it 1s manifeſt, that the water which ranneth throtigh the 
great Chanel 1n the {aid time of 35 min. {ec. ſhall be about 600 
. Bar, cls. WE: B.”--r SIO 


The. ſame operation performed another ivay. 


Nd becauſe very often in applyipg che Theory to Practice 
A: happeneth, that al! the necciliry. 'particulars in the ,The- 
ory cannot ſo eafjly/be pat iv'exccution ; therefore we'will 
here add another way of pertorming the tame Problem, it it ſtould 
chance to happen that the Chaneller could not commodiouſl y be 
diverted from the great Chanel, but: 'that it ware .cafier for the 
water of aaother {maller Chanel .to be brought unto. the grears 
Chanel ; which water of the ſmaller Chanel might be cafilymea- 
ſurcd , as hath been ſhewen in the twit.P: obleme; or in caſe: that 
there did tall into a greater Chanel, a leſſer Chane] : thae:wight 
be diverted. and meaſured. Therctovic | {ay mrthe fiift caſe; If 
we would mealure the quantity ofthe watcr chat. runneth 'in a 
certain time thorow the greater Clancl,1nto which another leſſer 
Chanel that is meaſurable may be brought, we muſt firſt exattly 
mea(ure the Chanellet, and then oblerve the quick height: of the 
preater Chanel, before the inrroduGion of the leffer ; and having 
brought in the {aid Chanellet, we muſt aynin tind the propor. 
tion that the water of the Chanellet hath to all the water ot the 
great Chanel ; tor theſe terms of the proportion being known, as 
allo the quantity of the water of the Chanellet , we ſhall allo 
come to know the quantity of the water that runneth thorow 
the great Chanel. Ir is likewiſe manifeſt, that we ſhall obtain 
our intent, if the cale were that there entered into the great 
Chanel, another leſſer Chanel that was meaſurable , and that 
mizhr be diverted. 


CONSIDERATION. 


T would be neceſſary to make: uſe 'of this Dodrine in the di= 
ſiribution of the waters that are impioy'd to overflow the fields, 
as 15 uled in the Breſcia, Cremoneſe, Bergamaſe, Lodigian,Mils- 
: neſe, 


55 


p——— 
w— _ » 
- —= 


- - _ —_ 
*. Po 


Of the MEnsSuratlION [th 2 


neſe territories, and many other places, where very preat ſuits 
and differences ariſc, which not being to be determined with in- 
telligible reaſons, come oftentimes ro be decided, by force of 
armes ; -and inſtead of flowing their Grounds with W aters, they 
cruelly flow them with the ſhedding of humane blood, inpiouſ] 
inverting the courſe of Peacc and Juſtice, ſowing ſuch dilorder; 
and feuds, as that they arc lometimes accompanied with the ry. 
ine of whole Cicics, or elle unprotitably charge them with Vain, 
and {ometimes prejudicial CXPCNCcEs, 


PROPOS. IV. THEOR. IL. 


If a River increaſe in quick height , the quamtitie 0 

4 os Che fiver liſcbargeth res the K] 
creaſe, hath the Proportion compounded of the *' 
Proportions of the Quick height to the Quick © 
height, and of the velocity to the velocity. 


Et there be a River, which whilſt it is low, runneth thorow 
the Regulator D F, with the Quick height AB, and akter= 
wards let a Flood come; and then let it run with the height 

DB, I fay, that the quantity of the Water that is diſcharged 
through.D F, to that which diſchargeth through A F, hath the 
proportion compounded of the proportions of the velocity 
through D F to the velocity through A F, and of the height 
D B to the height A B. As the velocity through D F is to the 
velocity through AF, ſo let the line R be to the lineS; and as 
the height D B is to the height AB ; ſo let the line $ be to the 


lne T, And let a Section be ſuppoſed L MN equal to the 
Section D F in height and length, but let it be in velocity equal 
to the SeGion AF, Theretore the quantity of the Water that run- 
neth through D F co that which rynneth through L N, ſhall be 


as 


Lib. 2. Of Runnino VVarams. 


1« the velocity through D F, to the velocity of LN, that is, to 
the velocity through LN, thats, to the velocity through A F. 
cheretore the quantity of Water which runneth through D F, 
'0 that which paſleth through L N, ſhall have the proportion 
chat R hathto S 3 but the quaritity of rhe Water that runneth 
through LN, to that which runnech.chrough A F ; (the Sections 
bcing equally {wift) ſhall have the proportion that the Section 
L N hath to the Seftion A F; thar is, that the height B D hath to 
che height B A, that 13, that S hath to T. Therefore, by equal 
p:oportion, the quantity of the Water which runneth by D F, 
to that which runnech by A F, ſhall have the proportion ot R to. 
T, chat is, ſhall be compounded of the propartions of the height 
D B, to the height AB3 and of the velocity through DF, ta 
the velocity through A F. © And theretore it a River increaſe in 
quick height, the quanticy of the Water that runneth after the 
ncreale, to that which runneth before the increaſe, hath the 
proportion compounded, &c. Which was to be demonſtrated. 


COROLLAKIJE I 


F En<c it followeth, that we having ſhewn, that the quantity of 

the Water which runnech, whilſt the River is high, to that 
which ran , whilſt it was low, hath the proportion compounded 
ot the velocity to the velocicy, aud of the height to the height. 
And it having been demonſtrated, that the velocity to the velo- 
city 15 as the height to the heighc; it followeth, I ſay, that the 
quantity of the Water that runneth, whilſt the River is high, to 
that which runneth, whilſt it is low, hath duplicate proportion of 
the beight to the height, that 1s, che proportion that the ſquares 
of the heights have. | 


COROLLARKIE 1lI. 


Pon which things dependeth the reaſon of that which I have 

laid, 1n my ſecond Conſideration, that if by the diverſion of 
; of the Water that entereth by the Rivers into the Moor or 
Fen, the Water be abated ſuch a meaſuce, that ſame ſhall be 
only one third of its whole height;zbur moreover diverting the 3, it 
ſhall abate ewo other thirds, a moſt principal point ; and (uch, 
that its not having been well underſtood, hath cauſed very great 
diſorders, and there would now, more than ever, follow extream 
dammage, if one ſhould put 18 execution the diyerſionof the Sile 
and other Rivers; and it is manifeſt, rhat in the ſame manger, 
wherewith it hath been demonſtrated, that the quantity of the 
Water increaſing quadruple, the height ay +." 

ou 


55 


Of the MEnsnkartloON Lib.z, 


double, and the quantity increaſing nonuple, the height increa- 
ſeth triple; fo that, by adding to units all the odde numbers, ac« 
cording to their Series, the heights increaſe according to the na- 
tural progreſſion of all the numbers, from units. As for exam. 
ple, there paſſing thorow a Regulator ſuch a certain quantity of 
Water in one time; adding three of thoſe meaſures , the quick 
height is two of thole parts , which at firſt was one; and con. 
tinuing to adde five of thoſe {aid meaſures, the height is three of 
thoſe parts which at firſt were one 3 and thus adding ſeven, and 
then nine, and then 11- and then 13, &c. the heights ſhall be 4. 
then 5, then 6. then 7, &c. And tor the greater facility of the 
Work, we have deſcribed the following Table, of which we will 
declare the uſe : The Table is divided into three Series 6r Pro- 
greflions of Numbers : the firſt Series containeth all the Num- 
bers in the Natural Progreſſion, beginning at a Unit, and is called 
the Series of the Heights ; the ſecond containeth all the odde 
numbers, beginning at an unit, and is called the Series of the 
Additions: the third containeth all the ſquare numbers, begin- 
ning at an unit, and is called the Series of Quantity. 


1 


Heights. 1 11 21 31 41 5161 7181 gl gol ut 
Additions. Il 1] 31 51 71 9litlizlhigh7l 191 21 
Quantities, 1 L 41 9116 125 136 149164 181 lcoolt2i 


—}_A——____—— 4 


The uſe of the afore-mentioned Table. 


Ir, if we ſuppoſe the whole quick height of a River of Run- 
ning Water to be divided into any number of equal parts, at 
leaſure, and would abate the ſame one fifr, by means of a divi- 
ſton 3 let there be found in the Table in the Series of heights the 
number 5. the denominator of the part which the River is to a- 
bate, and take the number that is immediately under it in the 
row of Additions, which is 9. which let be ſubſtracted from the 
number 25. placed underneath the ſame in the row of Quanti- 
ties, the remainder 16. fignifieth that of the 25. parts of Water 
that ran in the River, whilſt it was- 5 meaſures high , there do 
onely run 16. parts; ſo that to make it abate # it is neceſſary to 
take ;: from the Water that the whole River did carry ; fo that 
with ſubſtrating ſomewhat more than one third of the Water of 
the River, it is abated but only one fift. 

2. And thus, in the ſecond place, if on the contrary, one would 
know how much water is to be added to the ſaid River to make 
it igcreaſe one fift more in height, ſo as that it may run in the 

e3r : Regulator 


S9 


[ih,> Of RunxiIngG W artgss. 


N.ularor 6. of thole parts high 3 of which it ran before but s. let 
4 be found in the row of heights, and let the number ir. Rand- 
:1o tinder the fame be taken and added to the number 25. 
char i placed under the number 9. in the Additions, and 5. in 
the heights, and you ſhall have 36; which is the .quantiry of the 
watcr that runneth with the height of the River, when ir is high 
6 of thole parts, whereof it was before but 5, 

'3. Butific ſhould be deſired, ro know how much water it is 
requiſite to add ro make the River riſe ſo, as that it may run in 
height 8. of thoſe parts of which before it ran but 5 ; one 
ought to take the lum of the number of the Series of Additions 
ſtanding under BS. 7. and 6, which are 15. 13. and 11. that is, 39. 
and this ſhall be the ſumme thac muſt be added to 25 : So that 
ro make the River to run 8. of thoſe parts in height, of which it 
betore did run 5, it will be neceſſary to add 39. of thoſe parts, 
of which the River before was 25. 

4. Likewiſe the ſame Table giveth the quantity of water 
that runneth from time to time through a River, that increaſeth 
by the addition of new water to the ſame in one,of its hcights, the 
quantity of its water be known. As for example: If we knew that 
the River in one minute of an hour diſchargeth 25 00.0f thole mea- 
{arcs of water,and runneth in height 5.parts in the Regulator,and 
afterwards ſhould ſee that it runneth 8 Palms high , finding 1n the 
row of quantity the number placed under 8.which is 64.we would 
lay that the River heightned, carricth of water 64. of thoſe parts 
whercot it carried Us 5k bur 25 : and beeauſe before it carried 
2500. mcalures, by the Golden Rule we will fay,that the River 
carrieth 64.00.0f thoſe mealures,of which before it carried 25 00. 

[n this progreſs of Nature, is one thing really curious, and that 
at firſt ſight ſcemeth to be ſomewhat Paradoxal , that we pro- 
ceeding ordinarely in the diverſions and additions., with additi= 
ons and diverſions fo unequal, the abatings do notwithſtanding 
alwaics prove equal, and lo do the rifings : And who would cver 
think that a River in height, v.g. 10. Palms, running and carry- 
ing an hundred meaſures in a minute of an hour, is to abate but 
one Palm, onely by the diverſion of 19. of thoſe meaſures ; and 
then again, that the buiſineſs cometh to that paſs , that it abateth 
likewiſe a Palm by the diverſion of three onely of thoſe meaſures, 
nay, by the diverſion of but one meaſure? and yet it -is moſt 
ccitain : Andthis truth meets with ſo manifeſt 'proofs in experi- 
ence, that it is very admirable ! And for the full ſatisfaftion of 
thole , who not being able to comprehend ſubtil demonſtrati- 
ons, defire to be clearly inform'd by the matters of 'fa&, and to 
(ce with their bobil y eyes, and touch with their hands, what their 
underſtanding and reaſon cannot reach unto: I will hear add 
another very eaſte way to reduce all to an experiment , the 

E117 {hich 


£5 


Of te MENSURATLON "ES. 2 


which may be made in little , in great, orin very great ; of 
which I make uſe frequently , to the admiration < ſuch as ſee it. 


I pcepared an hundred Siphons, or,zif you will, bowed Pipes, 
all equal ; and placed them at the brim of a Veſſel , wherein the 
water is kept at one and the lame level (whether all the Sy phong 
work, or but a certain number of them) rhe mouths by which 
the water ifſueth being all placed in the ſame level, parallel to 
the Horizon ; but lower in level than the water 1n the Veſlel; and 

athered all the water falling from the Syphons into another 
Veſſel ſtanding lower than the former, 1 made it to run away 
thorow a Chanel , ia ſuch manner inclined , that wanting water 
from the Syphons, the laid Chanel remained quite dry. 

And thi» done, 1 meaſured the quick. height of the Chanel 
with care, and afterwards divided it exa@ly into 10 equal parts, 
and cauſing 19. of thole Syphons to be taken away, {o that the 
Chane! did not run water, {ave onely with 81 of tho'e Syphons, 
I again obſerved the quick height of the water 1n the ſame ſite 
oblerved before, and found that its height was diminiſhed pre- 
ciſely the tenth part of all its firſt height ; and thus continuing ro 
take away 17. other Syphons, the height was likewiſe diminiſh- 
ed +. of all is firſt quick height 3; and trying to take away 15. 
Syphons, then 133 then 11, then 9, then 7, then 5, and then 3, 
alwaies in theſe diverſions,made in order as hath been ſaid, there 
enſued ſtill an abatement of :, of the whole height. 

And here was one thing worthy of obſervation, that the water 
encreaſing in | or through] the Chanel,its quick height was diffe- 
rent in different ſites of the Chanel, that is ſtill lefler , the more 
one approached to the Out-let; notwithſtanding which the abate- 
ment followed in all places proportionably, that is in all its ſites 
the firſt part of the height of that ſire diminiſhed : And more- 
over the water iſſued from the Chanel,and dilated into a broader 
courle, from which likewiſe having divers Out-lets and Mouths; 
yer nevertheleſs in that breadth alſo the quick heights ſucceſſive- 
ly varied and altcredin the ſame proportions. Nor did I here 
dceliſt my obſervation, but the water being diminiſhed, that iſſu- 
ed from the Sy phons, and there being but one of them left that 
diſcharged water ; 1 obſerved the quick height that it made in the 
above-aid ſites, (the which was likewiſe 5. of all the ficſt height) 
there being added to the water of that Syphon, - the water of 
three other Syphons 3 ſo that all the water was of 4 Syphons, 
and conſequently quadruple tothe firſt Syphon ; bur the quick 
height was onely double, and adding five Siphons, the quick 
height became triple, and with adding ſeven Syphons,the height 
uncrealed quadruple ; and ſo by adding of 9. it increaſed quin- 
tuple, and by adding of 11, it cy ſextuple , and Ss 

ng 


ERA WIA, A IE" . < 4 — 
”- "ot =4 > P-3 > a 'Y $f: 
@ g + W,zE59 25 4 ww vow wy oy F . $4 


> F166 
, pon -. F:; > 


Lib. 2. Of Runxinoe VVarars. 

ding of 1 3+ It increaſed ſeptuple, and by adding of 15. ofuple, 
and by adding of 1 7. nonuple,and laſtly by adding 1 9. Syphons 3 
{o that all rhe water was centuple to the water of one Syphon, 
yet nevertheleſs the quick height of all this water was onely de- 
cuple to the firſt height conjoyned by the water that iſſued from 
one onely Syphon. 

For the more clear underſtanding of all which, I have made 
the following Figure ; in which we have the mouth A, that 
maintaineth the water of the Veſſel B C in the ſame level; though 
it continually run 3 to the brim of the Veſſel are put 25. Sy- 
phons (and there may be many more) divided into 5 Claſſes, 
D EFGH, and the firſt D, are of one onely Syphon ; the ſecond 
E, of three Syphons; the third F, of five ; the fourth G, of 7 ; the 
fifth H, of 9 3 and one may (uppoſle the ſixth of 11, the {ſeventh 
of 1 3 Syphons, and ſo of the other Claſſes, all containing in con- 
ſequent odd numbers ſucceſſively (we are content to repreſent in 
the Figure no more bur the five forenamed Claſſes to avoid con- 
fuſion) the gathered water DEF GH, which runneth thorow 
the Chanel I K L, and falleth into the out-let MN OP; and fo 
much (ufficeth for the explanation of this experiment. 


— 
B- — =yg a} . 
——— or © 
—- _—_— — 
: TN F [ 
__——_— E —— —— a— — — o 
= _ OO —  w_—=————— = SL 
— DD —_— —_— _ —_ — . —— 
— : En ——_—_— || \ — - EL 
—_— — = — 5 => — — - — —_— = a — _— ” LE 
pan a ge_ Ti. __ -— — — mm — -- _ LS 
w— — = — - gg—— m— 2 — 
f = _— — Th K<__ s _—_——— —— 4 
_ -A 4C 2<@ OT —_— © " - — 
— $a - - - —— — o a_— —_ — 
_— — —_— —_—_. 5 —_— | i - 
LEES — 4 I K 3 _— 
— >. INN EIE—_— Re” E Y = 5 — _— 
—  _—_— s L m_——n_— _ © = po . — 
"_ — _———— — : - _ _ w_ Jn 4 _ 
—_—— = _— ——_ oy —_——- — = rr _ 
—— ——_—— —_ ——— o F jcs NT — —_ —=0 
* _— _ =—_ —_— 
— I _ . 
—O— o — _— = — ——=— 
_— - - 
= 
o — 
9 | | \ 
Liii 3 ÞROP- 


—_ 
_ — —— 


dl 


Of the Mensun\ation [3 5. 


PROPOS. V. PROB. IIL. 


Any River of any bigneſs, if being given to examine t! 
quantity of the W ater that runners thorow the River 
ina time aſſigned. 


Y what we have ſaid already in the two preceding Pro- 

blems, we may alſo reſolve this that we have now before 

us ; and it is done, by diverting in the firſt place from the 
preat River a good big meaſurable Chanel, as is taught in the 
{econd Probleme , and obſerving the abatement of the River, 
cauſed by the diverſion of the Chanel ; and finding the proporti- 
on that the Water of the Chanel hath to that of the River, then 
let the Water of the Chanel be meatured by the {econd Pro- 
bleme, and work as above, and you ſhall have your deſire, 


g— 


CONSIDERATION. L 


Nd although it ſeemeth as if it might prove difficult, and 
A almoſt impollible ro make uſe of the Regulator number, it 
one be about to meaſure the water of ſome great River, 
and conſcquently would be impoſlible; or at leaſt very difficult 
to reduce the Theory of the firſt Probleme into praftice : Yet ne- 
' vertheleſs, I could ſay that ſuch great conceirs of meaſuring the 
watcr of a great River, are not to come into the minds of any 
but great Perſonages, and potent Princes of whom it is expe&ed 
for their extraordinary concerns, that they will make theſe kinde 
of enquiries 3 as if here in Italy it ſhould be of the Rivers Thber, 
Velino, Chiana, Arno, Serchio, Adice, 1n which it ſeemeth real- 
ly difticult to apply the Regulator , to finde exaQly the quick 
height of the River : But becauſe in ſuch like caſes ſometimes 
it would turn to account to be at ſome charge, to come to the 
exact and true knowledge of thc quantiry of water which that 
River carrieth , by Knowledge whereof , other greater dil- 
burkments might afterwards be avoided, that would oft times be 
made in vainz and prevent the diſguſts, which ſometimes happen 
amongſt Princes : Upon this ground I think it will be well co 
ſhew allo the way how to make ule of the Regulator in thele 
grcat Rivers ; in Which if we will but open our cyes, wc ſhall mcet 
with goud ones, and rhole made without great coſt or ſabour, 
which will ſerve our turn. 
For upon ſuch like Rivers there are Wears, or Lockes made, 
c0 


Lib. 2. Of Runnine VVarers. 
3 caulſc the Waters to riſe, and to turn them for the ſervice of 
\tills, or the like. Now in theſe Cales it is ſufticient, that one 
ere upon the two extreames of rhe Weare two Pilaſters either 
of Wood or Brick, which with the botrome of the Weare do 
compole our Regulator, wherewith we may make our deſired 
operation, Yea the Chanel it felt diverted ſhall ferve , wirhour 
making any other diverſion or union. - And in briet, if the bu- 
inetſes be but managed by a judictous perfon, there may wayes 
aid hclps be made nſec of, acco:ding to occaſion, of which i 
would be too tedious to ſpeak, and therefore this little that hath 
been hinted ſhall (uſhce. 


CONSIDERATION Il. 


T*Rom, what hath been declared, it it ſhall be well under- 
ſtood, may be deduced many benetits and conveniences, 
not onely in dividing of Running Waters for infinite uſes 

that they are put to in rurning of Corne-Mills, Paper-Mills, 

Gias, Powder-Mills, Rice-Mills, Iron: Mills, Oil-Mills , Saw- 

ng-Mills, Mirtle- Mills, Felhng- Mills, Fulliag-Mills, Silk-Mills, 

and (uch other Machines ; but allo in ordering Navigable Cha- 
nels, diverting Rivers and Chanels of Waters , or terminating 
and limiting the ſizes of Pipes fas Bouptains : In all which if 
fairs rhere are great errours corlinjaved, to the Folle of much 
expence, the Chanels and Pipcs that are made, {omertymes not 
being ſuflicr2ne to carry the deſigned Waters, and ſometimes they 
are made bigger than is neceflary 3 which dilorders ſhall be 
avoided, it the Engineer be adviſed of the things aboveſaid: and 
in caſe that to thele Notions there be added the knowledge of 

Philoſophy and Mathcmaricks, agreeable to the ſublime Diſco- 

veries of Szgnore Galilaxo, and the further 1unprovement thereof 

by Signore Evangeliſta Tarricelli, Mathematician to the Grand 

Duke of Tuſcany, who hath ſubiilly and admirably handled this 

whole buſinefle of Motion, one ſhall then” come to the know- 

ledge of particular notions of great curiolity in the Theoricks , 

and of extraordinary bencfit in the Prafticks that daily occur in 

thele buſineſſes. 

And to ſhew, in effect, of what utility theſe Notions are, I 
have thought fit to inſert, in this place, the Contiderations by 
me made upon the Lake of Venice , and to repreſent, 
at large, by the experience of the laft year 1641. the moſt Se- 
rene Erizzo , then Duke of the ſaid Republique. Being 
therefore at Venice, in the ycar aforeſaid, I was requeſted by the 
moſt Hluſttious and moſt Excellent Signore Giowanni Baſa- 

\ donyd 


6 Of the MEensSunraTlGH; Lib. 


donna, a Senatour of great worth and merit, that 1 would inge- 
nuouſly deliver my opinion touching the ſtate of the Lake 
of Venice; and after I had diſcourſed with his Honour ſeye- 
ral times, in the end I had order to {ſet down the whole 
buſinefſe in writing, who having afterwards read it privately, 
the ſaid Signore imparted the ſame, with like privacy, to the 
moſt Serene Prince, and I received order to repreſent the 
ſame to the full Colledge , as accordingly 1 did in the Moneth 
of May, the ſame year, and it was as followeth. 


Lib.3. 


CONSIDERATION 


S 


Concerning the 


LAKE 
VENICE 


Abbot of S. Benedetto Aliyſo , Mathematician to 


Pope UR BAN VII. and Profeſſor in 
R O ME. 


— —— — — > DO oe eo ere os 


——_——— 
ti at. lt. Att —_ 


CONSIDER ATION I. 


—— - © ———_ 


q Hough the principal cauſe be but one 
J || onely, that in my judgment threatneth 


irreparable ruine to the Lake of 
Venice, inthe preſent ſtate in which ir 


now ſtands; Yet nevertheleſfſe, I think 
that two Heads may be confidered. 
And this Confideration may peradven- 
ture (erve us for to facilitate and explain 
the opportune remedies, though not to 
render the ſtate of things abſolutely unchangeable and eternal: 
an enterprize impoſſible, and elpecially in that which having had 
{ome beginning, ought likewiſe neceſſarily to have its end; or 
at leaſt to prevent the danger for many hundreds of years ; and 
poſlibly it may, in the mean time, by the mutation it ſelf be 
brought into a better condition. © | 

I ſay therefore, that the preſent diſorder may be conſidered 
under two Heads ; One is the very notable diſcovery of Land 
that is obſerved at the time of low Water, the which, beſides 
the obſtrufting of Navigation in the Lake and alſo in the 
Chanels, doth likewiſ: threaten another miſchief and diſorder 


worthy 


Of the MEnsunaTtION Lib. z 


worthy of;very particular conſideration, which is, That the Sun 
drying up that mudde, eſpecially in the times of hot Summers, 
doth railc thence the putrified and pernicious vapours, fogs, and 
exhalations that infe& the Air, and may render the City unha- 
bitablc. pole ; 

The ſecond Head is the great Stoppage that daily is grow- 
ing in the Ports, eſpecially of Venice, at Malamoco ; concerning 
which matters I will hint certain general points, and then 
will procced to the more particular and important affairs. 

And firſt, I ſay, that I hold jr alcogether impoſlible to effe& 
any thing, though never lo protitable, which doth not bring with 
it ome milchict ; and theretore ghe good and the hurt ought to 
be very well weighed, and then the lefle harmful part to be im- 
braced. | | 
Secondly, I propole to conſideration; that the ſo notable diſ- 
covery of Earch & Mud, hath not been Jong obicrved,as | under- 
ſtand, from 0.4* perſoas that can remember paſlages for fifty 
years paſt ; which thing being truc, as to me it icemeth moſt 
true, it thould appear that it could not but be good to reduce 
matters to that palle that they were at formerly, (laying aſide 
all aife&ion or pallion that (elf-flattcring minds have entertained 
for their own concerts) or at leaſt it ſhall be neceſlary ipeedily to 
conſult the whole. 

Thudly, I hold thatit is neceſſary to weigh, whether from the 
torelaid dilcovery of Land, it followeth, that onely the Earth ri- 
ſcch, as it 15 commonly thought by all, without diſpute; or whe- 
ther the Waters are abated and faln away or elſe whether it 
procecdeth from both the one and other cauſe. And here it would 
be {caſonableto enquire, what ſhare the ſaid cauſes may have, 
cach conlidercd apart it the foreſaid effet. For, in the firſt 
calc, if the Earth have been raiſed, it would be neceflary to 
contider of taking it down, and removing it : But if the Wa- 
ters have iailcd or abated, I believe that it would be extreamly nes 
cellary co reſtore and raile them : And if both theſe reaſons have 
conſpired in this effeR, it will be neceſſary to remedy them each 
apart. And1Ido, for my part, think, that the ſo notable appea- 
rance of Shelves at the time of low Water, proceeds principally 
from the decreaſe and abatement of the Waters, which may 
confidently be affirined to necd no other proof, in regard that the 
Brent hath been' aCually diverted which did formerly diſcharge 
its Water into the Lake. 

As to the other point of the great Stoppage of Ports, I hold, 
that a)l proceedeth from the violence of the Sea, which being 
ſometimes diſturbed by windes, eſpecially at the time of the wa- 


ters flowing, doth continually raiſe from its bottome immenle 
| heaps 


4 


$ L 


Lib.2. Of Running Wares, 


heaps of (and, carrying them by the ride; and force of the waves 
:nro the Lake 3 it not having on its part any ſtrength of currenc 
char may raiſe and carry them away, they ſink to the bottom, and 
ſo they choke up the Ports. And that this effe& happeneth in 
this manner, We have moſt frequent experiences thereot along the 
Sea-coaſts : And have obſerved in Tuſcany on the Romen- 
ſhores, and in the Kingdom of of Naples, that when a river fal- 
[cth into the Sea,there is alwaics ſeen in the Sea it ſelf, at the place 
of the rivers out-let, the reſemblance,as it were,of an half-Moon 
or a great ſhelf of ſertled ſand under water, much higher then the 
reſt of the ſhore, and it 1s called in Tuſcany, il Cavallo ; and here 
in Venice, lo Scanto : the which cometh to be cut by the current 
of the river, one while on the right ſide, another while on the 
left, and ſometimes in the midſt, according as the Wind fits. And 
alike effe& | have obſerved in certain little Rillers of water, 
along the Lake of Bolſena; with no other difference,ſave that of 
ſmall and great. 

Now whoſo well confidereth this effe&, plainly ſeeth that it 
proceeds from no other , than from the contrariety of the ſtream 
of the River, to the impetus of the Sea-waves ; ſecing that 
great abundance of (and which the Sea continually throws upon 
the ſhore, cometh to be driven into the Sea by the ſtream of the 
river ; and in that place where thoſe two impediments meet 
with equal force, the ſand ſerleth under water, and thereupon is 
made thag ſame Shelf or Cavallo; the which if the river carry 
water, and that any conſiderable ſtore, it ſhall be thereby cur 
and broken z one while in one place, and another while in ano- 
ther; as hath been (aid , according as the Wind blows: And 
through chat Chanel it is that Veſlels fall down into the Sea, and 
again make to the river, as intoa Port. But if the Water of 
the river ſhall not be continual or ſhall be weak, in that caſe the 
force of the Sea-Wind ſhall drive ſuch a quantity of ſand into 
the mouth of the Port, and of the river, as ſhall wholly choak it 
up. And hereupon there are ſeen along the Sea-fide, very many 


Lakes and Meers, which at certain tunes of the year abound with 


waters, ad the Lakes bear down that encloſure , and run into 
the Sea. 

Now it is neceſſary*o make the like refleFions on our Ports 
ol Venice, Malamoceo, Bondolo, and Chiozze z which in a certain 
lenſe are no other than Creeks, mouths,and openings of the ſhore 
that parts the Lake from the main Sea ; and therefore 1 hold that 
it the Waters in the Lake were plentiful they would have 
ſtrength ro ſcowr the mouths of the Ports thorowly, & with great 
force ; but the Water in the. Lake failing , the Sea will with- 
out any oppoſa], bring ſuch a Sn ſand into the Ports 3 that if 
. K ic 


66 Of the MENSURATION - Lib. 2: 


it doth not wholly choke them up, it ſhall render them at leaG 
unprofitable, and impoſſible for Barks and great Veſlcls. 

Many other conſiderations might be propounded concernin 
theſe two heads of the ſtoppage of the Ports, and of the appea- 
rance of the Ouze and Mud in the Lakes, but ſo much ſhall (uf. 
fice us to have hinted, ro make way for dilcourſing of the Opera- 
tions about the oportune remedies. 

Yet before that I propound my opinion, I lay, That I know 
very well that my propoſal,at firſt ſight,will ſeem abſurd andin- 
convenient ; and thereforc, as luch, will perhaps be reze&ed by 
the moſt : and ſo much the rather, for that it will prove dire&ly 
contrary to what hath hitherto been,and as I hear, is intended to 
be done : And 1 am not ſo wedded to my opinions , but that T 
do conſider what others may judge thereof : But be itas it will, 
I am obliged to ſpeak my thoughts freely, and that being done, 
I will leave it to wiſer men than my (cli; when they ſhall have 
well conſidered my reaſons, to judge and deliberate of the quid 
agendum : Andif. the ſentence ſhall go againſt me,I appeal tothe 
moſt equitable and inexorable Tribunal of Nature, who not 
caring in the leaſt to plea(c cither one party or another, will be 
alwaies. a pun&ual and inviolable executrix of her eternal De- 
crees , againſt which neither humane deliberations, nor our vain 
deſircs, ſhall ever have power to rebell. I added by word of 
mouth that which followeth. 

Though your Highneſs intereſt your ſelf in this Noble Col. 
» In Pr:gadi, a ledge,.and cauſe it to be confirmed in the * Senate by univerſal 
gens Prune" Vote. that the Winds do not blow,that the Sea doth not fluQuate, 
which have great. That the Rivers do,not run 3 yet ſhall the Winds be alwaies deaf, 
Authority. the Sea ſhall be conſtant 1n 1ts inconſtancy , and the Rivers moſt 
obſtivate : And theſe ſhall be my Judges, and to their determi- 

nation I refer my (elf. 

By what hath been ſaid, in my opinion, that is made very clear 
and manifeſt, which in the beginning of this diſcourſe I glanced 
at ; name]y, That the whole diſorder, although it be divided into 
two heads, into the diſcovery of the Mud, and of the ſtoppage 
Ports, yet neverthelets, by the application of one onely remedy, 
and that in my eſteem-'very eafie, the whole ſhall be removed: 
And thisitis; That there be reſtored into the Lake as much 
W ater as can be poſlible, and in particular from the upper parts 
of Venice, taking care that the Water be as free from Mud as is 
pollible. And that this is the true and real remedy of the prece- 
dent diſorders, is manifeſt : For in the paſſage that this Water 
ſhall make thorow the Lakes, it ſhall of it ſelf by degrees clear 
the Chancls in ſundry parts of them, according to the currents 
that it ſhall lucceflively acquire z and in .this manner being - _ 

peric 


F 
. 
. 
\ 
- 
- 
. 
ho 
£ 
s. 
. 
$+ 
x 
a» 


Lib. 2. Of R unx1nNG VVarins 


»r({ed thorow the Lake, it ſhall maintain the waters in the ſam?, 
and in the Chanels much higher, as I ſhall prove hereafter; a 
thing that will make Navigation commodious ; and that, which 
moreover 15 of great moment jn our bulineſſe ; thoſe Shelves 
of Mud which now dilcover themſelves at the time of Low- 
Waters ſhall be alwayes covered, fo that the putrefaGtion of 
the Air ſhall alſo be remedied. 

And laſtly, this abundance of Water being alwayes to dif: 
charge 1t ſe]lf into the Sea by the Ports, I do not doubt, but that 
their bottomes will be {coured. And that theſe effeRs muſt fol- 
low, Nature her (elf feemerh to perſwade, there remaining onely 
one great doubr, whether that abundance of Water that ſhall be 
brought into the Lake may be really ſufficient to make the Wa- 
ters riſe ſo much as to keep the Shelves covered, and to facilitate 
Navigation, which oughtto be at leaſt half a * Brace, or there- 
abouts. And indeed it feemeth at farſt ſight to be impoſſible, 
that the ſole Water of the * Brent let into the Lake, and diſ- 

ried over the ſame, can occaſion fo notable an height of water; 
and the more to confirm the difficulties, one might ſay, reducing 
the reaſon to calculation, that in cale the Brent were 40. Bra- 
ces broad, and two and an half high, and the breadth of the 
Lake were 20000. Braces, it would ſeem neceſlary that the 
height of the warer of the Brent dilated and diſtended thorow 
the Lake would be but onely .-. of a Brace in height, which is 
mpcrceptible, and would be of no avail ro our purpoſe; nay 
more, it being very certain that the Brent runneth very muddy 
and foul, this would occafion very great miſchief, filling and 
contraQing the Lake, and for thatreaſon this remedy ought, as 

rnicious, to be totally excluded and condemned. 

[ here contefſe that I am ſurprized at the forme of the Argu- 
ment, asif I were in a certain manner convinced, that I dare not 
adventure to ſay more, or open my mouth in this matter ; but 
the ſtrength ir (elf of the Argument, as being founded upon 
the means of Geometrical and Arithmerical Calculation, hath 
opened me the way to diſcover a very crafty traud that is couch- 
ed in the fame Argument, which fraud I will make out to any 
one that hath but any inſight in Geometry and Arithmetick. 
And as it is impoſlible, that fuch an argument ſhould be produced 
by any but ſuch as have taſted of thele, in ſuch affairs, moſt pro- 
firable, and moſt neceſlary Sciences 3 {o do not | pretend to make 
my ſelf underſtood, fave onely by luch, ro whom I will evince 
lo clearly, as that more it cannot be deſired, the errour and fraud 
wherein thoſe Ancients and Moderns have been, and alwayes 
are intangled, that have in any way yet handled this matter of 
conſidering the Meaſure and Quantity of the Waters that move. 

Kkkk 4 And 


* AVenice Brace 
- v 
1s —- of our yard, 


* A River of 


that name, 


"- —_— Ln. 


ne 


. > wn nf 
- ba — 
= 6 -—— 


4. 
1 
& 


* 


"up © Cavit dell 
"Acque, a particu- 
lar Council tha: 
take care of the 
Lakes and other 
Aquatick affairs. 


Of the Mensurantion Lib > 


And ſo great is the eſtcen; that I have for that which 1 am now 
about to (ay touching this particular, that I am content that all 
the reſt of my I2iſcourſe be rezected 3 provided, that that be ver. 
fealy underſtood, which 1am hercaitcr to propoſe, 1 holding 
and knowing, it to be a main Principle, upon which all that is 
foundcd that can be (aid cither well or hand{omely on this Parti- 
cular. The other Diſcourles may have an appearance of bein 
probable, but this luts the mark as full as can be delired, arriving 
at the higheſt d.zrec of certainty. ; 

1 have, ſeventcen years {incc, as I reprelented to the moſt Se. 
rene Prince, and to the Right Honourable the Preſident of the 
Lords the Commiſſioners of the *Sewers, written a Treatiſe of the 
Meaſure of the waters that move, in which I Geometrically de- 
monſtrate and declare this buſinefle, and they who ſhall have 
well underſtood the ground of my Dilcourle, will rcſ fully (a- 
tisfied with that-which I am now about to propole : But that al] 
may become rhe more eafic, I will more briefly explicate and 
declare ſo much thereof as I have detnonltrated in the Diſcourſe, 
which will ſuffice for our purpoſe : And if thar ſhould not be 
enough, we have alwayes the experiment of a very eaſie and 
cheap way to clear up the whole bufſineſle. And moreover ] 
will take the boldnefle to affirm, that in caſe there ſhould not for 
the preſent any. deliberation be made concerning this affair, ac- 
cording to my opinion ; yet nevertheleſſe it will be, at ſome 
time or other ; or if it be not, things will grow worſe and 
worlc. | 

For more clear underſtanding, therefore, it ought to be known, 
that ir being r<quired, as it is generally uſed, to meaſure the wa- 
ters of a River, its breadth and its depth is taken, and theſe two 
dimenſions being multiplied together, the produtt is affirmed to 
be the quantity of that River : As for example, if a River ſhall 
be . 1a0. feet broad, and 20. feet high, it will be ſaid, that*thar 
River 18,3000 feet of Water , and fo if a Ditch ſhall be 15. feet 
broad, and 5. fect high, this ſame Ditch will be affirmed to be 
75. keet of Water : And this manner of meaſuring Running 
Water hath been uſed by the Ancients, and by Moderns, with 
no othet difference, ſave onely that ſome have made uſe of the 
Foot, others of the Palme, others of the Brace, and others of 
other. mealures. 

Now becaule that in oblerving thef& Waters that move, ] fre- 
quently found, that the ſame Water of the ſame River was 1n 
ſome lites of its Chanel pretty big, and in others much lelle, 
not arriving in ſome places to the twentieth, nor to the hundreth 
part of that which it is ſeen to be in other places 3 therefore this 
vulgar way of meaſuring the Waters that move, for that they did 

not 


Lib.2. Of RunninoG Warers. 


not give me Aa certain and ſtable meaſure and quantity of Water, 
began deſervedly ro be ſulpe&ed by me, as difficult and defeRive, 
being alwayes various, and the meaſure, on the contrary, being 
ro be alwayes determinate, and the {ime}; it is therefore written, 
chat Pondus ©» Pondus, Menſura ©» Menſura, utrumque abomi- 
nabile eſt apud Denm, Exod. I conſidered that in the Terri- 
tory of Breſcia, my native Countrey, and in other places, where 
Warters are divided to overflow the Grounds, by the like way of 
meaſuring them, there were commirted grievous and moſt impor- 
rant errours, to the great prejudice of the Publique and of P1i- 
vate perions, neither they that fell, nor they that buy under- 
ſtanding the true quantity of that which is ſold and bought : In 
regard that the ſame {quare mealure, as 1s accuſtomed in thoſe 
parts, aſlizned one particular perſon, carried to ſometimes above 
twice or thrice as much water, as did the ſame [quare meaſure af- 
ſigned to another. Which thing proveth to be the ſame incon- 
venieuce, as if the meaſure wherewith Wine and Oil is bought 
and (old, ſhould hold twice or thrice as much Wine or Oil at one 
time as at another. Now this' Conſideration invited my minde 
and curioſity to the finding out of the true meaſure of Running 
Waters. Andin the end, by occaſion of a moſt important bu- 
ſinefſe that I was imployed 1n fome years ſince, with great in- 
tenlenefle of minde, and with the fure direQion. of Geometry , I 
have diſcovered the miſtake, which was, that we being upon the 
bulinctle of raking the meaſure of the Waters that move,do make 
uſe of two dimentions onely, namely, breadth and depth, keep- 
ing no account of the length. And yet the Water being, thongh 
running, a Budy, it 15 neceſlary in forming a conceit of its quan- 
tity, in relation to another, to Keep account of all the three Di- 
menſions, that is of length, Sreadth, and depth. 

Here an objeQton hath been put to me, in behalf of the ordi- 
nary way of meaſuring Running Waters, in oppoſition to what 


L have above conſidered and propoſed : and I was told, Its true, 


that in meaſuring a Body that ſtands ſtill, one ought ro take all 
the three Dimenſions ; but in meaſuring a Body that coutinually 
moveth, as the Water, the caſe 1s not the ſame : For the lengch 
i5not to be had, the length of the water that moveth being infi- 
nite, as never finiſhing its running 3 and conſequently is incom- 
prchenfible by hamane underſtanding,and therefore with reaſon, 
nay upon neceſſity it cometh to be omitted. ; 

In anſwer to this, I ſay, that in the aboveſaid Diſcourſe, two 
things are to be conſidered diſtin&ly ; Firſt, whether it be poſſible 
toirame any conceit of the quantity of the Body of the Water 
with two Dimenſions onely. And fecondly, whether this length 
be tobe found. As to the firſt, L am very certain that hee” let 

ma 


Of the Mens URATION; Lib. 


him be never ſo great a Wit, can never promiſe to frame a con. 
ceit of the quantity of the Body of Water, without the third 
Dimenſion of length: and hereupon I return to affirm , that the 
vulgar Rule of meaſuring Running water 1s vain and erroneous, 
This point being agreed on, I come to the ſecond, which is, Whe« 
ther the third Dimenſion of length may be meaſured. And 1 ſay 
that if one would know the whole length of the water of a 
Fountain or River, thereby to come to know the quantity of all 
the Water, it would prove an impoſlible enterprize , nay the 
knowing of it would not be uſctul. But if one would know how 
much water a Fountain, or a River carrieth in a determinate time 
of an hour, of a day, or of a moneth, &c. I {ay, that it is a very 
poſſible and profitable enquiry, by reaſon of the innumerable 
benefits that may be derived thence, it much importing to know 
how much Water a Chanel carrieth in a time given; and I have 
demonſtrated the ſame above in the beginning of this Book ; and 
of this we ſtand in nced in the buſineſle of the Lake, that ſo we 
may be able to determine how much ſhall be - the height of the 
Brent, when it is {pread all over the Lake : For the three dimen- 
fions of a Body being given, the Body is known ; and the quan« 
tity of a Body being given, if you have but two dimenſions, the 
third ſhall be known. And thus diving farther and farther into 
this Conſideration, I found that the Velocity of the courie of the 
water may be an hundred times greater or leſſer in one part of 
its Chanel than in another. And therefore although there ſhould 
be two mouths of Watcrs equal in bigneſle ; yet nevertheleſs it 
might come to paſſe, rhat one might diſcharge an hundred or a 
thouſand times more water than another : and this-would be, if 
the water in one of the mouths ſhould run with an hundred or a 
thouland times greater velocity, than the other ; for that ir 
would be the ſame as to {ay that the ſwifter was an hundred or 
a thouland times longer, than the (lower : and im this manner I 
diſcovercd that to keep account of the velocity, was the keeping 
account of the Length. | 

And therefore it is manifeſt, that when two Mouths diſcharge 
the ſame quantity of Water in an equal velocity, it is neceflary 
that the leſs ſwift Mouth be ſo much bigger than the more witt; 
as the more ſwift exceedeth in velocity the leſs ſwift; as for 
example. 

In caſe two Rivers ſhould carry equal quantity of water 1n 
equal times, but that one of them ſhould be four times more 
ſwift than the other, the more ſlow ſhould of neceſſity be four 
times More large. And becauſe the ſame River in any Part 
thereof alwaies diſchargeth the ſame quantity of Water in equal 


times (as is demonſtrated in the firſt Propoſition of we ba 
00 


OO» Os TR 


» — TL pI — ES ” Tp 
4 4 . « ' 


—_— n o#'® d _ a *% 
4 24% [ - WY Fw 4 [TS " b_ 


Lib. Of Runnino Wares. 


Book* of the meaſure of Running Watets;) but yet doth not 
-1n thorowout with the {ame velocity : Hence it is, that the vul- 
gar mealures of the {aid River,in divers parts of ics Chane!), are 
\lwaies divers ; inlomuch, that if a River palling through its cha- 
nel had ſuch velocity, that it ran 100 Braces in the 4. of an hour- 
and afterwards the laid River ſhould be reduced to {6 much tard i, 
ty of motion, As that in the {ame tine it ſhould not run more than 
one Brace, it would be neceſlary that that {fame River ſhould be- 
come 100. times bigger in that place where it was retarded; | 
mean, 100. times bigger than ic was in the place whcre it was 
(wifter. And let it be kept well in mind, that this point rightly 
underſtood, will clear the underſtanding to dilcover very many 
accidents worthy to be known. Burt for this ime ler it tutfice, 
that we have onely declared that which makes for our purpoſe, 
referring apprehenſive and ſtudious Wits to the peruial of my 
aforenauued Treatiſe 3 for thereiu he ſhall fiude protit and delight 
both together. 

Now applying all to our principal intent, I ſay, That by what 
hath been declared it is manifeſt, that it the Brent were 40. Bra- 
ces broad, and 2: high, in ſome one part of its Chanel, that after- 
wards the lame Water of the Brent falling into the Lake, andpaſ- 
ſing rhorow the {ame to the Sea, it ſhould loſe ſo much of its ve- 
locity , that it ſhould run but -one Brace, in the time wherein 
whilſt it was in its Chanel at the place aforeſaid, it ran 100. Bra- 
ces. It would be abſolutely neceflary , that increafing 1n mea- 
ſure,it ſhould become an hundred times * thicker; and therefore 


it we ſhould ſuppoſe that the Lake were 20000. Braces , the 
Brent that already hath becn ſuppoſed ia its Chanel 1 00. Braces, 


being brought into the Lake, ſhould be too. times 100. Brates; 
that is, ſhall be 1 0000. Braces in chicknels, and conſequently ſhall 
be in height half a Brace ; that 1s, 55 of a Bracc, and noti.- ot a 
Brace, as was concluded in the Argument. 

Now one/may {ce into what a grols errour of 99. in 100. -one 
may fall through the not well underſtanding the true quantity 
of Running Water, which being well underſtood , doth open a 
dire& way to our judging aright in this moſt conſiderable atfair. 

And therefore admitting that wich hath been demonſtrated, 
I ſay, that I would (if it did concern me) greatly encline to con- 
lult upon the returning of the Brert again into the Lake : For it 
being moſt evident, that the Brent in the Chanel of its mouth, is 
much {wifter than the Brent being brought into the Lake, it will 
certainly follow thereupon , that the thickneſs of the Water of 
Brent in the Lake, ſhall be ſo much greater than that of Brent in 


Brent, by how much the Bront in Brent is ſwifter than thh Brent 
in the Lake. 


a. From 


7t 
* He here intends 
ths Demonſtrati- 
ons following, at 
the end of the fiutt 
Book 


* Deeper, 


Of the MensunrartionN Lib 2. 


1. From which operation doth follow in the firſ place, that 
the Lake being filled and increaſed by tbele Waters , ſhall be 
more Navigable, and paſlible, than at preſent we lee it to be. 

2. By the current of theſe Warers, the Chanels will be (cg. 
ed, and will be kept clean from timeto time. 

. There will not appear at the rimes oi low-waters 
Shelves, and ſuch heaps of Mud, as do now appear. 

. The Ayr will become more wholcſom, for that ir ſha] nor 
be {o infe&ed by putrid vapours exhaled by the Sun, (9 long a; 
the Micry Ouze ſhall be covered by the Waters. 

5. Laſtly, in the current of theſe 2dvantagious Waters, which 
muſt iſſue out of the Lake into the Sea,beſides thole of the Tyde 
the Ports will be kept ſcoured, and clear : And this is as much Bs 
I ſhall offer for the preſent, touching this weighty builineſs ; a1. 
waies ſubmitting my ſelf co founder judgements. 


lo many 


Of the above-laid Writing I preſented a Copy at Venice, at a 
full Colledge , in which I read it all, andit was hearkned to with 
very great attention ; and at laſt I preſented it to the Duke, and 
left ſome Copies thereof with ſundry Senators, and went my way, 
promiſing with all intenſeneſs to apply my pains with reiterated 
ſtudies in the publick ſervice ; and if any other things ſhould come 
into my minde, I promiſed to declare them ſincerely , and fo took 
leave of His ſerenity, and that Noble Council. When I was 
returned to Rome, this buſineſs night and day continually run- 
ning in my mind, I hapned to think of another admirable and 
moſt important concett, which with cffe&ual reaſons, confirmed 
by exact operations, I with the Divine aſſiſtance , made clear and 
manifeſt ; and though the thing at firſt ſight ſeemed to me a moſt 
extravagant Paradox, yetnotwithſtanding , having ſatisfied my 
| ſelf of the whole buſineſs, I ſent it in writing to the moſt Illuſtri- 
ous and moſt Noble Signore Gio. Baſadonna ; who after he had 
well conſidered my Paper, carried it to the Counci] ; and after 
that thoſe Lords had for many months maturely conſidered 
thereon, they 1n the end reſolved to ſuſpend the execution of the 
diverſion which they had before conſulted to make of the River 
Sile, and of four other Rivers, which alſo fall into the Lake; a 
thing by me blamed in this ſecond Paper, as moſt prejudicial, 
and harmful. The writing [pake as followeth. 


© a Sr ie bY HOI 


Lib.2. 73 


CONSIDERATIONS 


oo OE 
- = 
gow 


Concerning the 


LAKE 


OF 


VENICE 


—  — - > —_— — _ KO — — Cw wo-cn—m—_—_ 
—  — — 


CONSIDERATION 11. 


— 


— 


F the diſcourſing well about the truth of 
things, Moſt Serene Prince, were as the 
carrying of Burdens, in which we ſce 
that an hundred Horſes carry a greater 
weight than one Horſe onely ; it would 
{cem that one might make more account 


of the opinion of many men, than of 
" one alone; But becauſe that diſcourſing 


more relemblerh running, than carrying n 
Burdens, in which we {ce that ene Barb alone runneth faſter | od 
than an hundred heavy-hcel'd Jades; therefore I have ever more 
eſteemed one Concluſion well managed, and well conſidered by a 
one underſtanding man, although alone, than the common and 
Vulgar opinions ; eſpecially , when they concern abſtruce and 
arduous points : Nay in ſuch caſes the* opinions moulded and 
framed by the moſt ignorant and ſtupid Vulgar, have been ever 
lulpe&ed by me as falſe, for thatit would be a Pont wonder if 
in difficult matters a common capacity ſhould hit upon' that 
Hence I have, and do hold 


which is handſom , good, and true. 


thy 
in very great veneration the ſumme of the Government of the - 
moſt Serene , and eternal Republick of Venice ; which although, R 
as being in nature a Common-wealth, it ought to be governed by i] 
the greater part; yet neverthele(s, in arduous affairs, it is alwaies [N 
direfted by the Grave Judgement of few,and not judged blindly ; 

LI1I by , 


of the MtxSuraTtioN Lil : 


by the Plebejan Rout. Tis true, that he that propoundeth Þ; 0. 
politions far above the reach of common capacity, runneth a 
great hazard of being very often condemned withour further Pro. 
ceſs, or knowledge of the Caulc , but yet for all that, the twurh 
15 not to be deſerted in moſt weighty affairs, but ought rather tg 
be explained in due place and ume with all poſſible perlpicuity ; 
that {o being well-underſtood, and camlidered, it may come atter- 
wards for the Common good to be embraced. 

This whick 1 ſpeak in general, hath okren been my fortune in 
very many particulars, not onely when I have kept within the 
bounds of meer ipeculation, but alſo when I have chanced to de- 
{cend to Praftice, and to Operations : and your Highneſs know- 
eth vexy well what befel me the laſt Summer 1641. when in obe- 
dience to your Soveraign Command,f did 1n full Colledye repre- 
ſent my thoughts touching the ſtate of the Lake of Venice ; for 
there not being luch wanting, who without {o much as vouch. 
ſafing to underſtand me, but having oncly had an wkling , and 
bad apprehenſion of my opinion, fell furiouſly upon me, and b 
violent means both with the Pen and Preſs, tull of Gall, did abulc 
me in reward of the readineſs that I, had expreſt to obey and 
ſerve them : Butl was aboye meaſure encouraged and plcalcd, to 
ſee that thoſe few' who vouchſafed to hear me, wete all either 
thorowly periwaded that my opinion was well grounded, or at 
leaſt ſulpended their prudent verdi& to,more mature deliberati- 
on. Andthough at the firſt bout I chanced to propoſe a thing 
that was totally contrary to the moſt received and antiquated 
opinion, and to the reſolutions and conſultations taken above an 
hundred years ago: Moved by thele thipgs, and to ſatisfic alſo 
to the promiſe that I had made of tendering unto them what 
ſhould farther offer it ſelf unto me touching the ſame buſineſs ; 1 
have reſolved to preſent to the Throne of your Highneſs, another 
Conſideration of no lef{1mportance, which perhaps at firſt fight 
will appear a ſtranger Paradox 3 but yet brought to the Teſt and 
Touch-ſtone of exyerience, it ſhall prove moſt clear and evident. . 
If it ſhall be accounted of, ſo that it ſucceedeth to the benefit of * 
your Highneſs, I ſhall have obtained my defire and intent : And 
if not, I ſhall have ſatisficd my felf, and ſhall not have been 
wanting to the Obligation of your moſt faithful Servant, and na- 
tive ſubjeR. 

That which I propounded in the Mouths paſs , touching the 
moſt important bufineſs of the Lake, rhough it did onely exprel- 
ly concern the point of the diverſion of the Mouth of the Lake, 
already made and put in execution ; yet it may be underſtood 
and applycd alſo tothe diverfion under debate, to be made of 
the other five Rivers, and of the S'ile in particalar. bY 

| ow 


- 
K 
bb 
7 
E 


Lib, . Of Running WATERS. 


Now touching this, I had the fortune to offer an admirable 
accident that we meet with when we come to the effe&, which 
| verily believe will be an utter ruine to the Lake of Ve- 
nice. : 
1 ſay therefore, that by diverting thele five Rivers that re- 
main, although their water that they diſcharge for the preſent in- 
to the Lake is not all taken together ! parts of what the Brent 
alone did carry, yet nevertheletle the abatement of the water of 


\ the Lake which ſhall enſue upon this laſt diverſion of four parts, 


which was the whole water, ſhall prove double to that which hath 
happened by the diverſion of Brent onely, although that che 
Brent alone carried five parts of that water, of which the Riyers 
that are to be diverted carry four : A wonder really great, and 
altogether unlikely ;” for the reducing all this Propoſition to be 
underſtood, is as if we ſhould lay, that there being given us 
three Rivers, of which the firſt diſchargeth five parts, the ſecond 
three, and the third\ one, and that from the diverſion of the 
firſt, there did follow. ſuch a certain abatement or fall ; from 
the taking away of the ſecond there ought to follow alſo ſo 
much more abatement ; And laſtly , from the withdrawing of 
the third the water ought to fall ſo much more, which is wholly 
impoſſible : And yet it is moſt certain, and befides the demon- 
ſtration rhat perſwades me to it, which I ſhall explain in due 
time, I can fer before your eyes fuch an experiment as 1s not to 
be denied by any one, although obſtinate : and I will make ie 
plainly ſeen and felt, that by taking away only four parts of the 
tive, which ſhall have been taken away, the abatement proveth 
double to the abatement enſuing upon the diverting firſt of the 
hve onely ; which thing being tive, as moſt certainly it 1s, it 


\ will give us to underſtan& how pernicious this diverfion of five 


Rivers is like to prove, if it ſhall be put in execution. 

By this little that have hinted , and the much that I could 
lay, let your Highneſfle gather with what circumſpeQion- this bu- 
lineſle ought to be managed, and with how great $kill he ought 
to be furniſhed who would behave himſelf well in theſe difficult 
affarrs. | | | 
| Thave not at this time explained the demonſtration, nor have 
tio much as propounded the way to make the Experiment, that 
I am able to make in confirmation of what I have ſaid, that ſo 
by ſome one or others. miſ-apprehending the Demonſtration, 
and maiming the F.xperiment, the truth may not happen to ſhine 
with leſſe clarity than it doth, when all miſts of difficulty are re- 
moved : and if (o be, no account fhould be made of the Reaſons 
by me alledged, and that men ſhould ſhut their eyes againft the 
Experiments that without coft or charge may be mado; Þ do de- 

L11k a clare 


Fo) 


Ofthe MENSURATION Lib.2. 


clare and proteſt that there ſhall follow very great dammages 
to the Fields of the main Land, and extraordinary {ummes 
ſhall be expended to no purpoſe.- The Lake undoubtedly will 
become almoſt dry, and will prove impaſſible for Navigation, 
with a-manifeſt danger of corrupting the Air : And in the laſt 

lace there will unavoidably enlue the choaking and ſtoppage of | 
the Ports of Venice. | | 

Upon the 20th. of December, 1641. I imparted this my ſecond | 

Confideration to the moſt Excellent Signore Baſadonna, preſen- 
ting him with a Copy thereof amongſt other Writings, which 1 
have thought good to inſert, although they ſeem not to belong 
dire&ly to our bufineſſe of the Lake. 


The way to examine the Mubp and SaNnp 
that entereth and remaineth in the 
LAKE of VENICE. 


To the moſt Excellent 
S16NORE GIO. BASADONNA. 


Wo very conſtderable Objections have been miade a+ * 
; gainſt my opinion concerning the Lake of Venice : One © 
was that, of which I have ipoken at large in my firſt 
Conlideration, namely, that the Brents having been taken out of 
the Lake, cannot have been the occaſion of the notable fall of 
the Waters in the Lake, as I pretend, and conſequently , that 
the turning Brezt into the Lake would be no conſiderable reme- 
dy, in regard that the water of Brent, and the great expanſion 
of the Lake over which the water of Brent is to diffuſe and 
{pread being conſidered , it is/ found that the riſe proveth in- 
ſenſible. , | 

The {econd ObjeQtion was, that the Brent is very muddy, and 
therefore if it ſhould fall muddy into the Lake, the Sand would 
fink and fill up the ſame. 

Touching the firſt Query, enough hath been aid in my firſt 
Confidezation, where I have plainly diſcovered the deceipt of the 


Argument, and ſhewn its fallacy ; It remaineth now to PN 
the 


Lib. Of Running Wareks. 


the ſecond : to which in the firſt place I ſay, that one of the firſt 
things that I propoled in this affair was, that I held it Impoſlible 
ro do any act, though never lo beneficial, that was not alſorac- 
companied by ſome 1nconvenience and miſchief; and therefore 
we are to conlider well the profit, and the lofſe and prejudice 
and they both being weighed, we ſhall be able to choole the lel- 
{er evil: Secondly, 1 admit it to be moſt true, that Brent is at ſome 
times muddy, but it 1s alſo true, that for the greater part of the 
year it 15 NOT muddy. Thirdly, I do not fee nor underſtand 
what ſtrength this obzeCtion hath, being taken fo at large, and in 
general 3 and mcthinks that ir 1s not enough to ſay, that the 
Brent runneth muddy, and to affert that it depoſeth its Muddi- 
nefſe in the Lake, but we ought moreover to proceed to particu- 
lars, and ſhew how much this Mud is, and in what time this 
choaking up of the Ports may be effe&ed. For the Reaſons are 
bur too apparent and particular , that conclude the ruine of the 
Lake, and that in a very ſhort time, (for mention is made of 
daycs) the Waters diverſion being made, and moreover we 
have the circumſtance of an Experiment, the ſtate of things be- 
ing obſerved to have grown worle ſince the (aid diverfion. And 
| have demonſtrated, that 1n caſe the Diverfion of the Sife and 
the other Rivers ſhould be put in execution, the Lake would in a 
few dayes become almoſt dry ; and the Ports would be loſt, with 
other miſchievous conſequences. But on the other ſide, al- 
chough that we did grant the choaking of them, we may very 
probably ſay, that it will not happen, {ave onely in the ſuccefſion 
of many and many Centuries of years. - Nor can [I think it pru- 
dent counſel to take a refolution and imbrace a Defigne now, to 
obtain a benefit very uncertam, and more than that, which only 
ſhall concern thoſe who are to come very many Apes after us, 
and thereby bring a certain inconvenience upon our ſelves, and 
upon our children that are now alive and preſent. 

Let it be alledged therefore, (although I hold it falſe) that by 
the diverſions of the Rivers the Lake may be kept in good con- 
dition for ſeveral years to come. 

But I ſay confidently, and hope to demonſtrate it ; That the 
Diverſions will bring the Lake, even in our dayes, to be almoſt 
dry, and at leaſt will leaye fo little water int, that it ſhall ceaſe 
to be Navigable, and the Ports ſhall moſt infallibly be choaked 
up. I will therefore {ay upon experience, in anſwer to this Ob- 
je&ion, that it is very neceſlary firſt well to diſcourſe, and ratio- 
nally 10 particularize and aſcertain the beſt that may be this 
point of the quantity of this ſinking Mud or Sand, 

Now I fear E ſhall make my ſelf ridiculous to thoſe, who! mea- 
ſuring the things of 'Nature with the ſhallownefle of their brains 

de 


Ofthe MENSURATION Lib. 2, 
do think that it is abſolutely impoſſible to make this enquiry, and 


will ſay unto me, (#35 menſus eſt pugillo aquas, Gr terram palmo 


ponderavit ? Yet neverthelcis 1 will propound a way whereby 
at leaſt in groſs, onc may find out the lame. : 

Take a Veſlel of Cylindrical Figure, holding two barrels of 
water, or thereabours ; and then fill it with the water of Brent, 
at its Mouth or Fall into the Lake ; bur in the Lake at the time 
that the Brent runneth muddy, and after it hath be2un to run 
muddy for cight or ten hours, to give the mud time to go as far 
as S. Nicolo, to ifſuc into the Sea 3 and at the ſame time take 
another Veſſel, like, and equal to the firſt, and fill it with the wa. 
ter of the Lake towards S. Nicolo, (but take notice that this oPe- 
ration ought to be made at the tire when the waters go out, 
and when the Sea is calm) and then, when the waters ſhall have 
ſetled in the aforcſaid Veſſels, take out the clear water, and con- 
ſider the quantity of Sand that remains behind, and let it be (cx 
down, or kept in mind : AndI am eaſily induced to think, that 
that ſhall be a greater quantity of Sand which ſhall be left in the 
firſt Veſſel; than that left in the ſecond Veſſel. Afterwards 
when the Brent ſhall come to be clear,let both the operations he 
repeated, and obſerve the quzntity of Sand in the aforeſaid Veſ. 
{els ; for if the Sand in the firſt Veſſel ſhould be moſt , it would 
be a ſign, that in the revolution of a year the Brent would depoſe 
Sand in the Lake: And in this manner one may calculate to a 
ſ{ma]l matter what proportion the Sand that entreth into the Lake, 
hath to that which remains : And by that proportion one may 
judge how expedicnt it ſhall be for publick benefit. And if at 
ſeveral times of the year you carefully repeat the ſame operati- 
ons, or rather oblervations , you would come to a more exaQ 
knowledge in this buſineſs : And it would be good to make the 
{aid operations at thole times, when the Lake 1s diſturbed b 
ſtrong high Winds, and made muddy by its own Mud, raiſed by 
the commotion of the Waters. | 

This notion would give us grear light, if the fame obſeryations 
ſhould be made towards the Mouth of Lo, at {uch time as the 
waters flow and ebb, in calm ſeaſons ; for ſo one ſhould come to 
know whether the waters of the Lake are more thick at the going 
out, than at the entrance. I have propounded the foregoing 
way of mcaſuring Sands and Myd, to ſhew that we are not (9 
generally, and inconfiderately to pronoynce any ſentence , but 
proceed to ſtriter inquiries, and then deliberate what ſhall be 
moſt expedient to þe done. Others may propole more exqui- 
ſire examinations, but this ſhall ſerve me for the prelent. 

I will add onely,that if any one had greater curioſity (it would 
be profitable to have it) in inveſtigating more exaQly the LEE 

rity 


© 
oF 
fl 
LS - 
bad 
—_—_ 
% 


A wee + adi aetttdth. nonatnd LE LEASES EIS: man HT 
2X hs, = o |. , Fo of 


-$Þ 4 i TR I I Es 3, eat RT BDTI a TI 
R.-” FFAs gp, ; Vc; ay 


L ib.2. Of RunninG Warts: 

tiry of the Water that entereth into the Lake, by the means that 
1 have ſhewen inthe beginning of this Book : When he ſhall 
have found the proportion of the quantity of water to the quan- 
icy of Sand or Mud, he ſhall come to know how much Sand the 
Brent ſhall leave in the Lake in the ſpace of a year. Butto 
perform theſe things , there are required perſons of diſcretion,and 


fdclicy, and that are imployed by publick Order ; for there 
would thence reſult eminent benefit and profit. | 


Here are wanting LET TERS from ſeveral perſons. 


—  — — — —— 
——_— —_— —————_ _—_— _ —_—_ 


To the Reverend Father, Franceſco 4 
09. CGiusgePs, 


N exccution of the command that you laid upon- me in yeur 
former Letrers, by order from the moſt Sertkne , my Lord, 
Prince Leopold; that I ſhould ſpeak my judgement concern- 
ing the dilmmboguement of the River called Finme morto , whe-> 
ther it ought to be let into the Sea, or into Serchio 3 I fay, that 
{ chanced 18. years ſince to be preſent, when the {aid Mouth was 
opened into the Sea, and that of Serchio ſtopt 3 which work was 
done to remedy the great Innundation that was made in all that 
Country, and Plain of Piſa; that Iyeth between the River Arno, 
and the Mountains of $. Geuliano, and the River Serchio ; which 
Plain continued long under water, infomuch that not onely in the 
Winter, but alſo for a great part of the Summer , thoſe fields 
were overflowed ; and when that the Mouth of Fiume amorto. was 
eftectually opencd into the Sea,the place was preſently freed from 
the waters. and drained, to the great fatisfa&tion of the Owners 
of thole Grounds. And here 1 judge it worth your notice, that 
for the generality of thoſe that poſlels eſtates in thoſe parts,they 
deſired that the Mouth of Finme morto might ſtand open to the 
Sea, and thole who would have it open into Serchzo, are perſons 
that have no other concernment there, ſave the hopes of gaining 
by having the diſpoſe of Commiſſions, and the like, 8&c, 

But tor the more plain underſtanding of that which ts to be 
{aid, it muſt be known, That the reſolution of opening the ſaid 
Mouth into Serchio, was taken in the time of the Great Duke 
Ferdinando the tirft, upon the ſame motives that are at this time 
again propoled, as your Letters tell me, Since that, it manifeft- 
ly appearing, that Fiume morto had, and hath ts Mouthopen to 
the Sca, the Plain hathbecn kept dry ; andit being alſo true, Ch. 


=> "M%... by mY 
> Awe me - 
yy 
—_— ———_ - 


Of the MensuRraTlION: Lib 2, 


the fury of the Sourh, and South-Wcſt-Winds carried ſuch 
abundance of {and into the Mouth, or Out-let of Fiume morto 
that it wholly ſtopt it up : clpecially when the waters on Piſa 
(ide were low and ſhallow, And they think, that turning the 
Lake of Fiume morto into Serchio, and the Serchio malntainin 
continually its own Mouth with the force of its waters oPen to the 
Sea, and conſequent)y allo F iume morto,they would have had the 
Out-let clear and open 3 and in this manner they think, that the 
Plain of Piſa would have been freed from the waters. The hy. 
ſine(s paſſeth for current, at firſt ſight; but experience proveth 
the contrary, and Realon confirmeth the ſame : For the height 
of the water of thoſe Plains, was regulated by the hcight of the 
waters in the Mouth of Fiame morto ; that is, The waters at the 
Mouth being high, the waters allo do riſe in the ficlds ; and when 
the waters at the Mouth are low, the waters of the fields do like. 
wiſc abate : Nor is it enough to lay, T hat the Out-let or Vent 
of Fiuame morto 1s continual, but it muſt be very low : Now if 
Finme morto did determine in Serchio, it 15 manifeſt that jr 
would determine high ; tor Serchio terminating 1n the Sea , when 
ever it more and more aboundeth with water, and riſcth, it is ne- 
ceſlary that alſo Finume morto hath its level higher, and conſe. 
quently ſhall keep the waters in the Plains higher. Nay, it hath 
happened Jometimes (and I ſpeak it upon my own fight) that 
Fiume morto hath reverſed its courſe upwards towards Piſa ; 
which caſe will ever happen, whenlocver the Piſan waters chance 
to be lower than the level of thoſe of Serchio; for in that caſe 
the waters of Serchio return back upon the Plains thorow Fiuwe 
morto in {uch ſort, thac the Muddineſles, and the Serchio have 
been obſerved to be carried by this return as farr as the Walls of 
Piſa ; and then betore ſuch time as ſo great waters can be af. 
ſwaged, which come in with great fury, and go out by little and 
little, there do pals very many Gays, and moneths , nay ſome- 
times one being never able to find the waters of Serchio, 
when at the ſhalloweſt, io low as the Sea in level ; (which is che 
loweſt place of the waters) it thence doth follow, that the wa- 
ters of Fiume morto ſhould never atany time of the year, ſo long 
as they determine 1n Serchzo, be {o low,as they come to be when 
the ſame Fiume morto determineth in the Sea. Tis true indeed, 
that the Mouth of F iume morto,opened into the Sea, is ſubject to 
the inconvenience of being ſtopt up by the force of Winds ; But 
in this caſe,it is neceſſary to take ſome pains in opening it ; which 
may eaſily be done, by cutting that Sand a little which ſtayeth 
in the Mouth, after that the Wind is laid; and it is enough if you 
make a Trench little more than two Palms in breadth; for the 
water once beginning to run into it, it will ina few hours FR 
that 


Lib.2. Of Running Warers. 


that Sand away with it, and there wftf enſue a deep and broad 
Treach that will drain away all the water of the Plains in very lit- 
tle rime. And I have found by praQtice, that there having been 
4 greac quantity of Sand driven back, by the fury of the South- 
Weſt-Wind, into the Mouth of Finme morto, I having cauſed the 
lirtle gutter to be made in the Morning, ſomewhat betore Noon, 


a Mouth hath been opened of 40. Braces wide, and notab] y deep, 


inſomuch that the water, which before had incommoded all the 
Champian ran away in le(s than three dayes, and left the Coun- 
try free and dry , to the admiration ofall men. Therc was pre- 
ſent upon the place, at this buſineſs , on the ſame day that ] 


- opened the Mouth, the moſt Serene great Duke, the moſt Serene 


Arch-Dutchels Mother, all the Commiſſioners of Sewers, With 
many other Perſons and Peaſants of thoſe parts and they all ſaw 
very well,that it was never poſſible that a little Bark of eight 
Oars , which was come from Legorn to wait upon the great 
Duke, ſhould ever be able ro maſter the Current, and to make 
tip into Finme morto ; and his Highneſs, who came with an intent 
to cauſe the ſaid Mouth towards the Sea to be ſtopt ; and that 
into Serch1o to be opened, changed his judgement, giving order 
that it ſhould be left open towards the Sea, as it was done. And 
if at this day it ſhall return into Serchio, I am very certain that it 
will be neceſſary to open it again into the Sea. And there was 
alſo charge and order given to a perſon appointed for the pur- 
pole, that he ſhould take care to open the ſaid Mouth, as hath 
been ſaid-upon occaſion. And thus things have ſucceeded ver 

well unto this very time. But from the middle of OSober, until 


_ this firſt of February, there having corftinued high South , and 


South- Weſt- Winds, with frequent and abundant Rains ; it is no 
wonder rhat ſome innundation hath happened 3 but yet I will 
afficm , that greater miſchicts would have followed, if the Mouth 
had been opened into Serchio. This which I have hitherto ſaid, 
is very clear and intelligible to all ſuch as have but competent in- 
ſight, and indifferent skill in theſe affairs. But that which I am 
now about to propoſe farther, will, I am very certain, be under- 
ſtood by your lelf, but it will ſeem ftrange and unlikely ro many 
others. The point is, that I ſay , That by railing the level of 
Fintme morto, one half Brace, onely at its Mouth, (it will peni- 
penitrate into Serch1o farther than it would into the Sea) it ſhall 
cauſe the waters to riſe three , or perhaps more Braces upon the 
fields rowards Piſa, and till more by degrees as they ſhall recede 
farther from the Sea-(ide ; and thus there will follow very great. 
Innundations, and conſiderable miſchiefs. And to know that 
this 15 true, you are to take notice of an accident, which I give 
warning of in my diſcourſe of the Meaſure of Running Waters: 

Mmmm where 


St 


is 
. x 


v 


Of the MengSuratlon Lib 


« here allo 1 give the reaſon thercof, * Corvll. 14. The ac 
cident 15 this, That there COm1ng a Laid Flod , tor cxam ple ; 
into Arno, which mak<cth it to rile above its oudirary Mouth, 
w thin P:ſa,or a little above or below the City fix or [even Bra. 
ces ; this lame height becometh alwaics lefler ard lefler, the more 
we approach towards the Sea-(ide ; inlomuch , thar near to the 
Sea the ſaid River ſhall be raiſed hardly half a Brace : Whenee 
it followeth of neccſlary conlequence, that ſhould I again be ar 
the Sca-ſide, and knowing nothing of what hapneth, ſhould (ec 
the River Arno raiſed by the accellion of a Land-flood, one third 
of a Brace ; I could certainly inter, that the lame River was rail. d 
in Piſa thole ſame (ix or ſeven Braces. And that which 1 (ay of 
Arno, is tiue of all Rivers that fall into the Sea. Which thin 
being true, it 15 neceflary ro make great account of every rag 
riſing, that: Frume morto maketh towards the Sca-ſide by fa!. 
ling into Serchio. For although the ling of Fiume morto, by 
being to diſgorge its Waters into Serch1o, towards the Sea , were 
onely a quarter of a Brace 3 we might very well be lure, that farr 
from the Sca, about Piſa, and upon thole fields the tiſe ſhall be 
much greater , and ſhall become two or three Braces: Ard be- 
cauſe the Countrey lycth low, that lame 11ile will cauſe a conti- 
nual Innundation of the Plains, like as it did bctore ; I cauſed the 
Mouth to be opened into the Sea. And therefore 1 conclude 
that the Mouth of Fiume morto, ought by no means to he opencd 
into Serchio, but ought to be continued into the Sea , uſing all 
diligence to keep it open afcer the manner aforelaid, fo ſoon a 
ever the Wind ſhall be laid. And if they ſhall do, otherwiſe, | 
confidently affirm, that there will daily follow greater damages; 
not onely in rhe Plains , but allo in the wholcſomneſs of the 
Air ; as hath been een 1n times paſt. And again, It ought with 
all care to be procured, that no waters do by any means run or 
fall from the Trench of Libra, into the Plain of Piſa, for thehe 
Waters being to diſcharge into Fiume morto, they maintain it 
much higher than is nnagined, according to that which I have de- 
monſtrated in my conſideration upon the ſtate ' of the Lake of 
Venice. I have ſaid but little, but I ſpeak to you, who under- 
tandeth much, and I ſubmit all co the moſt refined judgment of 
our moſt Serene Prince Leopold, whoſe hands I beſeech you in all 
humility to kiſs in my name, and implore the continuance of hi 
Princely favour to me ; and ſodeſiring your prayers to God for 
me) | take my leave. 
Your moſt affectionate Servant, 
Rome x. Feb, 
1643. D. BextveTTo CASTELL!- 


The 


WCTRT__TTRT RT 


Tb. 2. Of R unx1NG VVarins. 


Theanſwer toa Letter written by B AR- 
TO LOTTI, -touching the 
difficultyes obſerved: 


[be former part of the Letter 1s omitted, and the diſcourſ e 
beginneth at the firſt Head. 


A Nd firſt I lay, Whereas I ſuppoſe that the level of the Ser- 

chio is higher than that of Fiume morto ; this is moſt true, 
atluch time as the waters of F:ume morto are diſcharged in- 
ro the Sea; but I did never ſay that things could never be brought 


to that pals, a* that the level of Fiume morto ſhould be higher than 


Serci1i0 : and (ol grant thatit will follow,that the waters of 
Fiume morto (hall gointo Serchio, and its. very, poſſible, that the 
Drain of Fiume morto into Serchio may be continuate ; and I far- 
ther grant, that 1ts poflible, that the Serchio doth never diſgorge 
thorow Fiume morto.towards Piſa; Nay, I will yer farther grant 
that it might have happencd, that Fiume morto might have had 
ſuch a fall into Serchio, as would have ſufficed to have turned 
Mills : Bur then I add withall}; that the Plains of Piſa, and'the 
City it {elt muſt be a meer Lake: -. | ; " 
2. S1gnore Bartolotti faith confidently, that when the Sca {wel- 
leth by the South- Welt, or other Winds, the level of Serchio in 
the place marked A in the Platt, diſtant about 200. Braces, riſeth 
very liztle - Bur chat Fiume morto in D, and in E, many miles 
more up into Land riſeth very much, and that certain Fiſhermen 
confirm this, and thew hun the {1gnes of the riſing of the Water. 
| grant it to be very true, and I have leen it with my own eyes: 
But this cometh ro pals, when the Mouth of Fzume morto is ſtopt 


ap by the Sca 3 as I ſhall ſhew by and by. And this riſing near 


the Sca-{ide, 1s of no confiderable prejudice to the fields. And 
this is as much as 1 find to be true in the aſſertion of Signore Bar- 
rlotti, ( without his confirming it by any orher proof ; as indeed 
It needs none) That the level of Finme mortoriteth in E, and ma- 


ny miles {farther upwards it rilcth much; nor did I ever afiirm the 


contrary. | 
3- Concerning tne dithculty of opening the Mouth of Finn? 
morto into the Sea, that which I! Caſtellano faith is molt certain; 
namely, That at che entrance upon the opening of the Mouth, it 
's necetlary to make a decp Trench: But I ſay, that at that time 
't 13 difficult ro open #, unleſs upon great occafians; for that the 
Mmmm 2 difficulty 


3 


Of the MEensuraTtlonN Lib. x 


difticulty proceedethfrom the waters of Fiume morto bein 
and the fields drained. 

4 As to the particular of the Cauſes that you tell me men 
prels ſo much unto the moſt Serene Grand Duke, and to the 
Prince, I have not much to Jay, becaule it is not my profeſſion : 
nor have I conſidered of the {ame : Yet I believe, that when the 
Prince and his Highneſſe ſee the benefit of his People and Sub. 
zecs in one ſcale of the Ballance, and the accomodation of 
Huntſmen in the other, his Highneſle will incline to the profit 
of his ſubje&s; ſuch have I alwayes found his Clemency and 
Noblcneſſe of minde. But if I were to put in my yote upon 
this buſineſle, 1 wonld lay, that the points of Spears, and the 
mouths of Guns; the yelping of Dogs, the wilyneſle of Huntſ- 
men, who run thorow and narrowly ſearch all thoſe Woods, 
T hickets and Heathes, are the true deltroyers of Bucks and 
Boares, and not a little Salt-water, which fetleth at laſt in ſome 
low places, and ſpreadeth not very far. Yet nevertheleſſe,l will 
not enter upon any ſuch point, but confine my lelt ſolely to the 
buſinefle before me. \ 

&. That Experiment of joyning together the water of Finwe 
#orto, and that of Serchio by a little trench to ſec what adyan- 
tage the Level E hath upon the Level 1, doth not give me ful] 
ſatisfaCion, taken ſo particularly, for it may come to paſſe, that 
ſometimes E may be higher, and ſometimes A lower, and [ do 
not queſtion but that when Serchio is low, and Finme morto ful] 
of Water, the level of Fiume morto will be higher than that of 
Serchio. But Serch1o being full, and Finme morto ſcant of Wa- 
ter, the contrary will follow, if the Mouth ſhall be opened to 
the Sea, And here it ſhould ſeem to me, that it ought to be 
conſidered, that there is as much advantage from E to the Sea 
throogh the little Trench opened anew into Serchio, as from E to 
the Sea by the Mouth of Fiume morto. But the difficulty (which 
1s that we are to regard in our Cafe) is, that the courle of the 
Waters thorow the Trench is three times longer than the courſe 
of thc Mouth of Fiume morto, as appcareth by the Draught or 
Plat which you ſent me, which I know to be very exaQtly drawn, 
for that the fituation of thole places are freſh in my memory. 
Here I muſt give notice, that the waters of Fiume morto determi- 
ning thorow the Trench in Serchio (the waters of which F zum? 
morto are, for certain, never {6 low as the Sea) their pendency or 
declivity ſhall, for two cauſes, be lefſe than the pendency of thole 
waters through the Mouth towards the Sea, that 1s, becauſe of 
the length of the line through the Trench, and becaulc c> the 


g low, 


height of their entrance into Serchio, a thing which 15 of very 
great import in diſcharging the waters which come {uddenl]y, as 


he 


my *# | : 
k. 7 Lt” Y © . Þ A 5 


Lib.2. Of RunninoG Warters. 


te ſhall plainly (ce, who ſhall have underſtood my Book of the 
Meaſure of Running Waters And this was the Reaſon why all 
the Countrey did grow dry upon the opening of the Mouth into 
the Sea. And here I propole to conſideration that which the Pea- 
(ants about Piſa relate, namely, That the Water jn the Fields 
doth no confiderable harm by continuing there five or lix, yea Or 
eight dayes. And therefore the work of the Countrey is to 0- 
pen the Mouth of Friume morte, in (uch manner, that the Water 
being come, they may have the French tree and ready,when thar 
the Water cometh it may have a free drain, and may not ſtay 
there above eigltt or nine dayes, for then the overtlowings bc- 
come hurtful. Ir 1s to be deſired alfo, that if any Propofition 1s 
produced rouching theſe affairs, it might be propounded the moſt 


diſtin&ly that may be poſlible, and not conſiſt in generals, c{pe-. 


cially when the. Diſpute is of the rifings, of velocity, of rardity, 
of much and little water 3 things that are all to be ſpecified by 
meaſures. 

6. Your Letter ſaith, in the next place, that Signore Barto- 
lotti confeſſerh, that if the Mouth of the Finme morto might al- 
waycs be kept open, it would be better to let it continue as it is : 
the which, that I may not yield to him in courteſie, I confeſle, 
for the keeping it ſtopt on all ſides would be a thing moſt per- 
nicious. But admitting of his confeſſion I again reply, that Fi- 
«me morto ought not to be let into Serchio, but jmmediately\in- 
tro the Sea ; becauſe although' fomettmes the Mouth to Sea- 
wards be ſtop up, yet for all that, the raifing of the Bank above 
the Plains (whichis all the butinefe of importance) fhall be ever 
lefler, if we make uſe of the Mouth leading to the Sea, than u- 
ſing that of Serchio. 

7. I will not omit to mention a kinde of {cruple that I have 
concerning the poſition of Sign. Bartolotti, that is, where he ſaith 
that the two Mouths A and D are equal to the like Mouths into 
the Sea; Now it ſeems to me, that the Mouth A of Fiume morto 
into Serchio is abſolutely within Serchio, nor can it be made low- 
er, and is regulated by the height of Serchio: But the Mouth 
of Finme morto terminates, and ought to be underſtood to ter- 
minate in the Sea it ſelf, the loweſt place. And this I believe 
was very well perceived by Sig. Bartolottz, but I cannot tell why 
he paſt it over without declaring it: and we fee not that the 
Mouth D falleth far from the Sea, which Mouth ought to be let 
into the Sea it (elf, and fo the advantage of the Mouth into the 
Sea more clearly appeareth. Ne | | 

8. That which Sig. Bartolotti addeth , that when it = high 
Waters, at ſuch time as the Waters are out, and when Winds 


choak up Fine morto, they not only retard it, but return the 


courſe 


Fo mp . > = 


Of the MExSunrartloN: Lþ 2. 


courſe of the Waters upwards very lealurcly, perſwadeth me 
more readily to bclieve that Szg. Bartolottz knoweth very well 
that the Mouth of -Finme morto let into Serchio 15 hurtfy] - ES 
by this he acknowledgeth that the Mouth towards the Sea doth 
:n (uch ſort drain the Countrey of the Warers, as that they be. 
come very low 3 and thercfore upon every little 2mpetus the wa. 
ters turn their courſe : And from the motions, being exccegins 
flow, is inferred , that the abundance of Sea-warter that _, 
eth into Frune morto, is ſo much as 1s believed, and as Sig. Bar. 
tolott: affirmeth. 

9. Afﬀtcr that Sig. Bartolotti hath {laid what he promiſcth a: 
bove, namcly, that when the Windes blowing ſtrongly do ſtop 
up Finme morto, and not oncly retard but turn the courle yp. 
wards, the time being Rainy, and the Mouth of F:ume aorto ſhut 
up, the Waves of the Sea pale over the Bank of Finwe morto; ar 
that time, laith Signore Bartolotti, the Champain ſhall know the 
benetit of Finme morto diſcharged into Serchio, and the mouth A 
ſhall ſtand alwayes open 3 and Fiume morto may alwayes con- 
ſtancly run our, as alſo the Rains and Rain-waters, although the 
huctful Tempeſt ſhould laſt many dayes, &c. And reply, thar 
all the Art conſiſts in this ; for the bencfit of thole Fields doth 
not depend on, or conſiſt in ſaying, that Finme morto is alwayes 
open» and Fiume morto draineth continually ; But all the buſi- 
nefle of profit Iyeth and sconfiſteth in maintaining the Waters 
low in tholc Plaines, and thoſe Ditches, which ſhall never beet- 
feged whilſt the World ſtands, if you let Finume morto into Ser- 
chio;, but yet it may, by opening the mouth 1nto the Sea: and 
ſo much realon and nature proveth, and (which importerh) Ex- 
perience confirmeth. 

10. In the tcnth place I come to conlider the anſwer that 
was made to another Propoſition in the Lerter which I writ to 
Father Franceſco, which prudently of it (elf alone might ſerve 
to clear this whole bufineſſe. I ſaid in my Letter, That great 
account is to be made of every {mall riling and ebbing of the 
Waters necr to the Sea in Fiume morto, for that thele rifings and 
tallings, although that they be imall neer to the Sea-ſide, yet ne- 
verthelette, they operate and are accompanied by notable riſings 
and fallings withia Land, and far from the Sca-tide, and I have 
declared by an example of Arzo, in which a Land-flood falling, 
that made it increaſe above its ordinary height within Pzſa fix or 
ieven Braces, that this height of the ſame Flood becometh ſtill 
(cfler, the neerer we apptoach to the Sea-coaſts. Nor ſhall the 
{aid River be raited hardly half a Brace ; whereupon it necell- 
rily followeth, thac it I ſhould return to the Sea-fide, and not 
knowing any think of chat which bappeneth at Piſa, and NY 

[ne 


4 ws EIS AIR xv 1 


. IE wo Ma Lore err <a 


»: 
[0 
$ 

t 


1.5, Of Runnino Wartks. 


the River Arno railed by a Land-flood half a Brace, I might con- 
idently affirm the 1aid River tO be raiſed in Piſa thole fix or (c- 
ven Braces, &c. From luch like accidents I conclude in the ſame 
Letter, that it is necetſary to make great account of every little 
iſe that Friume morto ſhall make towards the Sea. Now cometh 
Bartolotti (and perhaps becaule I knew not how to exprels my 
{elf better, underſtandeth not my Propoſition) and lpcaketh chat 
which indeed 15 true, bur yet belides our cale : Nor have 1 ever 
ſaid the contrary 3 and withall doth not apply it to his purpole. 
Nay 1 ſay, that if he had well applyed it, this alone had been a- 
ble to have made him change his opinion. And becault he (aith, 
char 1 laid, that it 15 true, waen the abarement proceedeth from 
ſome caule above, as namely by Rain, or opening. of Lakes; 
But when the caule i from below, that is, by tome ſtop, as for 
inſtance lome Fiſhers Wears or Locks, or {ome impediment rc- 
mote from the Seca, although at the Level it ſhall rite tome Brace; 
where the impediment is, yet that riting ſhall go upwards; and 
here be tiniſheth his ilcourle, and concludeth not any thing 
more. To which | ay firſt, that I have allo ſaid the ſame in the 
Propolition, namely, that a Flood coming (which. maketh Arno 
to riſe in Piſa tix or leven Braces (which I take to be a ſuperiour 
cauſe. whether it be Rain or the opening of Lakes, as beſt plea- 
ſeth Bartolotti ) in ſuch a caſe 1 ſay, and in no other (for towards 
the Sea-coaſts it ſhall not caule a riſing of full half a Brace ; and 
therefore ſeeing Arno at the Sea-ſide to be railed by a Flood, whe- 
ther of Rain, or of opening of Lakes half a Brace) it may be 
inferred, that at Piſa ir ſhall be raifed thole fix or ſeven Braces ; 
which variety, well coalidercd, explaineth all this affair in favour_ 
of my opinion : For the riſing that is made by the impediment 
placed below, of Fiſhing Weares and Locks, operateth at the be- 
ginning, railing the Waters that arc necr tO the impediment 3 
and afterwards lcls and lets, as we retire upwards from the im- 
pediment : provided yer that we {peak not of a Flood that com- 
meth by acceſſion, but onely of the ordinary Water impeded. 
But there being a new acceſſion, as in our cale, then the Water 


of the Flood, I (ay, ſhall make a greater riſing in the parts fuperi- 


our, far from the jmpcediment ; and thele impediments ſhall 
come to be tholc that ſhall overflow the Plains, as happened 
eighteen or ninetcen years ago, before the opening of Fiume 
morto \nto the Sea , The {ame will certainly follow, ik Finme 
morto be let into! Serchio. Here 1 could alledye a. very, pretty 
cale that befcll me in /a * Campagna di Roma, neer to the Sca- 
lide. where I drained a Bog or Fen, of the nature of the Wa- 
ters of Piſa, and | {ſucceeded in the enterprize,the Waters in their 
lite rowards the Sta abating ouly three Palmes, and yet in the 
; Fer 


* The Countrey 


or Province lying 


round tne City, 


heaictofore -alles 
Lati nn 


n 
> ett ee ad 


p_— —_— 


88 


Ofthe MENSURAaTIOnN L ib.» 


Fen they fell more than fifteen, Palmes. But the buſireſſ 
would be long, and nox fo ealily to be declared, and 1 am cer- 
tain that- Sig. Bartolott; having conſidered this, would alter his 
judgment; and withall would know that remitting that impedi- 
ment anew, which I had left for leiſe than three |} almes toward: 


the Sea, the Waters in the Fen would return with the firſt Flood: | 


and Raines to the ſame height as before , as likewiſe Finme mortg 


will do if it ſhall be let again into Serchzo. 


Here I intreat your Honour to do me the favour to importung 
P. Franceſco in my behalf, that he would be pleaſed to deelare 
my meaning in the aforeſaid Letter to Sig. Bartolotti, for | hope 
that if he will underſtand this point, he will be no longer ſa te> 
nacious 1n his opinion. 

Next that theſe Lords in the Commiſſion of Sewers, with the 
Right Honourable the Marqueſle of S. Angelo, and your Honour 
do approve of my judgment, doth very much rejoyce me but 
becauſe that I know that they doit not in delign to complement 
me, but onely to ſerve his Highnels our Grand Duke, I freely 
profe(s that I will pretend no | BF obligations from them there- 
in,than I account my ſelf to owe to thoſe whoſe opinions are 
contrary to mine, for that I know that they have the ſame end. 
The definitive fentence of this whole buſineſs is, that they give 
theſe Plains, theſe Draines, and theſe Waters farre ferchr ap- 
pellations. 

11. As to the quantity of the Water that Finme morto diſ- 
chargeth into the Sea, there are very great diſputes about it,and 
[ have been preſent at ſome of them. Bur let your Honour be- 
lieve me, that as this is not continual, but only during a few 
dayes, fo it will never be of any great prejudice to thele Fields ; 
and if your Lordſhip would be aſcertained thereof, you may 
pleaſe to go to Finme morto at about a mile's diſtance from the 
Sea, in the time of thele ftrong Windes, and obſerve the cur- 
rent from thence upwards, for you ſhall finde it extream flow, 
and conſequently will know that the quantity of che Water that 
is repulsd is very ſmall. And this ſeems to be contradicted by the 
rule of Rilings proceeding from cauſes bclow, which occaſion no 
conſiderable alteration far from the Sea. 

[ am neceſſitated to go to morrow out of Rome with his Emi- 
nence Cardinal Gaetano about certain affairs touching Waters, 
therefore I ſhall not farther inlarge, but for a cloſe to this tedious 
Diſcourſe, I conclude in few words, that Fiume morto 15 by n9 
means to be let into Sereh4io, nor are therc any means intermedi- 
ate a to be taken, for they will alwayes be prejudicial 3 but 
Finme #orto is to be diſcharged immediately into the Sca- When 
it 15 ſtopt up by the fury of the Sea-waves, 1 affirm that it 1s 2 


fign 


[ib 2. Of Running Waress. 


7.1 that there 15 nv need of opening it 3 and if there be any oc- 
calion to OPCn It, It 13 ealily done. As for the reſt your Lordſhip 
may plcalc to keep account of all che particulars that occur, tor 
the memory of things paſt 15 our Tutreſle in thoſe that are to 
-ome. If occaſion ſhall ofter, I intreat you to bow humbly in 
my name to His Highncls the Grand Duke, and the moſt Serene 
Prince Leopold; and to attend the ſervice of Their Highnefles, for 
vou ſerve | rinces of extraordinary merit; And to whom 1 my 
if am allo exceedingly obliged. In the controverſies that arilc 
reſpect the pious end of ſpeaking the Truth, for then every 
thing will ſucceed happily. | kiſs the hands of Padre Franceſco, 
of Sig. Bartolotti, and ot your Lordſhip. 


Tour Honours 
Rome, 14. March 1642. 
; mo$t Obliged Servant 


D. BENEDETTOCASTELLTI. 


pon this occaſion I will here inſert a Diſcourſe that I made 

upoa the Draining and improvement of the Pontine Fens, 
for thar I rhink that whatſoever may be done well and to pur- 
pole in chis matter hath abſolute dependance on the perfe& know- 
ledge of that ſo important Propoſition, by me demonſtrated and 
explained in my Treatiſe of the M#nſuration of Running W a- 
ters, namely, That the ſame water of a River doth continually 
change Mcalurcs, according as it altereth and changeth the ve- 
locity of its courle ; ſo that the meaſure of the thickneſle of a 
River in one Site, to the mealure of the {ame River in another 
vite, hath the ſame proportion reciprocally that the velocity in 
this ſite hath to the velocity in the firſtVite. And this is a Truth 
lo conſtant and unchangeable, that it altereth not in the leaſt 
point on any occurrences of the Waters that change : and 
being well underſtood, it openeth the way to the knowledge of 
lundry advertiſements in theſe matters, which are all reſolved by 
this ſole Principle ; and from it are derived very conſiderable be- 
nefits; and without theſc it is impoſlible to do any thing with 
abſolute perfeQtion. 


Nnngk A 


Lib.3. 
A 


CONSIDERATION 
Upon the 


DRAINING 


OF THE 
Pontine Fenns;: 


| BY 
D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot 
of S- BENEDETTO AL OI1s1 0,and Profeſſor 


of the Mathematicks to P. Urban VIII. inthe 
Univerfity of R OME, 


——  — OOO 
— ————_ = - — —_ — CO — —— — - — — <—— 


CONSIDERATION LIL 


Mongſt the enterprizes by me eſteemed, if not ab- 

lolutely impoſlible, , at leaſt exceeding difficulr, 
© one was that famous one of Draining the Pontine 
Y; \ Ferns ; and therefore I was thorowly reſolved 
SIZES never to apply my minde thereunto , although 
by my Patrons I ſhould be commanded to the 
fame : accounting that it was an occaſion rather of loſing repu- 
fation by the miſcarriage of the attempt, than of gaining fame by 
reducing thrngs to a better paſs then they now are at. Yet never- 
theleſs, having of latc years obferved the place,and ſailed through 
thoſe Chancls,and thoſe Waters;after I had made ſome refle&ion 
thereupon, | thought that the enterprize was not ſo difficult as 


f had at fiſt conceited itto bez and I am the more confirmed in 


this opinion, upon the inducement of that which I have written 


Nnnn Tf Geo- 


—_—_— —__ 
- _— 


Of the MEexnsunartlon: Libs. 


Geometrically in my Treatiſe of the Menſuration of Runnir 
Waters; ſo that talking with lcveral perſons, I adventured to 
affirry, in-diſcourcs , that this improvement mighe poflibly he 
brought ſmneb #goed chaxe. | Ds 

Now I have reſolved to ſet down my thoughts in writing , and 
to honout this my Paper with the Noble Name of your Lordſhip, 
to render it the more credible and con{picuous ar the firſt view, 
if it ſhould chance that the Subyect 1 treat of, were not of ſuch 
morMEngz#7as that it did deſerve to be valucd for any other reaſon. 
Pardon me, Sir, if I have been too bold, and continue me in the 
number of your Servants. 

The enterprize of Draining a great part of the Territorics of 
the Pontine Fenns, hath been undertaken both in the time of 
the antient Romans, and laſt of all,in our days; yea if the late 
times by Sixtus V. | do not doubt in the leaſt, but thar ir will 
be poſlible yer to reduce things to a very good pals;and if I be not 
miſtaken, with a very {mall charge in compariſon of the profit that 
would be received from thoſe rich Grounds. This improvement 
was of great expence mm the tire of Sixtus Quintus, but by rea- 
{on the thing was not rightly underſtood, there were made many 
Draitts 3 x'gteat Parke of which were tiaprofitable and vain : and 
amongſt {o many operations, there hapned {ome to be made that 
ſucceeded,as was defired ; but not being underftood, they were 
held in no accotintz and thus the bufinets being negle&ed , the 
waters are returned into the ſame ſtate as they were at firſt, be- 
fore the improvement. Here I have by familiar diſcourſes 
with my friends, explaincd this cnterprize undertaken by Six- 
ts V. and haply alſo by ſome more antient, with the example of 
the Fable of Orilo,in Arioſto. This Monſter was made up with 
ſuch enchantment, that men tought with him alwayes in vain; 
for though in the Combate he were cut in pieces , thoſe divided 
Members preſently re-united, and returned to the fight more 
fierce then eyer. Butthe Paladine Aſtolfo coming to undertake 
him, after a Tong diſpute , at the end he cut his head ſheer off 
from the ſhoulders at one blow; and nimbly alighting from his 
Horſe,took the Monſtrous head, and mounting again, as he rid 
away hc fell to ſhave the Pole of that Monſter , and fo he loſt 
the Lock of Hair, in which alone the enchantment lay ;*and then 
the horrible Head in an inſtant manifeſted ſigns of death, and the 
trunk which ran, ſeeking to reunite to it anew, gave the laſt gaſp, 
and in this manner the enchantment ended. The Book of Fate 
ſerved admirably to the Paladine , whereby he came to under- 
ſand that Charm ;Ifor by ſhaving his whole head, the enchanted 
hairs came to be cut off amongſt the reſt : In the ſame manner,l 


ſay, that it hath ſometimes happened in Draining thoſc Fm 
. for 


Lib. 2. Of R uxni1nG VV ain. 


for that amongſt ſo many tryals 45 have been made , that alſo 


was light upon, on which the improvement and reniedy to the 
diſorder did depend. And to us my fore-named Treatiſe ſhall 
ſerve for a Rule, which being well underitood , ſhall make us ro 
know whercin conſiſteth, and whercon dependeth.this miſcarri- 
age, and conſequently it will be cafie to apply thereutito a ſcalo- 
nablc remedy. | 

And firſt I ſay, That there is no doubt but that the water: 
continue ſo high on thoſe Plains becauſe they are to high in the 
principal River , which ought to receive them, and carry them 
into the Sea. Now the Caulcs of the height of the River, may 
in my judgement be reduced to one alone ; which is that by me 
ſo often mentioned for the moſt Potent one, and declared in my 
afore-named Tractate ; to wit, The tardity of the motion of the 
waters, which doth alwayes infallibly, and preciſely cailt the 
{elf (ame Running Water to change the meaſlire of its thickhels 
at ſuch a rate, that the more it encreaſeth in velocity , the more 
it decreaſeth in meaſure z and the more it detteaſeth ini velocity, 
the more it encreaſeth in meaſure : As for example ; If a River 
run in ſuch a place with the velocity of movihg a mile in the 
{pace of an hour, and afterwards the fatite River in anotker place 
doth encreaſe in velocity , fo as to make three miles an hour ; 
thar ſame River ſhall diminiſh in thickneſs two thirds : ' AHY oh 
the contrary, If it ſhall diminiſh in velocity fo, as that it funneth 
but kalf a mile in the ſame time, it ſhall etitrcaſe the dotble in 
thickneſs and meaſute. And ina wotd, look what my nine] 
the velocity in the firſt place, hath to the velotity in the ſecond, 
and ſuch hath reciprocally the meaſure of the thickneſs in the 
ſecond place, to the meafure in the firſt ; as [ have clearly dethon- 
ſtrated in my Treatife : Whith I repeat ſo frequently , that I 
fear the Profefiors of Polite Leatning will _ me with Tua- 
tologie, and vain Repetition. But I am ſo,defirous in this moſt 
important poitit to be well underſtood , becaufe it will then be 
eaſic to comprehend all the reſt ; and without this it is impoſſible 
(I will not ſay difficult, but abſolutely impoffible) to underſtand, 
or ever to cﬀfe& any thing to purpote. And the bertet to ex- 
plain the example, let it be ſuppoſed : 
That the water of a River A D, | | 


runneth high at the level of AF, &A|__ ones $2 ON 
with ſuch a certain velocity ; and let | 
it, by the ſame water,be velocitated | _'E 
three times more 3 I ſay, that it will 

abate; , and ſhall ſtand at the level © ERP Sv 


nBE;and if it ſhall more veloci- 


fate, it will abate the more at the Sea; Bur if it ſhould retard - 
| more 


-r 


—- a 


Of the MEensunratlon Lib.z 


more than it did at the level A F, it would riſe yet more above 
the ſaid level A F ; although that the felt (ame quantity of wate; 
runneth all the while. By the above-named folid Principle 1 
reſolve extravagant Problems in my Treatile, and allign the Rea. 
ſons of admirable cffe&s of Running Waters : But as for whar 
concerneth our purpole of the Pontine Fenns, we have the Cau- 
ſes very plain andclear; for which, by the trampling of Cattle 
which pals thorow the Drazning River, the waters abate (o nota- 
bly, that it is as it were a miracle for thoſe Reeds., Flags, and 
Weeds that ſpring up, encreaſc, and {pread all over the River, 
ſtop and impede that velocity of the waters which they would 
have by mcans of their declivity. But that paſlage of thofe Baſts, 
treading down thoſe Weeds unto the bottom of the River, jn ſuch 
ſort, as that they no longer hinder the Current of the Water ; 
and the ſame Waters increaſing in their courle , they do dimi- 
niſh in meaſure and height;and by this meancs the Ditches of the 
Plains empty into the ſame {uccelsfully , and leave them free 
from Waters , and Drained. But thele Weeds in a ſhort 
time ſprouting up anew, and raiſing their ſtalkes thorow the 
body of the Waters, they reduce things to the ſame evil 
ſtate , as before, retarding the velocity of the Water , ma- 
king'it to increale in height, and perhaps do occaſion grea- 
ter miſchiefs; ſeeing that thoſe many knots which cach plant 
- ſhoots forth, begets a greater multitude of Stalks , which much 
more incumbering the Water of the River, are a greatcr impe- 
diment unto its velocity , and conſequently make the height 
of the waters to encreaſe ſo much the more, and do more miſchicf 
than before. 

Another head to which theſe harms may be reduced, bur pro- 
cceding from the ſame Root, which hath a great part in this 
diſorder, is the impediment of thoſe Wears in the River which 
are made by heightning the bed of the ſame, tor placing of fiſh- 
1ng-nets ; of which Pz/carzes I reckoned above ten, when I made 
a voyage thorow thoſe waters to Sendolo. And theſe Fiſhing- 
Wears arc {uch impediments, that ſome one of them makes the 
water of the Rive: 1a the upper part to riſe half a Palm, and 
ſometimes a whole Palm, and more ; ſo that when they are al] 
gaihered together,theſe impediments amount to more than ſeven, 
or poſſibly thau eight Palms. 

There coacurreth for a thitd moſt Potent Cauſe of the waters 
continuing high in the evacuating, or Draining Chanel, and con- 
ſequently on the Plains 3 The great abundance of water that ilſu- 
eth from Fiume Siſto, the waters of which do nat keep within 1ts 
Banks when they are abundant ; but encreaſing above its Chanel, 
they unite with thoſe of the Evacuator , and diſperſing TO 

tne 


"IS 


Lib. 2. Of R unninG VVaruns. 


the Fens are raiſed with great prejudice, and much grea- 
rer than is conceived , according to what hath been demon- 
ſtrared in the Second Conlideration upon the Lake of Ventce, 
Nor is it to any purpole to ſay, that it we ſhould meaſure 
all the Waters that disunbogue trom Fiume Sifto , and gather 
chem into one fumme , we ſhowld not finde them to be {uch, 
as that they ſhall be able tro make the Waters of the Fens 
co increaſe , by. reaſon of the great expanlion of them, over 
which that body of water 1s to diſtend : tor ro this inſtance we 
anſwer with that which we have given notice of in the Firſt Con- 
ſideration touching the Lake of. Venice, treating of the abatc: 
ment that is cauled by the Brent let into the Lake. And more- 
over, it I ſhall adde thereto that which I; write in the Second 
Conſideration, it will be very apparent how greatly harmfull 
and prejudicial theſe excurſions of Waters from Finme Siſto 
may be, which arc not kept under, and contined within the 
River : Therefore , proceeding to the proviiions, and ope- 
rations that are to be accounted P;incipall , I reduce them to 
three Heads, | 

In the firſt place it is neceſlary to throw down thoſe Weares, 
and to take the Piſciaries quite away, obſerving a Maxime, in 
my judgment, infallible, that Fiſhing and Sowing arc two things 
that can never confiſt together ; Fiſhing being on the W ater, and 
Sowing on land. | 

Secondly, it will be neceſſary to cut under Water in the bot- 
tome of the River thoſe Weeds and Plants that grow and in- 
creaſe in the River, and leave them to be carried into the Sea by 
the Stream ; for by this means theſe Reeds ſhall not ſpring up 
and diſtend along the bottome of the River, by means of the 
Beaſts treading upon them; And the lame ought to be done 
often, and with care, and muſt not be delaied till the miſ- 
chief increaſe, and the Champain Grounds be drowned , but 
one ought to order matters fo, as that they may not drown. 
And I will affirm, that otherwiſe this principal point would be- 
come a moſt conſiderable inconvenience. 


Thirdly,it is neceſſary to make good the Banks of Finme Siſts 


on the left hand, and to procure that thole Waters may run in 
the Chanel, and not break forth. And it is to be noted, that 
It is not enough to do one or two of thoſe things, but we are to 
put them all in execution ; for omitting any thing, the whole 
machine will be out of tune, and ſpoiled. But procecding with 
duc Care, you ſhall not only Drain the Pontine Fens , but by 


means of this laſt particular the Current of Fiume Si$to ſhall 


icowr its own Chanel of its ſelf, even to the carrying part of ir 


away : and haply with this abundance of water that it ſhall 
bear 


Ofthe MensuRATlON Lib 2. 


bear, the Mouth della Torre may be opened, and kept open 
into the Sea. Andit would, laſt of all, be of admirable bene» 
fit tocleanſe Finme SiSto from many Trees and Buſhes where. 
with it is overgrown. 

And with this I conclude, that the Improvement or Drain 
poſſible to be made conſiſterh in theſe three particulars. F Iſt, 
in taking away the Fiſhing Weares, leaving the Courſe 
of the Warers free. Secondly, in keeping the Pringipa] 
Rivers clear from Weeds and Plants. Thirdly, in keeping 
the water of Finume SiSto in its own Chanel. All which are 
things that may be done with very little charge , and to the 
manifeſt benefit of the whole Country, and to the rendering 


the Air wholſomer in all thoſe Places adjoyning to the Pon- 
tine Fens. 


Lib.2. 


A 


CONSIDERATION 
Upon the 


DRAINING 


Of the Territories of 


Bologna, Ferrara, 


AND 


Romagna. 


L 
coo — 
% 


BY 


D. BENEDETTO CASTELLL kts 


of $. BENEDETTO ALOtsiO, Matheratician 
ro P. Urban VIII. and Profeſſor in the 


CANy 6 of ROM E. 


—_ _— h_ _n—_— 


— 


He weghty buſineſle of the Draining of 
[|| the Territories of Bolog na, Ferrara, 
and Romagna having 4.2 punRually 
yl handled and declared in writing from 
2 the excellent memory of the Right Ho- 
al nourable and Noble Monſignore Corſini, 
who was heretofore Deputed Commil- 
ſzry General, and Viſitor of thoſe Was 
ters 5 Iam not able to make ſuch ano- 


ther Diſcourſe upon he ſame Subje&, but will only lay ſome- 
what for farther confirmation of that which I have laid mm this 
Book upon the Lake of Venice, upon the Pontine Fens, and yp- 
on the Draining of thoſe Plains of Piſa, lying between the Ri- 
vers Arno and Serchio; whereby it 15 maniteſt, that in all- the 

O 009 afore« 


98. 


% 


Ofthe MENSURAT1ON Lib. 2 


aforementioned Cales, and in the preſent one that we are in hand 
with, there have, in times paſt, very grofſe Errours been com- 
mitted, hezugh the ngt hag ever well underſtood the truc 
meaſure of Running waters ; and here it i5 to be noted, that the 
buſinefle is, that in Yenicey; the diveryon of the waters «| the 
Lake, by diverting the Brent was debated, and in part executed, 
without conſideration had how, great abatement of water might 
folle þ the Lake, if'the Bn##t were diveried, as 1 haye ſhewn 
in thefirſt Confiderftion fipon this particalar, from which a& 
there hath inlued-very bad conſequences, not only the difficulty 
of Navigation, but/ic hath infe&ed the wholfomneſle of the Air, 
and cauled the ſtoppage of the Ports of Venice. And on the 
contrary y/ the ſameingdvertency of not conſidering what riſing of 
the Water the Reno, and other Rivers being opened into the Val- 
leys of Bologna and Ferrarg, might caule in the ſaid Valleys, i; 
the certain cauſe that ſo many rich and fertile Fields are drown- 
ed under water, converting the happy habizations and dwellings 
of men into miſerable receptacles for Fiſhes : Things which 
doubtleſſe would never have happened, if thoſe Rivers had been 
kept at their height, and Reno had been turnd into Main-Po, 
and the other Rivers into that of Argenta, and of Volano. Now 
there having ſufficient been ſpoken by the above-named Monſig. 
Corſuni in his Relation, I will only adde one conceit of my own, 
whichafter the'Rivers ſhould be'regulated, as hath been ſaid, I 
verily believe would be of extraerdinary profit, I much doubt in- 
deed that I ſhall finde it a hard matter to perſwade men to be of 
my nimd, but yet nevertheleſs I will not queſtion, bur that thoſe, - 
at leaſt, who ſhall have underſtood what I have ſaid and demon- 
ſtrated concerning the manners and proportions, according to 
which the abatements and rifings of Running waters proceed, 
that are made by the Diverſions and Introductions of VVaters, 
will apprehend that my conjeQure 1s grounded upon Reaſon. 
And although I deſcend not to the exattnefle of particulars, 1 
will open the way to others, who having obſerved the requifite 
Rulesof tonſidering the quantity of the waters that are intro- 
duced, or that happen to be diverted, ſhall be able with punCctu- 
ality to examine the whole buſineſſe, and then refolve on that 
which ſhall be expedient to be done. 

Refleing therefore upon the firſt Propoſition, that the 
Rifings of a Running Water made by the accefſion of new water 
into the River, are to one another, as the Square-Roots of the 
quantity of the water that runneth ; and confequently, that the 
lame cometh to paſs in the Diverſions : Inſomuch, chX a River 
running in height one ſuch a certain meaſure, ro make it encreale 


double in height, the water is to be encreaſed to three times A 
much 


” 
ſ 
' 
f 
} 


f 16.5: Of Running Waters: 


much as it ran b-fore 3 lo that when the water ſhall be quadru- 

plc, tic hcight ſhall be double ; and if the water WCIc centuple, 

[ic height would be decuple onely, and fo from one quantity 

0 another : And on the contrary, in the Diverſions; It ct the 
1 00. Parts of water that run thorow a River , there ſhall be di- 

verted 11! , the height of the River diminiſheth onely :+ , and con- 

tinuing to divert +>, the height of the River abateth likewile :* , 
and io proceeding to divert {5; and then *:, and then, and 

chen 5-:, and then 5c, and then, and then :-:, alwaics by 
_ each of theſe diverſions, the height of the Running Water dis 
miniſherh che renth part: although that the diverſions be (or unc. 

qual. RefleGing | tay upon this infallible Truth, 1 have had 4 
conceit, that though the Reno and other Rivers were diverted 
from the Valleyes, and there was onely left the Chanel of Nawvi- 
gation, which was onely the :-part of the whole water thar fal- 
Iethinto the Valleys yet neverthelets, the warer in thoſe ſame 
Valleyes would retain a tenth part of that height that became 
conjoyacd by the concourſe of all the Rivers : And therefore F 
ſhould think rhat it were the beſt reſolution to maintain the Cha- 
nel of Navigation (it it were poſſible) continuate unto the Po of 
Ferrara, and from thence to carry it into the Po of Volano ; for 
beſides that it would be of very great caſe in the Navigation of 
Bologna, avd Ferrara , the ſaid water would render the Po of 
Volano navigable as far as to the very Walls of Ferrara, and con- 
ſequently the Navigation would be continuate from Bologna to 
the Sea-(ide. 

But to manage this enterprize well, it 1s neceſlary to meaſure 
the quantity of the Water that the Rivers dilcharge into the Val- 
leys, and that which the Chanel of Navigation carryeth, in man- 
ner as | have demonſtrated at the beginniny of this Book ; for this 
once known, we ſhall alfo come ro know, how profitable this dis 
verſion of the Chanel of Navigation from the Valleys is like to 
prove z which yet would ſtill be unprofitable, if ſo be that all 
the Rivers that diſcharge their waters into the Valleys, ſhould 
not firſt be Drained, according to what hath been above ad- 
vcrtiſed. 


Abbot CASTEL L1, inthe preſent conſideration referring 
himfelf to the Relation of Monſig. Corſini, grounded apon the Ob- 


ſervations and Precepts of the [, aid Abbot ;, as is ſeen in the pre- 


ſent Diſcourſe. I thought it convenient for the compleating of the 
be Fore of our Authour, upon theſe ſubjes, to inſert it inthis 
Place. | 


OQOoooes A 


99 


LOO 


. Or Lordſhip. 


Of the Mensunartlon, Lib. 
A 
Relation of the Waters inthe Territories 
of Bologna and Ferrara. 


BY 


The Right Honourable and Jlluſtrious, Moir. 
me CORSINGI, a Native of T uſcany, Ju= 


perintendent of the general DRA1Ns, 

and Prefident of Romagna. 

f THe Rhexo, and other Brooks of Romagna, were by the 
advice of P. Agoſiizo Sperna%%at: the Jeſuite, towards 
the latter end of the time of Pope Clement VIII. notwith- 

ſtanding the oppoſition of the Bologneſe, and others concerned 

therein, diverted from their Chanels, for the moce commodigus 
cleanſing of the Po of Ferrara, and of its two Branches of Prima- 
ro, and Volano; in order to the introducing -the water of the 

Main-Po into them, to the end that their wonted Torrents being 

reſtored, they might carry the Muddy-water thence into the Sea, 

and reſtore to the City the Navigation which was laſt, as is ma- 
nifeſt by the Brief of the ſaid Pope Clement, dirced to the Car- 

dinal San Clemence, bearing date the 22. of Auguſt, 1604. 

The work of the {aid cleanſing, and introducing of the (aid 
Po, either as being (uch in it ſelf, or by the contention of the 
Cardinal Legates then in thele parts ; and the Jarrings that hap- 
ned betwixt them, proved ſo difficult, that after the expence of 
vaſt ſummy in the ſpace of 21: years, there hath been nothing 
done, ſave the rendring of it the more difticult to be effeged. 

Interim, the Torrents with their waters, both muddy and 
clear, have damaged the Grounds lying on the right hand of the 
Po of Argents, and the Rheno thoſe on its Banks ; of which 1 
will ſpcak in the tirſt place, as of that which is of greater impor- 
rance, and f:om which the principal cauſe of the miſchiefs that 
reſulr from the reſt doth proceed. 

This Rbeno having overflowed the * Tennency of Sanmartina, 
in circumference about fourreen miles given it before , and part 
of that of Cominale given it afterwards, as it were, for a recepta- 
cle ; from whence, having depoſed the matter of its muddinels, 
it iſlued clear by the Mouths of Maſe, and of Liewaloro, into 
the Po of Primaro, and of Volano; did break down the encom- 


paſling 


Lib. 2. Of R unnino VVaruns. 


paſling Bank or Dam towards S. Martino, and that of its new 
Chanel on the right hand neer to Torre del Fonds. 

By the breaches on this ſide it ſtreamed out in great abun- 
dance from the upper part of Cominale, and in the parts abour 
| Raveda, Pioggio, Caprara, Ghiare di Reno, Sant Agoſtino, San 
Proſpero, San Vincenzo, and others, and made them ro become 
incultivable : it made alſo thole places above but little fruitful, 
by reaſon of the impediments that their Draines received, tindin 
che Conveyances called Riolo and Scorſuro, not only tilled by 1. 
Motta and [a Belletta, but that they turned backwards of them- 
(elves. 7 

But by the Mouths in the incloſing Bank or Dam at Borgo dt 
S. Martino i{lutng with violence, ic tirſt gave obſtruftion to the 
ancient Navigation of [2 Torre del /2 Foſſa, and afterwards ro 
the moderne of the mouth of Mafz, {o that at preſent the Com- 
merce between Bologna and Ferrara is loſt, nor can ir ever be 
in any durable way renewed, whilſt that this exceeds irs due 
bounds, and what ever moneys ſhall be imployed about the ſame 
ſhall be without any equivalent benefit, and to the maniteſt 
and notable prejudice of the * Apoſtolick Chamber. 

Thence paſling into the Valley of Marzera , it ſwelleth high- 
er, not only by the riſing of the water, but by the railing of the 
bottome , by reaſon of the matter ſunk thither after Land- 
floods, and dilateth ſo, that it covereth all che Meadows there- 
abouts, nor doth it receive with the wonted facility the Drains of 
the upper Grounds,of which the next unto it lying under the wa- 
ters that return upwards by the Conveyances, and the more re- 
mote, not finding a paſſage for Rain-waters that fertle, become 
cither altogether unprofitable or lictle better. 


From this Valley, by the Trench or Ditch of Marzars, or of 


la Duca by la Buowa, or mouth of Caſtaldo de Roſſe, and by the 
new paſſage it falleth into the Po of Argenta, which being to re- 
ceive it clear, that ſo it may ſink farther therein, and receiving 
it muddy, becauſe it hath acquired a quicker courle, there will 
arile a very contrary effect. 

Here therefore the ſuperficies of the water keeping high, unti} 
it come to the Sea, hindereth the Valleys of Rawenna, where 
the River Senio, thoſe of San Bernardino where Santerno was 
turned, thoſe of Buor' ecquiſto, and thoſe of Marmorto, where 
the Idice, Qnaderna, Sellero fall in, from {wallowing and taking 
in their Waters by their ufual In-lets, yet many times, as I my 
(elf have ſeen in the Viſitation, they drink chem up plentifully, 
whereupon, being conjoyned with the muddineſſe of thoſe R1- 
vers that fall into the ſame, they ſwell, and dilate, and overflow 
ſome grounds, and deprive othiers of theic Drains in like manner 

A? 


* The Popes 
Exch:quer, 


E 


[z: of Crronnd oN- 


im0!t 
With 


O? 


Poleſine 15 a 


{urrounded 
Boos or wa- 


rers,)ike an T:n! 


" 


rYAYMA, 


cople 0; Fer- 


Of the MEnsunatlon Lib > 


a» hath been ſaid of that of Marrara, infomuch that from the 
Point of S. Giorgio, as far as S. Alberto all thole thatare berween 
the Valleys and Po are ſpoiled, of thole that are between Valley 
and Valley many are 1n a'Very bad condition, and thole that are 
ſoinc conſiderable ſpace above not alittle damnihed. 

In fine, by raiſing the bottom or land of the Valleys, and the 
bed of Keno, and the too great repletion of the Po of Primary 
with waters, the Vallcys of Comacchio (on which ſide the Banks 
are very bad) and * Poleſine di S. Grorgio are threatned with > 
danger, that may in time, 1t it be not remedied, become IITCPa- 
rablc, and at preſent tecleth the incommoduy of the Waters, 
which pcnctrating thorow the pores of the Earth do {pring up in 
the ſame, which they call Purlings, which is all likely to redound 
to the prejudice of Ferrara, fo noblc a City of Italy, and foim- 
portant to the Eccleſtaſtics $iate, 

W hich particulars al] appcar to be atteſted under the hand of 
a Notary in the Viſ:/2/:0z,which 1 made upon the command of 
His Holinefle,and are withall known to berrrue by the *Ferrareſ; 
themielves, of whom (beſides the requeſt of the Bologneſi) the 
greater part beg compaſlion with fundry Memorials, and reme- 
dies, alwell for the milchict; paſt, as alſo for thoſe in time to 
come, from which I hold it a duty of Conſcience, and of Cha- 
rity to deliver thei. 

Pope Clement judged, that the ſufficient mcans to effec this 
was the {aid Introduction of the Main Po into the Chanel of 
Ferrara; a rclojution truly Heroical, and ot no lefle beauty 
than benctit to that City , of which I ſpeak not at prelcnt, be- 
cauic t think chat there 15 need of a xcadicer and more acco- 
modate remedy. : 

So that 1 {ec not how any other thing can be ſo much conſidc- 
rable as the removal of Keno, omitting for this time to ſpeak of 


--©5 *zncloſing it from Valley wo Vallcy untill it come to the Sca, as 


the Dukes of Ferrara did detign, toraimuch as all thole Ferra- 
ref: that have intercit in the Poleſrne ai S. Giorgio, and on the 
right hand of the Po of Argent a do not deſire it, and do, but too 
openly, proteſt againſt it; and becauſe that before the Chanel 
were made as far as the Sea, many .hundreds of years would be 
ſpent, and yet would not remedy the damages of tholke who 
now are agrieved, but would much increaſe them, in regard thc 
Valleys would continue ſubmerged, the Drains ſtopped, and the 
other Brooks obſtructed, w!;:\ch would of neceſlity drown not 4 
few Lands that lie betwcen Valley and Valley ; and in fine, 
regard it hath not from San Martma to the Sea fora ipace of fit- 
ty miles a greater fall then 1 9, 8, 6, fcet,it would want that Iorce 


which they themſelves who propound this project do require x tO 
ave 


Lib 2; Of Ruxxniko Whritks. 
have,that ſo it may not depoſe the matter of the muddinels when 
iris intended to be let into Volana. | 

$4 that making the Line of the bortome ticer to Vigareno, it 
wou, { riſe to thole prodigious termes that they do make bigger, 
and they may thence expet thoſe miſchiefs, for which they 
will not admit of introducing it into the ſaid Po of Vol an. 

Amongſt the wayes therefore that I have thought of for effeQ- 
ing that ſame remotion, and which have cauſed to be viewed by 
skilful men that have taken a level thereof,( with the affiſtance of 
the venerable Father, D. Benedetto Caſtelli of Cafine, a man of 
much fidelity and honeſty, and no leſs expert in ſuch like affairs 
touching waters,than perteCt in the Mathematick Diſciplines) two 
onely, the reſt being either too tedious, or too dangerous to the 
City, have ſeemed to me worthy, and one of them alſo more than 
che other, to offer to your Lordſhip. 

The one 1s to remit it into the Chanel of Volans, thorow which 
ic gocth of its own accord to the Sea. | 

The other is to turn it into Main-Po at Stellata, for, as at other 
times it hath done, it will carry it to the Sea happily. 

As to what concerns the making choice of the firſt way , that 
which ſcemeth to periwade us to it is, that we therein do nothing 
that is new, in that it 1s but reſtored to the place whence it was 
removed in the year 1522. in the time of Pope Adrian , byan 
agreement thade in way of contra, between Alfonſo, Duke of 
Ferraze, and the Bologneſe ; and that it was diverted for reaſons, 
that are either out of date, or elſe have been too long time 
deferred. j4) | 

[n like manner the facility wherewith 'it may be effe&ed, let- 
ting it run into the divided Po, whereby it will be turned to. Fer- 
rara, or elſe carrying it by Torre del Fondo, to the mouth of Maſs, 
and from thence thorow the Trench made by the Ferrarefr, 
along by Panaro, where alſo finding an ample Bed, and high and 
thick Banks, that will ſerve at other times for it, and for the wa« 
ters of Po, there may a great expence be ſpared. 

That what ever its Fall be, it would maintain the fame, not 
having other Rivers, which with their Floods can binder it ; and 
that running confined between good Banks, without doubt it 
would not leave [a Motto by the way 3 but eſpecially, that it 
would be ſufficient if it came to Codigoro, where being affiſted by 
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, it would run no hazard of 
having its Chanel filled up from thence downwards. 
| That there might thence many benefits be derived to the City) 
by means of the Running Waters, and allo no mean Navigation 
might be expeed. | | 

On the contrary it is obje&ed , That i is not ——_—_ - 


293 


104 


« T he wich Fol 
theic places 1s 
ſomewhat bigget 
chan ouis. 


Of tbe Minzunatlok Lib 5 


thitk of returning this Torrent into the divided Po, by reaſon of 
the peril that would thence redound to this City. 

And that going by Torre del Fondo, through Sanmarting to 
the Mouth de Maſt by the Chappel of Vigarano unto the Sea, it i3 
by this way 70. miles 3 nor 1s the Fall greater than 26.5.6. Feet,lo 
that it would come to fall but 4. inches & an halt,or thereabout. 
in a mile; whereas the common opinion of the skiltul] (to the 
end that the Torrents may not depole their {and that they brin 
with themin Land-Floods) requireth the twenty fourth part of 
the hundredth part of theic whole length, which in our cale, 
accounting according to the meaſure of thele places, is 16. inches 
a * mile ; Whereupon the ſinking of the Mud and Sand would 
moſt ccrtaivly follow, and (o an imm-nle heightning of the Line 
of the Bottom, and conſequently a necellity of raiſing the Bank, 
the impoſlibility of maintaining them, the danger ot breaches 
and decayes, things very prejudicial to the Iſtets of this City, and 
of San Giorgio, the obſtruction of the Drains, which from the 
Tower of Tienne downwards, fall into the laid Chanel; to wit, 
thoſe of the Sluices of Goro, and the Drains, of the Meadows of 
Ferrara: And moxeover, the damages that would ariſe unto the 
ſaid Iſlet. of S. Giorgio, and the Valleys of Comachio, by the wa- 
ters that ſhould enter into the Goro or Dam of the Mills of Belri- 


gnardo, thorow the Trenches of Q #adrea,which cannot be ſto t, 


becaiiſe they belong to the Duke of Modena,,who hath right of 
diverting the waters of that place at his plealure to the work of 
turning: Mills. 

The greater part of which Objeftions, others pretend to prove 
fnvolous, by laying, that its running there till at the laſt it was 
turned another way, is a ſign that it had made ſuch an elevation 
of the'Line, of its Bed as 1t required ; denying that ic needeth 
ſo great a declivity as 15 mentioned aboye z and that for the fu- 
ture 3t-would riſeno more. 

That the ſaid Dra ns and Ditches did empty into the ſame, 
whilſt Po was there 3 ſo that they muſt needs be mpre able to do 
ſo when-onely Reno runs that way. [ 

That there would no Breaches tollow , or if they did, they 
would be onely of the water of Reno, which in few hours might 
be taken away (in thoſe parts they call damming up of Breaches, 
and mending the Bank, taking away the Breaches) and its a que- 
ſtion whether they would procure more inconvenience than bene- 
fit, for that its Mud and Sand might 1a many places, by filling 
them up, occaſion a {ealonable improvement. 

Now omitring to diſcourſe of the ſolidity of the reaſons on the 
oneſide, or on the other, I will produce thoſe that moye me to 


fuſpend my allowance of this deſign. 


The 


Lib.2. Of Runxino Wartths. 195 


The firſt is, that although I dare not ſubſcribe to the Opinion 
of thoſe that require 16. inches Declivity ina mile to Reno, to 
prevent its depoſing of Mud ; yet would [ not be the Author that 
thould make a trial of it with ſo much hazard, for having to ſa- 
ticfie my lelt in ſome particulars cauſed a Level to be taken of 
the Rivers L'amone, Senzo, and Santerno, by Bernardino Aleotti; 
we found that they have more Dechivity by much than Artiſts re- 
quires, As allo the Reno hath from la Botta de Gbiſlier: to the 
Chappel ot Vigarano, for in the ſpace of four miles its Bottom- 
Line falleth five fect and five inches. So that I hold it greater 
prudence to depend upon that example, than to go contrary to a 
common opinion, elpecially fince,that the effe&s cauſed by Reno 
it (elf do confirm me in the ſame, for when it was forſaken by 
the Po, after a few years, either becaule it had choaked up its 
Chanel with Sand, or becaule its too long journey did increaſe 
it, itallo naturally turned aſide, and took the way of the ſaid 
Po towards Stellata. Nay, mn thoſe very years that it did run that 
way, it only began (as relations fay) to make Breaches, an evi- 
dent (ign that 1t doth depole Sand, and raiſe its Bed ; which a- 
greeth with the teſtimony of ſome that were examined in the 
Viſitation of the Publique Notary , who found great benefit by 
having Running Water, and ſome kind of paſlage for Boats, 
and yer nevertheleſs affirm that it for want of Ranning Watet 
had made too high Stoppages-and Shelfes of Sand ; fo that if 
it ſhould be reſtored to the Courſe that it forſook, I much fear 
that after a ſhort rine; if not ſuddenly , un would leave it a- 
again. 

"The fecond | take from the oblervation of what happened to 
Panaro, when with fo great applauſe of the Ferareſs, it was 
brought by Cardinal Serra into the ſaid Chanel of Volana ; for 
that notwithſtanding that it had Running Waters in much grea- 
ter abundance than Reno; yet in the time that it continued in 
that Chanel it raz{ed its Bed well neer five feet, as 1s to be ſeen 
below the Sluice made by Cardinal Capponi to his new Chanel ; 
yea, the ſaid Cardinal Serra who deſired that this his undertakmg 
ſhould appear to have been of no danger nor damage, was con- 
firained at its Overftowings, to give it Vent into Sanmartina, that 
it might not break in upon, and prejudice the City ; which dan- 
ger I ſhould more fear from Reno, in regard it carrieth a greater 
abundance of Water and Sand. - | | 

Thirdly, 1 am much troubled (in the uncertainty of the ſuc- 
ce(3 of the affair) at the great expence thereto required ; For mn 
regard | do not approve of letting it in, neer to the Fortreſle, 
for many reſpe&s, and carrying i by le Torre del Fonde to the 
Mouth de Maſs, it will take up eight miles of doubte Banks; a 

Pppp ching 


1c6 


| Of the MrExSurtation Lib. », 


thing not eaſie to be procured, by realon that the Grounds lie 
under Water ; but from the Mouth de Maſe unto Codigoro, it 
would alſo be neceſſary to make new Scowrings of the Chanel; 
to the end, that the Water approaching (by Wearing and carr : 
iog away the Earth oa both ſhores, might make a Bed lufficient 
for its Body, the depth made for Panaro not lcrving the turn, as 
| conceive ; and it it ſhould ſuthce, when could the people of 
Ferrara hope to be re-imburled and f(atished for the Charge 
thereof ? 

Fourthly, it ſerves as an Argument with me, to fee that the 
very individual perſons concerned in the Remotion or Diverſion 
of the (aid-Torreut,namely, the Bologneſe do not incline unto it, 
an: chat the whole City of Ferrara, even thole very perſons who 
at prelent receive damaye by it, cannot 18du'e to hear thercot. 
Fhe rcalon that inducerh thele laſt named robe lo/averſe thereto, 
1s, cither becauſe that this undertaking will render the introduGi- 
on of the Water of Main-Po more difficult ; or becauſe they fear 
the danger thereof : The others decline the Project, enther for 
that they know that Reno cannot long continue 1n that ' Courſe, 
ot becaule they fear that it 15 too much cxpoled to thoſe mens re- 
vengeful Cutting of it who do not defirc it ſhould ; and it a 
man have any other. wayes; he ought, in my opinion, to forbear 
that, which to ſuch as ſtand;in need of its Removal, is lefle ſati(- 
faGory, and'to-fuch as oppole it, more prejudicial. 

. Ts conclude; I exceedingly honour the judgment of Cardinal 
Gappont, who having to his Natural Ability and Prudence added 
a particular Study, Oblervation, and Experience of theſe Wa- 
ters:for the-ipace of three years together, doth not think that 
Repo can go by Volana; to which agreeth the opinion of Car- 
dinal S. Marcello, Legare of this City, of whom, for his exqui- 
fire underſtanding, we ought to make great account. But if e- 
ver'this ſhould be reſolved on, it would be materially neceſſary 
ro Unite the Quick and Running Waters of the little Chanel of 
Cento, of the Chanel Nawvilio, of Guazzaloca, and at its very 
beginning thole of Dardagza, which at prelent, is one of the 
Springs or Heads of Panaro, that ſo they might afliſt it in carry- 
wg its Sand, and the matter of its Muddinels into the Sea; and 
then there would not fail to be a greater evacuation and {cowr- 
I0g 3 but withall the Proprietors in the Iſlet of San Giorgio and 
of Ferrara muſt prepare themſelves to indure the inconveniences 
of .Purlings -or Sewings of the Water from the River thorow 
the Boggy Ground thereabouts. 

ſhould more eafily incline therefore to carry it inco Main-Po 
at-Stellata, for the Reaſons that Cardinal Capponi moſt ingeni- 


ouſly enumerates in a ſhort, but well-grounded Trad of his : not 


becauſe 


[ iþ.2, Of Running Warts. 


becauſe that indeed ic would not both -by Puclings and by Brea- 
ches occaſion ſome inconvenience eſpecially, in the beginning : 


bur bccauſe I hold this for the incomodiries of it, to be a far leſs 


evil than any of the reſt ; and becaule that by this means there is 
no occaſion g1ven to them of Ferrara, to explain that they are 
deprived of the hope of ever ſeeing the Po again under the Walls 
of their City : To whom, where it may be done, it is but reaſon 
that ſatisfa&ion ſhould be given. | 

It is certain that Po was placed by Nature in the midſt of this 
great Valley made by the Appennine Hills, and by the Alps, to 
carry, as the Maſter-Drain to the Sea, that is the grand receptacle 
of all Waters; tliole particular ſtreams which deſcend from 
them. 

That the Reno by all Geographers, Strabo, Pliny , Solimas, 
Mella, and others is enumerated among the Rivers that fall into 
the laid Po. | | 

Thar although Po ſhould of it {elf change its courſe, yet would 
Reno go to look 1t out, if the works erefted by humane ind uſtry 
did nor obſtruct its paſſage ; ſo that it neither is, nor ought to 
icem ſtrange, if one tor the greater common good ſhould turn it 
into the lame. | | 

Now at Stellata it may go ſeveral waies into Po, as appeareth 
by che levels that were taken by my Order ; of all which I ſhould 
beſt like the turning of it to [a Botta de Ghiſlieri , carrying it 
above Bondeno to the Church of Gambarone, or a little higher or 
lower , as ſhall be judged leaſt prejudicial, when .it cometh to the 
execution, and this for two principal reaſons: The one becauſe 
that then it will run along by the confines of -the Church P tri- 
mony, without {eparating Ferrara from the reſt of it ; The other 
ts, Becaule the Line is ſhorter, and conſequently the fall greater; 
tor that in a (pace of ten miles and one third, it falleth twenty (ix 
teet, more by much than 1s required by Artiſts ; and would 
by places where it could do bur little hurt, notwithſtanding thac 
the perſons interrefled ſtudy ro amplike it incredibly. 

On the contrary, there are but onely two objze&ions that are 
worthy to be examined ; One, That the Drains and Ditches of 
S. Bianca, of the Chanel of Cento, and of Burana, and all thoſe 
others that enter into Po, do hinder this diverſion of Reno, by the 
encreaſing of the waters in the Po. _ The other is that Po 11fing 
about the Tranſom of the Pilaſter-Sluice, very near 20 feet, the 
Reno would have no fall into the ſame ; whereupon it would rite 
to a terrible height, at which it would not be poſſible ro make, or 
keep the Banks made , to'thatit would break' out and drown 
the Meadowes, and cauſe milchiefs, and damages unſpeakable 
and irreparable ; as is cvident by the experiment made ypon' 

Pppp T2 P ana- 


107 


100. 


Ofthe MENSURATION Lib 2. 


Panaro, which being confined between Banks, that it might go 
into Po, this not being neither in its greateſt excrelcenlc, it broke 
out into the territories of Final, and of Ferrara. And though 
thac might be done, it would thereupon enlue , that there being 
let into the Chanel of Po, 2800. iquare feet of water (for ſo much 
we account thoſe of Reno and Panaro, taken together in their 
oreateſt heights) che ſuperficics of it would rite at Icaſt four feet 
'nſomuch that either it would be requiſite to raile its Banks a]l the 
way unto the Sea, to the ſame height, which the treaſures of the 
Indies would not {uffice to cffe& ; or elſe there would be a nece(- 
ity of enduring exceſlive Breaches. To chele two Heads are the 
Arguments reduced, which are largely amplitied againſt our op1- 
nion 3 and I ſhall anſwer firſt to the laſt, as moſt material. 

[ {ay therefore , that there are three calesto be conſidered - 
Firſt , Po high, and Reno low. Secondly, Reno high, and Po 
low. Thirdly, Keno and Po both high rogether. 

Asto the firſt and ſecond, there 1s no difficulty in them; for if 
Po ſhall not be at its greateſt height, Reno ſhall ever have a fall 
into it, and there ſhall need no humane Artitice about the Banks: 
And if Reno ſhall be low, Po ſhall regurgitate and flow up into 
the Chanel of it ; and allo from thence no inconvenience ſhall 
follow: The third remains, from which there are expe&ed ma- 
ny milchiets; but ict is a moſt undoubted truth, that the excreſcen- 
cies of K-no,as coming from the adjacent Appennines and Rains, 
arc to continue bur leven, or eight hours at moſt, and fo would 
nevet,'or very rarely happen to be at the ſame time with thoſe of 
Po, cauled by the melting of the \nowes of the Alps, at leaſt 400. 
miles diſtance from thence. But becauſe it ſometimes may hap- 
pert, I reply, that when it cometh to pals, Reno ſhall not go Into 
Po, but it ſhall have allowed it one or two Vents; namely, into 
the Chanel of Ferrara, as it hath ever had; and into $ anmartina, 
whete 1t runneth at prelent, and wherewith there is no doubt, but 
that the perſons concerned will be well pleaſed , it being a great 
benefit ro them, to have the water over-flow their grounds once 
every'four or five years, inſtead of feeing it. anoy them continu- 
ally. Yea, the Vent may be regulated, reſerving for it the Cha- 
nel in which Rexvat preſent cunneth ; and inſtead of turing ir 
by a Dam at{a Betta de Ghiſlieri, perhaps, to turn it by help of 
Rirong Slaices, that may upon all occaſions be opened and ſhur. 
And for my part' , I do nor queſtion but that the Proprietors 
them(clves in Sazmartina would make a Chanel for it ; which 
receiving, and confining 1t in the time of the Vents, might carry 
the Sandinto the Po of Primaro : Nor need there thence be feat- 


td'any ſtoppage by Mud and Sand, fincethat it is ſuppoled char 


thive-will but very ſeldom beany neceflity of ufing. it 3- ſo thar 


time 


c 
: 
: 
þ = 


ts 4 LE l ot, * 


Om RT PYTETNTY RENTS - 
A 


man an” wry ® 


Lib. 2; Of Running Wartks. 


ime would be allowed, upon occaſion, to ſcowr and cleanſe 
It 


with ſo much tear from the enterance of the Water of Reno 
(welled into Po, when it 15 high, to which there needeth no other 
anſwer 3 yer nevertheleſle we do not take that.quantity of Wa- 
ter, that 15 carried by Reno,and by Panaro,to be lo-great as is affir- 
med : For that P. D. Benedetto Caſtell; hath no leſle accutely 


than accurately obſerved the meaſures of rhis kind, noting that 


the breadth and depth of a River is not enough 'ro relolye the 
queſtion truly, bur that there is relpeG to be hadto the velocity 
of the Warters, and the term of tune, things hitherto not conſi- 
dered by the Skilful in theſe affairs; and theretorc they are not 
able to lay what quantity of Waters the ſaid Rivers carry, nor 
zo conclude of the rilings that will follow thereupon. Nay, it 
is moſt certain, that it all the Rivers that fall into Po, which are 
above thirty, ſhould rile at the rate that theſe compute Reno to 
do, an hundred teet of Banks would not ſuffice, and yet they 
have far fewer : So that this confirmes the Rule of R. P. D. Bene- 
detto, namely, that the proportion of the height of the Water 
of Renoin Reno to the height of the Water, of Reno in, Po, is 
compounded of the proportion of the breadth of the Chanel of 
Po to that of Reno, and of the velocity of the Water of Keno 
in Po to the velccity of the Water of Kenoin Reno; a manifeſt 
argument.that there cannot in it, by this new augmentation of 
Waters follow any alteration that 'neceſlitates the raiſing of its 
Banks, as appeareth by the example of Pavare, which hath been 
fo far from iwelling Po, that it hath rather aſlwaged it, for it hath 
carried away many Shelfs and many Iflets that had grown in its 
Bed, for want of Waters luthcient to bear away the matter of 
Land-floods in ſo broad a Chanel; and as is learnt by the crial 
made by usin Penaro with the Water of Burana; for exe&in 

in the River ſtanding marks, and ſhucting the laid Sluice, we; could 
ſee no ſenſible abatement, nor much lets after we had opened it 
ſenſible inereaſment 3 by which we judge that the ſame is to {uc- 
ceed to Po, by letting in of Reno, Burane having greater pro- 
portion to Panaro than Reno to Po, conlidering the ſtate of thoſe 
Rivers in which the Oblervation was made. So that there 1s no 
longer any occaſion for thoſe great railings of. Banks, and the 
danger of the ruptures as well of Reno as of Po do vaniſh, as al- 
{0 the fear leſt that the Sluices which empty into Po ſhould re- 
cave obſtruttion : which if they ſhould, yet it would be over ir 
a few hours. And as to the Breaches of Pazaro which happened 
in 1623. I know not why, fecing that it is confeſſed that the Po 


Was not, at that time, at its height, one ſhould rather charge it 
4 with 


| And in this manner all thole Prodigtes vaniſh that are raiſed p 


129. 


Of the MensuraTtlION Lih.z 


with the crime, than 'quit ic thereof. The truth is, that the 
Bank was not made of proof, ſince that the ſame now continu- 
eth whole and good, and Panaro doth not bicak out ; nay,there 
was, when it brake more than a foot and halt of its Banks above 
the Water, and to ſpare ; but it broke thorow by a Moles wor- 
king; or by the hole of a Water-Rat, or lome ſuch vermine ; 
and by occaſion of the badnels of the ſaid Banks, as 1 finde by 
the teſtimony of ſome witneſlces examined by my command, that 
I might know the trath thereof. Nor can | here torbear to lay, 
that it would be better, if in ſuch matters men were more candid 
and ſincere. But to ſecure our lclves nevertheleſſe, ro the ut- 


moſt of our power, from ſuch like Breaches which may happen 


at the firſt, by reaſon of the newnefle of the Banks, I preſuppoſle 
that from Po unto the place whence Reno 13 cut, there ought to 
be a high and thick Fence made with its Banks, ſo that there 
would be no caule to fear any whatſoever acceſſions of Water, 
although that concurrence of three Rivers , which was by ſome 
more ingeniouſly aggravated than faithtully ſtated by that which 
was ſaid above were true; to whom | think not my ſelf bound 
to make any farther reply, neither to thole who ſay that Po wilt 
aſcend upwards into Reno, fince that theſe are the fame perſons 
who would introduce a {mall branch of the {aid Po into the 
Chanel of Ferrara, that ſo it may conveighto the Sea, not Reno 
onely, but alſo all the other-Brooks of which we complained ; 
and becauſe that withal it is impoſſible, that a River ſo capacious 
as Po ſhould be incommoded by a Torrent, that, as I may ay, 
hath no proportion to it. 

I come now to the buſineſſe of the Ditches and Draines ; and 
as to the Conveyance of Burana; it hath heretofore been deba- 
ted to turn it into Mezin-Po, fo that in this cale it will receive no 
harm, and though it were not removed, yet would it by a Trench 
under ground purſue the courſe that it now holderh, and alſo 
would be able to diſ-imbogue again into the ſaid new Chanel of 
Reno, which conforming to the ſuperficies of the Water of Po, 
would continue at a lower level than that which Panare had 
when it came to Ferrara, into which Burana did neverthelefle 
empty it ſelf tor {ome time. 

The Conveyance or Drain of Santa Branca; and the Intle 
Chanel of Cento may alſo empty themſelves by two ſubterranean 
Trenches, without any prejudice where they run at preſent, or 
without any more works of that nature, they may be turned into 
the {aid new Chanel, although with ſomewhat more of incon- 
venience ; and withall, the Chanel of Ferrara, left dry, would 
be a ſufficient receptacle for any other Sewer or Draio whatſoe- 
ver, that ſhould remain there. is 


CO CO OE OPS BORED 


(4 
s. 


es LE IRE oP * $5efdt 


or ee a ot. Gd w_—_— 9 4 . 
\ - 
= 


Lib. 2. Of Running VVaress. 


All which Operations mighe be brought to perteCtion with 
150. thouland Crowns, well and faichtully laid out; which ſfumm 
the Bologneſi will nor be unwilling to provide ; beſides that thole 
Ferrareſi ought to contribute to it , who ſhall partake of the 
benefit. 

Let me be permitted in this place to propole a thing which 1 
have thought of, and which pcradventure might Occalion two 
benefits at once, although ir be not wholly new. Ic was in the 
time of Pope Pant V. propounded by one Creſcenziv an Ingi- 
icer, to cut the Mazn-Po, above le Papozze ; and having made a 
ſufficient evacuation to derive the water thereof into the Po of 
'1 Adriano, and lo to procure it to be Navigable, which was not at 
that time effected, either by reaſon of the oppolitions of thoſe, 
whoſe poſleſſions were to be cut thorow , or by rcaton of the 
great ſum of money that was neceſlary for the effeGing ok it : But 
in viewing thole Rivers, we have obſerved, that the {edge cutting 
might eaſily be made below le Papozrze, in digging thorow the 
Bank called Santa Maria,& drawing a Trench of the bigneſs that, 
&kifful Artiſts ſhall judge mcer unto the Po * of Axiano, below the 
Secche of the ſaid 'S. Maria; which as being a work..of not 
above 160. Perches in length, would be; finiſhed with onfly 
112000. Crowns. | + 4 

Firſt; itis to be believed, that the waters running that way, 
would nor fail to open that Month into the Sea, which at pe- 
ſent is almoſt choakr up by the Shelf of Sand, which. the new 
Mouth of Pozto Virro hath brought rhirthor ; and that ix would 
again bring 1nto uſe the Port Goro, and its Navigation<;,., _,... 

And haply experience mizht teach us, that the ſuperticies of 
Po might come to fall by this aflwagement of Water, lo that che 
acccliion of Reno would queſtionleſs make no riling in it : 
Whereupon, if it ſhould fo fall out, thoſe Princes would have 
norcalon to complain; who lceem to queſtion, left by this new 
acceſſion of water into Po, the Sluices might be endangered® 
Which I thought not fit to omit to repreſent to your Lordſhip; 
not,that I propoſe it to you as a thing abſolutely certain, but that 
you might, if you ſo pleaſed, lay it before perſons whoſe judge- 
ments are approved in thele affairs. 

| return now from where I degreſt, and affirm it as indubita- 
ble, that Ren2 neicher can, nor ought to continue longer where 
It at this day is; and that it cannot go into any other place but 
that, whither Cardinal Capponi deſigned to carry it, and which 
at preſent plcaleth me better than any other ; or into Volana, 
whence it was taken away 3 the vigtlance of Men being able to 
obviate part of thoſe milchiefs,which ic may do there. 


But from its Removal, beſides the alleviation of the harm. 
which 


11, 


x Of Adriano. 


H2 


Of the MtxsuRanrion {:3h2 


which by it (elf is cauſed, there would allo relule the diminution 
of that which 1s occaſioned by the other Brooks, to the right hand 
of the Po of Argenta ; ftoralmuch as the ſaid Po wanting all the 
water of Reno, it would of neceſlity come to ebb in ſuch man- 
ner, that the Valleys would have a greater Fall into the tame 
and conlequent]y it would take in, and {wallow greater abun- 
dance of water ;, and by this means the Ditches and Draines 
of the Up-Lands would likewile more ealily Fall into them ; eC- 
pecially if the ſcouring of Zenzalino were brought to perteGiion, 
by which the waters of Marrara would fall into Marmorta: And 
if alſo that of Baſtia were enlarged, and hniſhed, by which: there 
might enter as much water into the {aid Po of Argenta, as is taken 
from it by the removal of Reno; although that by that meancs 
the water of the Valleys would afſlwage double: Nor would the 
people of Argenta,the Iſles of S. Gzorgio, and Comacchio have any 
caule to complain ; for that there would not be given to them 
more water than was taken away : Nay ſometimes wheteas they 
had Muddy waters, they would have clear ; nor necd they to fear 
any riſing : And furthermore, by this means a very great quan- 
tity of ground would be reſtored to culture ; For the effeQing of 
all which, the ſumm of 50. thouſand Crowns would go very far, 
and would ſerve the turn at preſent touching thoſe Brooks, car- 
rying them a little farther in the mean time, to fill up the greater 
cavities of the Valleys, that we might not enter upon a vaſter 
and harder work, that would bring with it the difficulties of other 
8perations, and ſo would hinder the benefit which theſe people 
exped from the paternal charity of His Holineſs. 


T 0 


<7 MD; 15; 4g 4 4x 


_—_— RL. 


; , WY ON 
Lib.2. | ” 44s | 113 | 


T O ME | 
The Right Honourable, | | 


MO NSIGNORE 


r= > 


D. Ferrante Celarini. 


ninG Ware ks, Right: Honourable, and 
moſt Noble Sir, hath not a greater Preroga- \ 
tive thanits having been the produQtion of the 6 
command of Pope Urban VII. when His Ho- 

lineſs was pleaſed to enjoyn me to go with 

Monſrgnore Corſini, in the Viſitation that was 

impoſed upon him in the year 1625. of the Waters of Ferrara, 

Bologna, Romagna, and Romagnola 3 for that , on that occaſion 

applying my whole Study to my ſervice and duty, I publiſhed in 

that Treatiſe lome particulars till then not rightly underſtood and 

conſidered ( that I knew ) by any one; although they be in them- 

ſclves moſt important, and of extraordinary conſequence, Yet | 
| muſt render thanks to Your Lordſhip for the honour you have 

done ro that my Tra@ 3 but wiſh withal, that your Eſteem of it 
may not prejudice the univerſal Eſteem that the World hath of 
Your Honours moſt refined judgement. 

As to that Point which 1 touch upon 1n the Conclufion, name- 
ly,That the conſideration of the Velocity of Running Watet ſup- 
plyerhthe conſideration of the * Length omitted in the common 
way of meaſuring Running Waters; Your Lordſhip having com- 
manded me that in favour of PraGiſe, and for the perfe& diſco- 
very of the diſorder that commonly happeneth now adayes in 
the diſtribution of the Waters of Fountains, I ſhould demon- 
ſtrate that the knowledge of the Velocity ſeryeth for the finding 
of the Length : I have thought fit to fatisfie your Command b 
relating a Fable ; which, if I do not deceive my felf, will make 
Out to us the truth thereof ; infomuch that the reſt of my Treatiſe 
ſhall thereby alſo become more manifeſt and intelligible , even tos 


Q4qqq thoſe 


* Largher2a,but . 
miſprinted. 


432 


Of th M ENSURATION ” 


thole who finde therein fome kinde of obſcurity. 

In the dayes of yore, before that the admirable Art of Wea. 
ving was in uſe, there was tound in Perſia a vaſtand unyaluable 
Treaſure, which conſiſted in an huge multitude of pieces of Er. 
meſin, or Damask , I know not whether; which , as I take it, 
amounted to ncar two thouland picces ; which were of ſuch a 
nature, that chough their Breadth and Thicknels were finite and 
determiftate, as they ule to be at this day ; yet nevertheleſs, their 
Length was in a certain lenſe infinite, for that thoſe two thouſand 
pieces, day and night wichour ceafing,iflued out with their end; 
at ſuch a rate, that of cach piece there illued roo. Ells a day,from 
a deep and dark Cave, conſecrated by the Superſtition: of thole 
people, to the fabulous Arachne. In thole innocent and car] 
times (I take it to have been, in that ſo much applauded and 
deſired Golden age ) it was left to the liberty of any one, to cut 
off of thoſe picces what quantity they plealcd without any diffi-, 
culty : But that telicity decaying and degenerating, which was 
altogether ignorant of Menw and Tunm ; terms certainly moſt 
pernicious, the Original of all evils, and cauſe of all dilcords ; 
there were by thoſe people ſtrong and vigilant Guards placed 
upon the Cave, who relolved to make merchandize of the Stuffes; 
and in this manner they began to ſet a price upon that ineſtima- 
ble Treaſure, ſelling the propriety in thoſe pieces to divers Mer- 
chants 3 to ſome they-lold a right in one, to lome in two , and to 
ſome in more. Bur that which was the worſt of all, There was 
found out by the inſatiable avarice of theſe men crafty inventions 
to deceive the Merchants alſo ; who caine to buy the aforeſaid 
commodity , and to make themſelves Maſters , ſome of ene 
ſome of two, and ſome of more ends of thoſe pieces of ſtuff; 
and in particular, there were certain ingenuous Machines placed 
in the more (ecret places of the Cave, with which at the pleaſure 
of the Guards, they did retard the velocity of thole Stuffs, in 
their iſſuing out of the Cave; inſomuch, that he who ought to have 
had 1 00. Ells of Stuffin a day,had not above 50, and he who 


ſhould havc had 400, enjoyed the benefit of 50. onely ; and lo all . 


the reſt were defrauded of their Rights, the ſurpluſage being ſold, 
appropriatcd, and ſhared at the will of the corrupt Officers : So 
that the buſineſs was without all order or juſtice , inſomuch that 
the Goddeſs Arachne being diſpleaſed at thole people, deprived 
every one of their benefit, and with a dreadful Earthquake for 
ever cloſing the mouth of the Cave, in puniſhment of ſo much 
impiety and malice : Nor did it avail them to cxcuſe themſelves, 
by ſaying that they allowed the Buyer the Breadth and Thick- 


ne(s bargained for ; and that of the Length, which was __ 
| there 


CE Aden 


Sm bromnb bl 3s A. cit 


—_— "0 0 es OG td es AO 


Lib.2. Of Running Waress. 


there could no account be kept: For the wiſe afid prudent 
Pricſt of the Sacred Grotto anſwered, That the deceit lay in the 
length, which they were defrauded of, in that the velocity of the 
Nutfe was retarded, as it iffued out of the Cave : and although 
che total length of the Piece was infinite, for that it never cca- 
ſed coming forth, and fo was not to be computed; yet never- 
theleſs its length confidered, part by part, as it came ont of the 
Cave, and was bargained for, continued ſtillFinite , and might 
be one while greater, and another while leſſer, according as the 
Piece was conſtituted 1n greater or leſſer velocity ; and he added 
wichall, thar exact Juſtice required, that when they ſold a piece 
of ſtuff, and the propriety or dominion thereth, they oughr not 
only to have aſcertained rhe breadth and thicknefle ot the Piece, 
hut allo to have determined the length, determining Its vVe- 
locity. | 
The ſame dilorder and confuſion, that wis repreſented in th 


Fable, doth come to paſſe in the Hiſtory of the Diſtribtition of + 


the Waters of Conduits and Fountains, teeing that they are ſold 
and bought, having regard only to the two Dimenſions, I mean 
of Breadth and Height of the Motth that diſchargeth the Wa- 
ter; and to remedy ſuch an inconvenience, it is neceffary to de- 
termine the length in the velocity 3 'for never ſhall we be able ta, 
make a gueffe ar-the quantity of the Body of -Runiing V Vater, 
with the two Dinc-ollins only of Breadth and Height, without 
Length. A 
And to the end, that the whole bulinels may be reduced 
toa moſt caſie practice, by which the waters of Aquedudts 
may be bought and ſold juſtly, and with meaſures alwayes ex- 
at and conſtant. A, TD, p. 5-6 
Fuſt, the quantity of the Water ought Uiligently to be exa- 
mined, which the whote' principal * Pipe diſchargeth in a time 


certain, as for inſtance, in an hour, in half an hour, or in a leffe- 


interval of time, (for knowing which I have a moſt exa& and 
caſie Rule) and finding that the whole principal pipe difchar- 
gethi v. g. a thouſand Tuns of Water int the ſpace of one or 
more hours, in ſelling of this water, it ought not: to be uttered by 
the ordinary and falfe meaſure, but the diſtribution is' ro be 
made with agreement to give and maintain: to the buyer ten or 
twenty, or a greater number of Tuns, as the bargain ſhall be 
made, in the ſpace of an hour, or of ſome other ſet and deter- 
minate time. And here I addey that if I were to undertake to 
make ſuch an adjuſtment, F would make uſe of a way to divide 
and meaſure the time with ſuch accurateneſfe, that the fpace .of 


an Ireur ſhould be divided into four, fix, or ctght thouſand parts 


6 (.q ov! q A witb- 


| 


Hg 


Of the MExsurAT1oON, Lib. 5, 


without the leaſt errour 5; which Rule was taught me by my 
Maſtcr S:gn. Galileo Galilei, Chict Philoſopher to the moſt Se- 
rene Grand Duke of Tuſcany. Andyhis way will ſerve ealtly and 
admirably to our purpoſe and occaſion; fo that we ſhall 
| thereby be able to know how many Quarts of Water an A- 
quedu& will diſcharge in a given time of hours, moneths, or 
years. And in this manner we may conſtirute a Cock that ſhall 
diſcharge a certam and determinate quantity of water in a time 
ven. 

And becauſe daily experience ſhews us, that the Springs of A- 
queduds do not maintain them alwayes equally high, and full 
of Water, but that ſometimes they increale, and ſometimes de- 
creaſe, which accident might poſlibly procure ſome difliculty in 
our diſtribution : Therctore, to the end that all manner of ſcru- 
ple may be removed, I conceive that it would be convenient to 
provide a Ciſtern, according to the occaſion, into which there 
might. alwayes fall one certain quantity of water, which ſhould 
not be greater than that which the principal pipe diſchargeth in 
times of drought, when the Springs are bare of water, that ſo in 
this Ciſtern the water might alwayes keep at one conſtant height. 
Then to the Ciſtern ſo prepared we are to faſten the Cocks of 
particular perſons, to whom the Water is ſold by the Reverend 
Apoſtolique Chamber, according to what hath been obſerved 
betore ; and that quantity of Water which remaineth over and 
above, 1s to be diſcharged into another Ciſtern, in which the 
Cocks of the Waters for publick ſervices, and of thoſe which 
people buy upon paxticular occaſions are to be placed. And 
when the buſineſle ſhall have beea brought to this paſle, there 
will likewiſe a remedy be found to the ſo many diforders that 
continually happen 3 of which, for brevity ſake, 1 will inſtance 
in. but four only, which coneern both publique and private bene- 
fit, as being, in my judgment, the moſt enormous and intole- 
rable. 

The firſt inconvenience 15, that in the common way of meaſu- 
ring, diſpenſing, and ſelling the Waters of Aquedu&s, it is not 
underſtood, neither by the Buyer nor Seller, what the quantity 
truly is that is bought and fold ; nor could I ever meet with any 
cither Engineer or ArchiteQ, or Artiſt, or other that was able to 
decypher to me, what one, or two, or ten inches of water was- 
But by our above declared Rule, for diſpenſing the Waters of 
Aqueduds we may very eaſily know the true quantity of Water 
that is bought or ſold, as that it is ſo many Tuns an hour, lo a 
ny a day, ſo many in a year, &c. * WO ICeER 

'Fhe fecond diſorder that happeneth, at preſent, in the hey 
uting 


Lib. 2. Of Ruxnino VV args. 


bution of AqueduRs tb, thar as the bulineffe is now governed, it 
lieth in the power of 4 lordid Mafon'ro take; upjuſtly from, one, 
and give undelervedly to another mote or lefla: Water han be- 
longeth to them of right : And I have febn it. Jonc;!,of; my! 
own experience. But in our way of mcaluring and diſtri- 
buting Waters, there can no traud be committed ; and put- 
ting the calc that they ſhould be committed, its an cafie mat- 
ter to know it, and amend it, by repairing to the Tribunal 
appointed. 

Thirdly, it happens very often,(and we have examples there- 
of both antient and modern) that in dilpenling the Water after 
the common and vulgar way, 3 there 1s fometuncs more Water dif- 
pended than there is 1n the Regiſter, ifi which there will be regi- 
ſtred, as they ſay, two. hundred inches (for example) and there 
will be diſpenſed two hundred and fifty inches, or more. Which 
paſſage happened in the time of Nerva the Emperour, as Giulio 
Frontino writes, in his 2. Book, De AquaduGibus Urbis Roma, 
where he obſerveth that they had ## Comthrentariis 12 755. Oui- 
varies of Water ; and found that they diſpenſed 14018. Q#i- 
naries. And the like Errour hath continued, and is in uſe alſo 
modernly until our times. But if our Rule ſhall be obſerved, 
we ſhall incur no {ach diſorder, nay there will alwayes be given 
to every one his ſhare, according tothe holy cnd of exaGt juſtice, 
which dat unicaique quod ſuumeſt. As on the contrary , it is 
manifeſt, that His Divine Majeſty hateth and abominateth Pon- 
dus &- pondus, Menſura & menſura, as the Holy Ghoſt ſpeak- 
eth by the mouth of Solomon in the Proverbs, Chap. 20. Pondus 
& Pondus, Menſura &« Menſura, utrumque abominabile eft apud 
Deum. And thetefore who is it that {ceth not that the way of 
dividing and meaſuring of VV aters, commonly uled, is expreſly 
againſt the Law of God. Since that thereby the ſame meaſure 
is made ſometimes greater, and lometimes lefler ; A diforder fo 
enormous and execrable,that I ſhall take che boldneſs to ſay,that 
for this ſole refpeR& it ought to be condemned and prohibited like- 
wiſe by human Law,which ſhould EnaG that in this bufinels there 
ſhould be imployed either this our Rule, or {ome other that 
1s more exquiſite and practicable , whereby the meaſure 
might keep one conſtant and determinate tenor, as we make it, 
and not, as it is now, to make Pondus &r Pondus, Menſur a © 
Menſura. 

And this 1s all that I had to offer to Your moſt Illuſtrious 
Lordſhip, in obedience to your commands, relcrving to my ſelf 
the giving of a more exa& account of this my invention, when 
the occaſion ſhall offer, of reducing to praftice ſo holy, juſt, and 

necellary 


117 


Jn 
ot 
a» — «woken $,or pame'y, a 


n$ 


Of the McnsSuraTlION Lib.z. 


neceſſary a reformation of the Meaſure of Running Waters and 
of AqueduQs in particular : which Rule may alſo be of great 
benefit in the diviſion of the greater Waters to over-floy 
Grounds, and for other uſes : I hambly bow, 


Your Mof# Devoted, 
ſe: and 


Moſt Obliged Servan, 
D. Benedetto Caſtelli, 44iCafs. 


FINIS. 


| A TABLE 


Of the moſt obſervable matters in this Treatiſe of the 


MensuraTtion of Running 


Warexs. 
A 

«& Batements of '4 KrVey #1 different and unequal Diverſions , is almazes equal, 
A which 1s proved 4th 100, Syphons. Page 75 
Arno R:wer when it riſethupon a Land-Flood near the Sea ons third of a' Brave, it 
riſeth about Piſa 6. or 7, Braces, $2 

B 
Banks near to the Sea lower, than far from thence. Corollary XIV. 16 
Brent Ktver diverted from the Lake of Venice, andits effeRs, 64- 
Brent ſuppoſed #-ſ" ufficient toremedy the nconventencesof the Lake, and the falfity of that 
ſuppoſition, LF 67 
Brent, and its benefits 11: the Lake, 70 
Its Depoſition of Sand in the Lake, bow great it s, 78,72. 
Bridges over Rivers, and how they. ave to be made. Appenat x VIII. 20 
Burana &/ver, its riſi-g, and falling in Panaro, +, $30 

C 
Caſtelli applyed himſelf to this Study by Order of Urban VIII. 2 
Chanel of Navigation # the Valleys of Bologna, and its inconveniences, 99 
Carried into the Po of Ferrara, and:ts bengfits - tbid: 
Ciampoli a/over of theſe Obſervations of Waters. 3 

D 


Difficulty of this buſineſs of Meaſuring Waters, 2 
Diſorders that happen in the diſtribution of the Waters of Aquedats, 8nd their re- 


medies. | I13 
Diſbribution of the Waters of Fountains, and Aquedufis, Appendix X. 22 
Diſtribution of Water to over-flow Grounds, Appendix X 1; 23, 69,70 


Drwerſion of Reno and ot her Brooks of Romagna, aduiſed by P, Spernazzati to what end 
was, | 190 


Drains and Ditches , the benefit they receive by cutting away the Weeds and Reeds. 
Appendrx 1X. 


. . . > , 
Dratus and Sewers obſirufled , in the Druerſion of Reno snto Main Po, and 4 remedy for 


the ſame, 


I19 

E 
Engenters unverſ"d in the matters of Waters. _ 
Erour found in the common way of Meaſuring Running Waters: 68, 69 
Errour 1; deriving the Water of Acqua Paola. Appendix I I, 17,18 


Eriour 


” ” 000 oy of WEN en. 


1he Tabte. 


Errour of Bartolotti. JED 8, 87 
E rrcurs of Engineers m the Deritcaticn of Chenels. Ceardlary X11, 


12 
Eyrcar of Engineers in Meaſurirg of Renoin Po. Apperdix11I. 4 ibid. 
Errour of other Engineers , contrary to the precedent, A pper &ix IV, Ibid. 
Errour of Giovanni Fontana i# Meaſuring Waters, Cerdllary XI, = 
Errowr of Giulio Frontino in Meeſurirg the Waters of AquedaAts, Appen- 
4x1. 1 
Ern0urs committed in cutting the Baxk at Bondeno , #n the ſnellir.gs of Þo : Corlay 


XIII, tr 
F 
Fenns Pontine, Dratzed ty Pope Sixtus Quintus, #ith Taft experce. 92 
The ruine and miſcarriage thereof. | 93 
Tardity of the prireipal Chanel that Drains them, cauſe of the D1cwnizrg, ibid, 
They are obftrufcd by the Fiſking-1 ears,n hich ſnell the Riter, 94 
waters of Fiume Siſto , which flow in great alwidar ce intothe Evacuator of the 
ſaid F enns, 94,95 
Remedies to the diſorders f thoſe Fenns, 95, 96 
Fontana Giovanni, þ# errours iz Meaſering Waters. Corollary XI, g 
Fiume Mor to, whether tt ought to fall in19 the Sea, cr mtos erchio, 79 
Let into Serchio and iS #r,contentences, 79, $0 
\ The dangerow riſing of its Waters. when tote expefied. $1 
Its inconveniences when it & higher in level than Serchio, a10 ly it riſeth moſt 
On the Sea-coafis, at ſuch time «s the Winds make the Sea toſnell, 83 
G 
Gablzo Galilzi, Loxomratly mentioned, - Page 2,28 
Hi Rule for meaſuring the time, 49 
H 
Height, vide Quick 
Heights different, made Lythe ſame fiream of a Brock or Torrent , according to the divers 
Veloceties 11 the entrance of the Rin er. Cerollary I, 6 
Herghts difſerer.t, mage Ly the Torrent in the Riter, accerdirg 16 the different beights of 
the River. Corollary II, ibid; 
K 
Kuonledge of Mition how much it emponteth. I 
L 
= | 
Lake of Perugia, ard bt Obſertation made on it, Appendix XII. 42 
Lake of Thraſimerus and Cer faerartiors upor it, a Leitcr BrYitt(s 10 vip. Galilzo 
Galilzj. 28 
Loke of Venice, and Cc; fiderations upon it. 63> py 


Low Waters which let the bettem of it te diſcruened. 4 
The floppage and cheaking of the Ports, a main cauſe «f the diſcrdes of the Lake, 
and the grand remeay1o theſe az[crders nhat it ._ 66 


Lokes ar.d Meers alcr.g the Sea-ceoſts, ar.g tht cauſes thereof, 65 

Lergih of waters, wit tobe Meaſured. bs THIN > 
MF ; M 

Mraſure and Diftritutions of Waters. "Appendix Ne 


Mad 


The Table. 


Aeasſure of Revers that fall exto others dt ht, Corel. X: 9 
Meaſure of the Running Water of a Chanel of an height known by a Regulator of « Mes- 


VS. 


ſure given, 11a time aſſigned. Propoſition 1. Problem 1. 50 
Meaſurt of = water of any Rtyer, of ary greatneſs, in a time given. Propsſition V, 
Problems | I, 60 
Meaſure that ſhewes how much Water a River diſchargeth in 4 tems gruen, | 48 
' Mole-hiles, ; 
Motion the principal ſubje& of Philoſophy. x 
' Mud. Vide Sapd. | 
PIE | N 
Navigation from Bologua: to. Ferrara, (7 become :mpofible , till ſuch time a Reno be 
diverted. 1OL 
Nat ization 11 the Lake of Venice endangered, and how reftored.. 65, 70 
Perpenuiculargy of the Banks of the Rever , to thi upper ſaperficies of ut. 37 
Perpendicularity of the Banks to the bottom, 37 


Perugia, Vide Lake .- by? 

Pontine.; Vide. Fenns. © \ © WOT 

Ports of Venice, Malamocco, Bondolo, ard Chiozza , choaked up for want of 
Water in the Lake, FA "YL | 65 

Proportions of unequal Seftzons of equal Velocity , and of equal Sezons of unequal Velo- 
city, Axtome 1 V. and VN, ID 38 

Proportions of equal and unequal quantities of W ater , which paſs by #be Seftions of arf- 


ferent Rivers, Propoſition LI. : 5 39 
Iropertions of une qual Sefons that iz e qua} trmes diſcharge equal quantities of Water. 
Propeſiton 111. | 41 
Proportion gee” one River falling into another , Varieth in herght, Propo- 
ſition 1+. ©; TETY 


Proportion of the Water dif, c harged Ly a River in the time of Flood , to the Water Aifthwgd 
1108 equal time by the {aid River, before of after the Flood, Propoſitton V. 44 
[roportuon of. the Heights made by tyo equal Ryooks or Streams falling into the ſame 
River, Propoſition V T. | 45 
Proportion of the Water which a River diſchargeth encreaſing In Puick-belght by the ag- 
dition of new Water , to that which it diſchargeth after the .encreaſe is made, Propo- 


ſition IV. Theor. II. _.' A | 34 
Proportion of a River when high, to it ſelf when low, Coroll. 1. 55 
Q 
Quastity of Running Waters is never certain, if with the Vulgar may of Meaſtring them, 
their Velocities be not conſidered. | : 32 
Ruantities of waters which are diſcharged by a Rever, anſwer in equality to the Velocities 

aud times in which they are diſcharged, Axiome 1, Ll Ill. 38 
Quick-Height of 4 Rier, what it is, Definition V 48 
i . R 


Reaſon of the Proverb, Take heed ofthe till Waters. Corel. V I; TER 4 
&raſons of Monſignore Corſini \agawoft the diverſion of Reno into the Po of 


Volano, 105 
Reaſons of Cardinal Capponi ad Monfig. Corfini , for the turnzng of Reno into | 
Main Po. : | x06 | 


Rrer Rea: 


"The Table. 


To objeRions on the contrary » and anſwers tothem. 104 &1 o5 
What ought to be the proportion of the Heights of Reno in Reno » «nd of Reno is 
Po. : Ilo 


Regulator what it is. Definition 1 V. al 
Relation of the Waters of Bologna and Ferrara , by Monſignore Corfini 10c 
Reno inthe Valleys, and its bad off ets. | 1005 
Two wayes to divert it. = 
The facility an utility of thoſe wayes, Ibi F, 
The difficulties objefted, RY hy 
Reply to Barto.otti ouchrng the dangers of turning Fiume Morto #to Serchio. 8; 
Retardm:nt of the courſe of « River cauſed by its Banks, Appendix V 11. 19 
Riſings mad: by Flood-Gates but ſmall. Appendix XIII. © 


2 
Reuers that are ſhallow ſivell much upon ſmall ſhowers , ſuch as are deep riſe but little A 
great Floods, C orollary [I * : 
Rivers the higher they are , the ſmifter, Ibi4 
Rivers the higher they are , thelege they encreaſe upon Floogs, x 
Rivers when thay are to hace equal and when hike Velocity . 6; 
Rivers in falling into the Sea, forma Shelf of ' Sand called Cavallo, 65 


Five Rivers to be diveried from the Lake of Venice , and the inconvenzences that would 
enſue thereapon, 74 75 
A River of Buick-beight , and Velocity in its Regulator being given, iF the Height 
be ridoubled by new Water , it redoubleth alſo in Velocity, Propofition 11, 7he. 


orem 1. Fl 
Keepeth the proportion of the betghts , tothe Velocities, Corollary 52 
S 
Sand and Mad that entereth Into the Lake of Venice , andthe way to examineit. 76 
Seas agitated and driven by he Windy flop up the Ports. 64, 65 
Seflior.s of a River what they are, Definition 1, 37 
Seftions equally ſwift what they are. Definitlon II, Ibid. 
Seftions of a River being gruen, to conceive others equal to them , of different breadth, 
height and V, elociny. Petition, 33 
Seficns of the ſame River , and thetr Proportions to their Velocities, Coroll, 1. 43 
Seftions of « River diſcharge in any whatſoever place of the ſaid River ,, equal quantities 
of Water in equal times, Propoſition 1, 39 
Sile River what miſchiefes it threatueth , diverted from the Lake. 74 
Spirtings of Waters grow bigger the higher they go. Coroll. X VI. 16 
Sreams of Rivers how they encreaſe and vary, Coroll, I. 23. 
Streams retarded , and the effatts thereof, Coroll. IX. 8 
T 

Table of the Heights, Additions, and Suantities of Waters , and its uſe, 56 

Throſemenus. Vide Lake. 
Time how its meaſured in theſe Operations of the Water. 49 
Torrents encreaſe at the encreafing of « River , though they carry wo More Water than befort 
Coroll. IV. 6 
Torrents when they depoſe and carry away the Sand, Coroll. V. 7 
Torrents and their eff ts ina River, 6, 7 


Torrents that fall ine the Valleys , or into Po of Volano , and their miſchiefy prevent- 
ed , by the diwerting of Reno into Main Po. yu 
Tyber and the cauſes of its inundations, Coroll, V I II, y 


Vu- 


KANO, 1m] 


» wh 


» = 


The Table. 


V 
Yallys of Bologna and Ferrara their innndations end diſorders ; whence they pre- 
ceed, 
Pelocity of the Water ſhewn by ſeveral Examples. _ 
Its proportion to the Meaſure. ; 
Valecaties equal " what they are. 47 
Pelocities like, what they are, 47, 48 
Velecitits of Water known , how they belp w in finding the Lengths. 'S; 
A Fable to explain the truth thereof. Ibid. 
Venice. Vide Lake. 
Ve of the Regulator in meaſuring great Rivers. Conſideration I, 60 
vw 

Waters falling why they diſzroſs. Eoroll, XV I. 16 
Waters, how the Length of them # Meaſured. 70 
Waters that are imployed to flow Grounds, how they are to be diflributed, I9, 53,54 
Waters to be carryed in Pipes, to ſerve Aqualuis and Conduits, how they are tobe Mea- 

ſured. IIS, 116 
Wayto know the riſing of Lakes by Rajnes. 28 
Way of theVulgar to Meaſure the VV aters of Rivers. 68 
WindGan, and Tortable Fountarn of Vincenzo Vincenti of Urbin. II 
Winder contrary, retard, «nd make Rivers encreaſe, Coroll. VII. 8 


The Ex» ot the Tarts of the Second Part 
of the Fuſlt TOME, 


* 
A.  e 4a 12 a GS _— 


